* 1727189
* Quasi-Integral Control for Robustness to Perturbations of Integrated Genetic Devices in Living Cells for Biotechnology
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Domitilla Del Vecchio, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

The objective of this research is to develop the theoretical underpinnings for
the design of integral feedback controllers that can be added to genetic
circuits to make their operation robust to a number of common perturbations.
Integral controllers provide model-free compensation of constant or slowly
varying disturbances and uncertainties. The tremendous progress of molecular
biology technologies has enabled engineering of the genetic circuitry that
controls the way cells sense and respond to external stimuli. This opens up the
path to a number of impactful applications, ranging from regenerative medicine,
wherein healthy cells could be reprogrammed into any required cell type to
replace damaged cells, to biofuel production, to biosensing. For engineered
cells to be dependable, their genetic circuitry needs to function robustly in
the face of changes and uncertainties in the environment. Unfortunately, today's
state-of-the-art genetic circuitry lacks robustness, and often fails to function
properly outside of nominal pre-set conditions. This precludes the use of
engineered cells in real-life applications. This project seeks to develop a
genetic-circuit analog to the proportional-integral (PI) controllers that are
ubiquitous in industry for enhancing the robustness of electromechanical
systems. This will ultimately lead to engineered cells dependable enough to be
used in real-life applications, resulting in cutting edge progress in medicine,
environment, and energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
create a novel mathematical framework for the analysis and design of in vivo
nonlinear quasi-integral controllers that make the operation of in-cell
integrated genetic devices sufficiently robust for biotechnology applications.
Engineered living cells, wherein in-cell genetic devices reconfigure the way
cells sense, compute, and respond to the environment hold tremendous promise for
a number of biotechnology applications from regenerative medicine, to biofuel
production, to biosensing. While a number of success stories are available, for
engineered living cells to reach their full potential a major roadblock needs to
be overcome: lack of robustness. The reality is that genetic devices are subject
to significant perturbations in the cellular context, which often hamper the
devices' functionality. In this project quasi-integral controllers will be
designed and implemented through core biomolecular processes, to restore
robustness of integrated genetic devices to unwanted perturbations that affect
the cellular context. The physics of the systems considered lead to dynamical
structures that are subject to singularities, potential instabilities, and
integrator windup problems. The analysis and design of stability, robustness,
and performance of such structures is largely unexplored. This project includes
the following tasks: create a new class of nonlinear dynamical system structures
that captures the physical mechanisms of core biomolecular processes that can
realize quasi-integral feedback in living cells; create new control theory to
determine the stability, robustness, and performance properties of this class of
dynamical system structures; and validate the previous findings with
experimental demonstration of in-cell quasi-integral feedback.