* 1727026
* MRI: Acquisition of a Controlled-Environment Atomic Force Microscope for Nanoelectronic Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Michael Hurley, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2021
* USD 624,000.00

Acquisition of an advanced atomic force microscope system within a controlled
environment glove box enables imaging of solid surfaces with a resolution near
the scale of individual atoms while simultaneously measuring the properties of
the surfaces at each location. This microscope provides the ability to directly
relate the structure and properties of a surface to how it was made and how it
performs, which lies at the heart of materials science and engineering research.
These materials relationships give researchers the information needed to create
advanced materials for a range of applications. Critically, the controlled
environment capabilities allow research to be performed on materials that cannot
be exposed to air or moisture. Housed within the Surface Science Laboratory at
Boise State University, this instrument expands research capacity in Idaho and
meets the needs of a broad research community, including five universities,
several local industries, and two national laboratories. The principal
investigators have a proven, rigorous, and industry-recognized model for
training undergraduate and graduate students in atomic force microscopy. The
controlled-environment microscope exposes these students to the current state-
of-the-art instrument and better prepares them for success in graduate school
and careers in academia and industry. With active community outreach, the new
microscope showcases advanced materials research capabilities and inspires
elementary and high school students to pursue careers in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The controlled-environment
atomic force microscope provides an important tool for materials research at
Boise State University by enabling advanced nanoelectronic characterization of
air-and moisture-sensitive materials. The new capabilities provided by this
system include inert-environment Kelvin probe microscopy for nanoscale surface
potential measurements and scanning electrochemical microscopy for in-situ
monitoring of electrochemical reactions. The microscope enables
interdisciplinary and collaborative materials research in (1) the controlled
integration of DNA nanostructures with semiconductor surfaces for sub-
lithographic patterning of memory devices; (2) the nanoscale origins of
corrosion mechanisms in metal alloys to enable fabrication of high-performance
aerospace structural components and biomedical implants; (3) interphase
evolution and electrochemical activity of air-sensitive metal-ion battery
electrodes for stable, safe, and high-capability energy storage; (4) the effects
of synthesis and processing conditions on the electronic and thermal properties
of air-sensitive 2-dimensional materials for flexible and energy-efficient
electronics; and (5) real-time observation of ion channel formation in air-
sensitive phase change materials for novel memory devices for extreme
environments.