* 1727922
* Strong and Multifunctional Geopolymer Composites: A Multi-Scale Study
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,04/30/2018
* Ange-Therese Akono, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 04/30/2018
* USD 334,525.00

This award supports fundamental research to provide new knowledge that paves the
way for a systematic design of advanced geopolymer composites. Geopolymer
composites are a new class of amorphous polymeric hybrids with attractive
attributes that have the potential to drastically change the way composites
materials are synthesized. Geopolymer-based hybrids are relevant to a vast array
of fields such as civil, aerospace, mechanical, and biomedical engineering.
However, established relationships between performance, chemistry, and
composition are lacking. As a consequence, the widespread application of
geopolymer-based materials has been impeded, despite their high potential. The
integration of cutting-edge experiments with advanced computational modeling
will accelerate the discovery of high-performance multifunctional structural
composites. Geopolymer composites have been theorized for many interdisciplinary
applications including enhanced-performance construction materials, passive
cooling systems for buildings, biomaterials for bone repair, membranes for clean
energy generation, and sound insulation systems. Therefore, results from this
research will benefit the U. S. economy and society, and spur materials
discovery. This research involves the collaboration between three institutions
and across disciplines including nanoscience, solid mechanics, and materials
science. Comprehensive outreach activities will be implemented in collaboration
with local high schools to contribute to raising the next generation of
materials scientists. Therefore, the multi-disciplinary approach will help
broaden participation of underrepresented groups in research and positively
impact engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geopolymers are amorphous
inorganic polymers that result from the reaction between an aluminosilicate
source and an alkali metal hydroxide or silicate solution. Despite a wealth of
studies, the origin of the strength of geopolymer composites is not fully
understood. This research is to fill the knowledge gap by connecting the
effective response to the micro- and nano- constituents based on continuum and
computational micromechanics integrated with nanoscale mechanical
characterization methods. The research team will formulate a theoretical
micromechanics model to predict the macroscopic constitutive behavior,
articulate new variational solutions using the modified secant approach within
nonlinear homogenization theory, build a periodic microfield finite element
model that accounts for multiaxial loading cases as well as morphological
features, test the hypothesis that nano-porosity is the driving factor
controlling the macroscopic mechanical response, validate the theoretical models
by carrying out nano- and macro-scale mechanical tests on microsphere-reinforced
potassium-based geopolymer composites, and establish correlations between nano-
and micro-scale characteristics and the macroscopic behavior.