* 1727459
* The Power of Images: A Computational Investigation of Political Mobilization via Social Media
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* John Wilkerson, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2020
* USD 301,577.00

General Abstract Social media have been described by some scholars as a "weapon
of the weak." Any person in the world with a mobile device and network
connection can now communicate with a potential audience of unlimited size. This
project proposes the first large-scale study of the roll of images in the social
media communications of advocacy organizations, social protest movements, and
extremist militant groups. The team will collect social media communications in
real time and exploit recent "deep learning" advances from computer science to
automatically label millions of images for objects (crowds, animals, weapons
etc.), entities (specific actors), and emotions evoked (fear, sadness, humor,
etc.). The team seeks to assess whether, all else equal, these images promote
political message engagement and diffusion.

Technical Abstract Research in psychology finds that images are easier for
individuals to process cognitively, and have a larger impact on consciousness
than do words. Images should be especially important tools for traditionally
marginalized groups that rely on outsider strategies to promote issue awareness
and their views. This is new ground however, as there is no theory and no
databases for studying the mobilizing effects of political social media
communications. The research team will construct new social media databases for
a wide range of political groups. The project will contribute new labeled
political image collections to existing computer science image repositories. The
team also proposes to offer national workshops on advanced image classification
methods for social scientists, and will disseminate research findings to
scholars and practitioners through conference presentations and peer-reviewed
publications.