* 1727316
* Systematic Design of Porous Heterogeneous Hierarchical Materials and Structures to Optimize Reactive Transport Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Pirooz Vakili, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2022
* USD 721,138.00

Many of today's high performance materials are required to perform multiple
functions to be most effective for a variety of reactive transport applications
such as catalysts for fuel upgrading, adsorbents for carbon dioxide capture,
electrodes for batteries, membranes for water treatment or anti-bacterial agents
for biomedical applications. The required material systems are often
combinations of different materials (heterogeneous) placed at specific locations
throughout the system (hierarchical) with controlled pores, channels and active
particles. Traditionally such a material is designed for a primary function,
such as transport efficiency, with only secondary consideration of other
properties such as density or strength. By coupling rigorous computational and
experimental methods, a new design approach will be developed that considers
both the material properties along with fabrication and structural aspects
allowing for the comprehensive tailoring of properties for the materials system
for a specific application. The design framework developed in this project is
not specific for one material so will have far reaching applications for many
complex materials systems for use in biomedical applications to energy
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To enable a paradigm shift in the design of porous
heterogeneous hierarchical materials for reactive transport processes, the PIs
have developed an integrated computational and experimental approach. The
materials comprise an organic and/or inorganic scaffold designed with multiple
levels and distributions of porosities, tortuosities and particle sizes, which
are decorated with active sites, often nanoscale inorganic compounds, that can
be incorporated during or after "construction" of the scaffold. The PIs will
employ materials informatics for the development and analysis of property-
structure relationships for materials identification of appropriate scaffold and
active site materials. As a fundamental shift from the typical design process,
they will also consider the design of the structure of the materials system. A
novel design of experiments (DOE) based methodology will be used to optimize the
porous materials architecture and active site distribution by integrating
computational fluid dynamics studies on the porous reactive transport through
the projected material systems. As an integral part of this design methodology,
the PIs will develop a DOE approach to the fabrication of porous heterogeneous
hierarchical materials that is computationally optimal in terms of design while
still being physically manufacturable. This computational design framework will
be experimentally validated using renewable fuel upgrading as a sample
application, beginning with methane reforming, then with heterogeneous biomass
pyrolysis biofuels.