* 1727147
* RR: Collaborative: Origins of Intergroup Perceptions and Attitudes Across Diverse Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* May Ling Halim, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/2021
* USD 89,924.00

Within the first five years of life, children become adept at categorizing
others into social categories, which has wide-ranging implications for
children's perceptions and interactions with others. Yet much of what is known
about how children process social categories is based on studies conducted with
limited populations (in terms of only including children from certain
race/ethnic, geographical, and socioeconomic backgrounds). By harnessing natural
variation in exposure to diversity in different regions of the U.S. among
children from different backgrounds, the current project will lead to a better
understanding of how young children from throughout the United States
conceptualize and reason about social categories. A second goal is to test the
robustness of past results regarding children's social category understanding
and to contribute to recent calls for transparency, reproducibility, and
generalizability in science.

The project involves five sites (Hawaii, the Southwest, the Northwest, the
Southeast, and the Northeast), with each site including 4- to 5-year-old
children from multiple demographic backgrounds. The focus is on four core
components of early social category knowledge: children's attitudes towards;
prosocial behavior with; facial recognition of; and perceptions of status of
members of different social categories. Children will complete a standardized
protocol and task battery that assesses each of these components across all five
geographic locations in the U.S. The research will examine whether results are
reproducible across geographic regions that differ in their demographics. It
will also investigate how individual tasks relate to each other within each
child (e.g., the relationship between perceptions of status and behavior towards
children from different groups). This approach will also allow tests of the
robustness of past results regarding children's knowledge of social categories
and will contribute to recent calls for transparency, reproducibility, and
generalizability in science. This goal will be implemented by: (1) posting all
study materials so that the exact methods can be implemented elsewhere; (2)
posting all final data so that others can re-analyze the data; and (3) pre-
registering the proposed analyses in line with recent recommendations for
transparency in research. By achieving a better understanding of the origins of
intergroup perceptions and attitudes, broader impacts are expected to support
focused interventions that promote positive relations between different groups
of people.