* 1727366
* NSF-DFG: Laser Finishing of the Multi-Scale Surface Structure of Additive Manufactured Parts
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Frank Pfefferkorn, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 05/31/2022
* USD 359,045.00

This award supports fundamental scientific research to discover how laser
remelting can be applied to additively manufactured metal parts to improve their
final surface quality and extend their useful service life. This was motivated
by several technology roadmaps published by Federal Agencies in 2015 and 2016
that: (1) identified additive manufacturing of metal components (not just
prototypes) as a key strategic technology for securing U.S. manufacturing
competitiveness and national defense, and (2) outlined the crucial need for
research on improving the surface smoothness of additively manufactured parts.
The surfaces of additively manufactured parts are often very rough, with a
similar appearance as a course sand paper. This is mainly caused by partially
melted powder that adheres to the surface. This partial powder melting can also
result in significant near-surface porosity. The rough surface and the near-
surface pores can act as the source of cracks that can cause a part to fail.
Furthermore, those rough surfaces can cause additively manufactured parts to
fail to meet design specifications. Laser remelting smooths the surface while
simultaneously reducing the number of pores near the part surface. This means
that there are fewer sources from which cracks can grow, hence it should be
stronger and last longer. The knowledge generated from this project will be
distributed publically, through conference presentations, journal articles, open
house engineering expositions, and through integration into undergraduate and
graduate courses. The project is an international collaboration between the
University of Wisconsin-Madison and the University of Bremen, Germany. NSF is
only providing funding for the work done by the University of Wisconsin-Madison;
funding for the University of Bremen is being provided by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG). This collaboration will be enable the PIs to
leverage research facilities not available in the U.S. to the benefit of U.S.
innovation, especially in the aerospace, automotive, health care and defense
industries. This represents a very large portion of the American manufacturing
sector, and the results of this fundamental research could provide significant
tangible benefits to the domestic economy. The international collaboration also
provides a unique exposure of an American graduate student to manufacturing
research at the highest levels of sophistication in both Germany and the United
States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to generate
fundamental new knowledge that will improve surface finish and mechanical
properties of additively manufactured metallic parts through the application of
laser remelting. The laser remelting process presents significant, yet
unexplored opportunities for smoothing and functionally improving additively
manufactured parts, and it can be integrated into existing laser-based additive
manufacturing equipment to improve the as-built surface finish. The scientific
contribution of this work can be summarized into three parts: (1) providing a
fundamental understanding of the multi-scale surface topography created by
powder-bed laser additive manufacturing and how this relates to the process
parameters and feedstock, (2) understanding the physical phenomena behind laser
remelting of these surfaces for smoothing and porosity reduction, with
appropriate models, and (3) understanding the impact that smoothing and
densification has on the performance of the surface as compared to the as-built
part (e.g., fatigue life). A key scientific understanding will be investigated
on how the level of adherence of a partially-melted powder (i.e., physical and
thermal contact with the surface) will affect its incorporation into the surface
for a given set of laser remelting parameters; and how localized concentrations
of mass due to individual and agglomerations of unincorporated powder can be
redistributed (i.e., create a smoother surface) through Marangoni flow that is
induced through laser parameter variation. An important goal of this project is
to to measure the localized waviness in a laser remelted area and modulate the
laser processing parameters in a secondary laser pass (i.e., pulsed laser
structuring) to induce suppressive flow to overcome potential surface roughness
minimization boundaries present with remelting with non-variable laser
processing parameters.