* 1727303
* CI-EN: Enhancement of a Large-scale Multiagent Simulation Tool
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Andrew Crooks, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 896,303.00

An agent-based simulation is a software simulation of many independent actors
(people, robots, animals, companies, etc.) interacting in complex ways. For
example, one might build a simulation of a swarm of ants, a school of fish, a
large group of robots collectively building a house, a city of people under
siege by a large medieval army, or the spread of urban legends over a social
network. These kinds of simulations are used for everything from building
software for swarms of delivery robots, to understanding the spread of disease
in third-world slums, to predicting the impact of climate change on human
migration patterns. Similarly, these simulations help researchers and policy
makers in engineering and robotics, in artificial intelligence, and in the
biological and social sciences. Such simulations can get very large, with large
numbers of actors. This project involves building a software tool to assist in
the development of large-scale agent-based simulations spread over potentially
many separate computers, and to make it easy for them to place their agents in
simulated locations on the Earth. At the same time the tool will be easy to use
for high school and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will develop a distributed agent-based modeling tool for constructing large
simulations of swarms and groups of agents. The project enhances an existing,
successful open-source Java multiagent simulation library called MASON. MASON is
designed to run on a single machine; but the enhanced version will also allow
distribution over many machines. The enhanced tool will also include facilities
for embedding agents in geographical information systems (GIS), model
optimization and automation, interfaces for alternative programming languages
targeting the Java Virtual Machine, statistics facilities, internal testing and
verification, and integration with software tools. The enhancement will not only
provide a distributed simulation facility for researchers in the social
sciences, biology, and engineering, but will also improve on MASON's graphical
interface and language facilities to make it easier to use as a teaching tool.