* 1727951
* Dynamics of Contactless Ultrasonic Power Transfer for Wireless Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Karim Sabra, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 07/31/2021
* USD 356,119.00

The transformation of ambient mechanical energy such as vibrational energy into
low-power electricity for enabling self-powered wireless electronic components
has been heavily investigated over the last decade. This method of energy
transfer is possible as long as sufficient ambient energy is readily available
in the vicinity of small devices. There are several conditions where there is no
ambient energy available or battery replacement or tethered charging is either
undesirable or impossible, for example, deep-implanted medical devices or
sensors located in hazardous environments such as nuclear waste containers. In
such cases, contactless power transfer is needed. The primary objective of this
theoretical and experimental research is to perform a system-level investigation
of contactless ultrasonic power transfer dynamics to lay the foundation for its
implementation in next-generation wireless devices. One particular method of
contactless power transfer that has lately received growing attention is the use
of ultrasound waves (which are acoustic waves with frequencies higher than the
human hearing range). The use of ultrasound offers several advantages such as
relatively long power transmission distances using smaller transducers, and
elimination of magnetic fields, as compared to popular power transfer methods
such as inductive coupling. The research has significant potential for
technological and broad societal impact. Contactless powering of wireless
electronic components can reduce the maintenance costs in sensor networks and
chemical waste of discarded batteries. Wireless charging of deep-implanted
medical devices can eliminate the surgery-related complications associated with
battery replacement. The project involves efforts to recruit women and minority
undergraduate students and involvement of high school teachers in research
experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effective use of ultrasonic power transfer
as an enabling technology in wireless applications faces difficult challenges
due to the presence of obstacles, reflections, diffractions, losses, and
acoustic or electromechanical impedance matching issues resulting from the
multiple domains involved. The objective of this research program is to perform
a system-level theoretical and experimental investigation of contactless
ultrasonic power transfer by coupling the dynamics of electromechanical systems,
piezoelectricity, ultrasonic wave physics, and acoustic metamaterials. The
project will generate a comprehensive knowledge of the underlying multiphysics
dynamics to be exploited in next-generation wireless electronic devices spanning
from medical implants to remote sensors with no direct physical access. System-
level, experimentally validated, high-fidelity multiphysics modeling frameworks
that combine transmitter-receiver-electrical load dynamics with acoustic
propagation across multiple domains can enable the design of efficient
ultrasonic power transfer systems. Additionally, concepts from phononic crystals
and metamaterials can be exploited for combined wave focusing and impedance
matching, and phased arrays can be leveraged for obstacle circumventing in power
transfer. The specific research goals are to (1) establish fully coupled
modeling frameworks to analyze multiphysics dynamics of contactless ultrasonic
power transfer; (2) leverage various piezoelectric transmitter-receiver
architectures including phased arrays; and (3) exploit phononic crystals and
metamaterials for combined wave focusing and impedance matching.