* 1727610
* II-New: Infrastructure for THz Computing and Signal Processing Organization
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Ehsan Afshari, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 620,000.00

In the electromagnetics spectrum, the terahertz (THz) frequency domain, ranging
from 300 Gigahertz to 10THz, has remained elusive, underdeveloped, and
underexploited for computing, communications, and signal processing due to a
lack of enabling electronic and photonic technologies. Achieving THz
communication and signal processing has posed a long-lasting, unresolved grand
challenge in electrical and computer engineering that merits concerted and
sustained endeavors to discover the opportunities THz technology can bring. THz
wireless and signal processing hold the promise to transform the capability of
portable devices in the home, in business, and in the clinic; to amplify
achievable data rates in infrastructure deployments where wired connections are
impossible; and to augment or even supplant expensive switching infrastructure
in the data center. To realize such transformative engineered systems, this
project will establish an institutional infrastructure to foster
interdisciplinary research in computer science, electrical engineering, medicine
and biology. The proposed infrastructure for THz signal processing is expected
to spur numerous crosscutting experimental
investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators of this project have been
conducting cutting-edge experimental research in terahertz technology by pushing
the edge of device speed from both electronics and optics ends of the
electromagnetic (EM) spectrum. Specifically, the equipment purchased with the
CRI grant will be used in testing (i) emerging terahertz photonic devices, and
(ii) enabling electronic technologies using newer materials such as GaN, SiGe
and grapheme. Further, the equipment will be utilized in (iii) experimental
characterization of ultra-fast transport phenomena in chalcogenide and
transition metal materials (TMD), and (iv) investigation into link-layer and
network-layer protocols for THz networking with specific applications in a
datacenter environment. On one hand, the project will showcase the terahertz
photonics technology by building the ultra-fast EM digital logic and analog-to-
digital converter. On the other hand, the enabling electronic technology will
engender sub-millimeter vertically and horizontally polarized beam-steering
phase antennas operating in the sub-THz band and a 320 GHz phase-locked
transmitter with conversion efficiency exceeding the state-of-the-art silicon
THz radiators. At the computer system level, exploration into integration of THz
channels with conventional electrical and photonic interconnects will be made to
boost data communication rates to 100 Gbps and beyond. The equipment will also
allow the investigators to study the ultrafast transport dynamics of material
excitations and their interaction with the THz electromagnetic field. Finally,
the equipment will be utilized in integration of research and education with a
view to training future engineering workforce pulled in from a broad swath of
the American society including minority and female students. Didactic materials
developed from new engineering courses on terahertz will be disseminated to
research communities and practicing engineers by leveraging the NSF sponsored
nanoHub repository.