* 1727249
* Integrating Theory and Data to Assess Government Policy Options
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* David Siegel, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 250,621.00

Dissident actions including violent protest, terrorist activity, and insurgency
demand state responses in order to foster national security. Policy makers and
the military are increasingly turning to researchers to help them better
formulate and evaluate the interventions they undertake. But the range of
potential state interventions is great, comprising anything from diplomatic or
informational engagement to economic development or sanctions to military force
or police action, and our understanding of how these interventions work is
limited. This project will improve our understanding in two ways. First, it will
employ cutting-edge Big Data approaches to make predictions as to the
likelihoods of different post-intervention outcomes. These predictions will
include both the mean effect of the interventions and their variance, allowing
policy-makers to use them in cost-benefit calculations. Second, it will provide
a novel theoretical undergirding for these predictions. This will greatly
enhance the scope of our predictions, in that we will discover how and why the
interventions worked as they did, enabling lessons learned to be used in other
contexts. In addition to its direct practical and scientific benefit, our
research will also show a way forward for theoretically-informed big data
applications, and its novel core concepts have the potential for significant
uptake across a wide range of fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We have a limited
understanding at present as to both the efficacy of state interventions into
substate conflict and the manner in which they function. To improve this
understanding we need to develop models of the causal logic by which an
intervention designed to work at the individual or community level alters
collective dissident mobilization. To make headway on this problem, we tie
cutting-edge Big Data approaches to a new type of theoretical model we develop:
an integrated theoretical-empirical Bayesian model that assesses the individual-
level effects of state interventions and then aggregates individual decisions to
predict anti-state action. Our model ties its inputs---individual- and faction-
level data---to: (i) theoretical population distributions over incentives to act
against the state and (ii) distributions over ensembles of individual-level
responses to state interventions. The output of the model is a directly testable
probability distribution over predicted anti-state action given a state
intervention. As such, the model will produce quantitative predictions on the
impact of state interventions that address both the mean effect of the
interventions and the variance in their predicted performance. No previous model
merges individual-level causal mechanisms, empirical prediction, and direct
policy consequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.