* 1727329
* System Analysis and Design under Space- and Time-Dependent Uncertainty
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2017,04/30/2019
* Xiaoping Du, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rob Stone
* 04/30/2019
* USD 374,862.00

Engineering systems are always subjected to uncertainty, which is due to the
randomness in many places, such as the environment, material properties,
manufacturing imprecision, and imperfect knowledge. No consideration or improper
consideration of uncertainty (unknowns, surprises) during system design may
result in low reliability, quality, and robustness; higher costs; and even
catastrophe. This research accounts for the most common type of uncertainty that
varies in space and with respect to time with the following two benefits. First,
it allows engineers to better understand how the space- and time-dependent
uncertainty impacts system performance. Second, it enables engineers to design
systems with minimized effect of the space- and time-dependent uncertainty. As a
result, the research results will add new knowledge to the current theories and
methodologies of engineering and systems design, and also make products more
reliable and safer. This research will be applicable to wide engineering
applications, ranging from large civil systems to small integrated circuit
systems. Other potential areas that will benefit include operations research,
reliability engineering, statistics, and probability, where space-dependent and
time-dependent probabilistic approaches play a vital role. The inclusion of
research results into engineering courses and educational materials will better
foster probabilistic thinking for engineering students, making them be more
responsible for public safety and welfare.

The objective of this research is to quantify and reduce the effect of space-
and time-dependent uncertainty on system performance. The major approach is the
integration of system analysis and design methodologies with advanced theories
of stochastic processes and random fields. The project first answers a question
about how the space- and time-dependent uncertainty in the system input (design
parameters) propagates to the system output (performance). This provides a
better understanding of the effect of uncertainty and identifies complete
probabilistic characteristics of system performance over space and time. Second,
this research answers a question of how to optimally determine design variables
so that the effect of the space- and time-dependent uncertainty is minimized
with a lower cost and reduced risk. All engineering systems are required to work
properly with stable performance in a desired space and period of time, and this
project will produce new methodologies to achieve this requirement.