* 1727565
* Boundary Interactions in Pilot-Wave Hydrodynamics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* John Bush, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 449,933.00

This project is an experimental and theoretical investigation of the "walking
droplet" system, in which a millimeter-size droplet bounces across a vibrating
fluid bath, propelled by a resonant interaction with the waves created when it
strikes the fluid surface. The walking droplet exhibits several features
previously thought unique to the microscopic quantum realm. The outcome of this
project will be a critical assessment of the potential and limitations of the
walking droplet system as an analog for microscopic behavior. Although the
walking droplet system was discovered only a decade ago, a similar conception
for the motion of microscopic quantum particles was formulated in the 1920s by
pioneering physicist Louis de Broglie. De Broglie envisioned microscopic
particles moving in resonance with what he called a "pilot wave." Working from
this conception, de Broglie deduced a number of equations that became the
cornerstones of modern quantum theory, and correctly predicted the phenomenon of
electron diffraction, for which he received the Nobel Prize. Despite this early
success, the pilot wave concept was overshadowed by the viewpoint that the
statistical predictions of quantum mechanics stand alone as a complete
description of physical reality on the microscopic scale, with no role for any
additional physical structure. This project revisits these competing models, and
asks whether chaotic pilot-wave dynamics, of the form conceived by de Broglie
and now realized in the walking droplet system might plausibly underlie quantum
statistics. If the answer is yes, then the prevailing view of the microscopic
realm will require drastic revision, with deep implications for the philosophy
of science. The PIs have designed a walking droplet apparatus, controlled by a
free smartphone app, which can be built for less than $60. The PIs have used the
walking droplet experiment for a variety of science outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will both question and inform the
philosophical foundations of modern physics. The bouncing drop system,
characterized by a resonant interaction between a particle and its guiding wave,
is a rich new dynamical system that extends the range of classical systems to
include features previously thought to be exclusive to the microscopic realm. It
is, moreover, the first macroscopic realization of a pilot-wave dynamics of the
form that was postured in the 1920s by Louis de Broglie, who, in his double-
solution theory, envisaged microscopic quantum particles moving in resonance
with a guiding wave. This study builds upon prior work that has yielded both the
most refined bouncing-drop experimental system in operation and the most
sophisticated theoretical models. Together the theory and experiments provide
predictive power for the dynamics and stability of this hydrodynamic pilot-wave
system. This project will apply these refined experimental and theoretical tools
to revisit key hydrodynamic quantum analog systems involving boundary
interactions, including motion in confined geometries and single-particle
diffraction and interference. The project will also examine several new analog
systems, including refraction of walkers across discrete steps, where a modified
Snell's Law is obeyed, and scattering from circular obstacles, where a property
akin to electromagnetic self-induction arises. Hydrodynamic analogs of the
quantum mirage, Kapitza-Dirac effect, and Bragg scattering will also be
explored. This class of problems will lead to a better understanding of pilot-
wave hydrodynamics, and add to the growing list of hydrodynamic quantum analogs.
In providing the opportunity to observe and understand pilot-wave dynamics on a
macroscopic scale, the bouncing droplet system invites a critical revisitation
of de Broglie's pilot-wave mechanics, and an examination of its viability as the
basis for a realist quantum dynamics.