* 1727949
* Mechanosensation in Bone through Osteocyte Plasma Membrane Disruptions
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Liyun Wang, AUGUSTA UNIVERSITY RESEARCH INSTITUTE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 07/31/2021
* USD 449,738.00

Exercise (bone mechanical loading) is crucial for maintenance of bone health.
Bone adjusts to its loading environment; the skeleton strengthens from
mechanical loading and weakens when not used. During aging, the ability of bone
to properly sense and respond to mechanical loading can change, contributing to
the development of osteoporosis and placing individuals at risk of skeletal
fractures. Cells embedded within bone matrix called osteocytes sense mechanical
load and use it as a signal to direct skeletal adaptation. The mechanisms
osteocytes use to detect loading are not fully understood, but if discovered,
could be targeted by medical treatments intended to prevent osteoporotic
fractures. The research will advance this field by examining a novel mechanism
to detect bone loading, where osteocytes develop small tears in their cell
membrane during mechanical loading. A cell membrane tear triggers cell responses
in the wounded and in neighboring non-wounded cells that are known to be
associated with mechanical loading. The objective of this research program is to
determine the role of loading-induced plasma membrane tears in osteocyte
mechanosensation. Once this biology is better understood, it can be investigated
as a contributing factor to regulation of bone mass (e.g., during aging) and
targeted to test therapeutic agents for altering membrane fragility and repair
rates in bone to enhance skeletal responses to loading. The PI particpates in a
pipeline established to recruit graduate students, undergraduate students, and
fellows from schools serving under-represented hispanic minorities in Puerto
Rico. Outreach to K-12 students, in the form of STEM seminars, Career Day
presentations, and Science Fair judging, will be performed by the PI and
students. Research findings will be integrated into lectures to give students a
deeper appreciation for the material than they would gain from a purely
"textbook" lecture and to attract students into research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evolution restricts musculoskeletal tissue
growth to minimize the metabolic and biomechanical expense of excess tissue
mass, which explains why mechanically regulated inhibitors of musculoskeletal
growth (e.g., sclerostin and myostatin) exist. Likewise, it would be
evolutionarily beneficial for the initiating stimulus for adaptation
(mechanosensation mechanism) to specifically recognize injurious mechanical
stressors, so that tissue adaptation would be driven by a mechanobiological need
to preserve cell viability and organ integrity. This project poses that
mechanical loading causes repairable plasma membrane injury in osteocytes, which
triggers a signal cascade leading to bone adaptation. Thus, mechanically loaded
bone adapts in part by sensing cellular injury, and adaptation in the form of
altered geometry and tissue properties may be designed to limit future injury
when similar stresses are imposed. This project will advance the fundamental
understanding of osteocyte mechanosensation, addressing an unanswered question
in the field and providing new avenues to augment bone strength. Goals include
defining how membrane tears arise and initiate signaling in osteocytes, testing
the effects of altering membrane repair, and exploring how these mechanisms
affect osteocyte mechanosensation during aging. Experiments will employ state-
of-the-art imaging and multiscale studies of bone mechanosensitivity.