* 1727092
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Nanoscale Temperature Manipulation via Plasmonic Fano Interferences
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,12/31/2021
* David Masiello, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 12/31/2021
* USD 521,271.00

Thermal energy, also known as heat, flows naturally from hot objects to cold
objects. One consequence of this heat flow is that it is difficult to create
objects with localized "hot spots," even when heat is applied to a single spot.
When touching a hot pan on the stove, the temperature of the lid on top of the
pan is not much different than the bottom where the heat is applied. Depositing
and maintaining thermal energy in a small region of space becomes even more
challenging as the object's size approaches the tens to hundreds of nanometers,
or about 1,000 times smaller than a human hair. Yet, the ability to control heat
flow and thus temperature at nanoscopic dimensions has important implications
for applications ranging from data storage and the local control of chemical
reactions to photothermal therapies for disease treatment and pain management
through ion channel stimulation. With support from the Designing Materials to
Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) Program in the Division of
Chemistry (CHE) and the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and
Transport Systems (CBET), Professor David J. Masiello from the University of
Washington, Professor Katherine A. Willets from Temple University, and Professor
Stephan Link from Rice University are developing methods to theoretically design
and experimentally realize a new class of materials capable of controllably
directing temperature increases to nanoscale regions of space. Beyond impacting
a wide variety of applications, the project is also facilitating the
interdisciplinary training of students and postdoctoral researchers through
student exchange between the three research groups.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Together, the researchers and their students are designing plasmonic
nanostructures that exploit Fano interferences to focus and convert optical
radiation into precise nanoscopic temperature profiles that are actively tunable
from the far-field. They are developing computer simulations to solve the
coupled Maxwell-heat diffusion equations and using them to design novel
plasmonic nanostructures with Fano interferences that are capable of localizing
spatial temperature profiles at dimensions below the diffraction limit. The best
candidates are then created in the laboratory and characterized using optical
microscopies. Diffraction-limited, single-nanoparticle photothermal absorption
spectroscopy techniques measure the heat power absorbed as well as the
associated temperature change induced in the target material. Fluorescently-
labeled stem-loop DNA structures are used to achieve super-resolution imaging of
the nanoscopic temperature profile. The imaging results are then input into the
design of the next generation of structures, providing the iterative feedback
that is critical to the project's success.