* 1727085
* Improved Dating of Archaeological Materials with Coordinated Stable Isotope Studies
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Warren Sharp, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2021
* USD 199,496.00

Determining the ages of archaeological sites is essential for assessing the
timing and rates of human behavioral and biological evolution, and for
synchronizing archaeological, fossil, and paleoenvironmental records across
sites. Current techniques for dating archaeological sites do not fully meet
these needs, especially at sites older than 50 thousand years. This project will
develop 1) a new approach for determining ages and apply it to several important
Middle Stone Age archaeological sites, and 2) a technique that uses
archaeological materials to provide paleoenvironmental reconstructions for these
sites during human occupation. The project will enhance the infrastructure for
archaeological research across existing laboratories, allowing more informative
study of museum collections that may contain unique or irreplaceable artifacts.
The investigators will promote teaching, training and learning by engaging
undergraduate science majors, technicians conducting the research, and a female
PhD candidate who is a first-generation college attendee, in novel analytical
protocols and approaches to data interpretation. The project will also support
international collaborations, research, and science outreach, at sites that
include a UNESCO-World Heritage Center.

The archaeological record of the Middle Stone Age (300 thousand to 30 thousand
years ago) is critical for understanding the biological and behavioral origins
of our species, Homo sapiens. It encompasses the earliest known fossils of
anatomically modern humans, provides abundant evidence for accelerated
behavioral innovation relative to prior intervals, and coincides with the
expansion of modern humans out of Africa. In this project, stable isotope and
uranium-thorium dating of ostrich eggshells will be applied at sites in eastern
and southern Africa that record the Middle Stone Age. The project will develop
and apply uranium-thorium dating of ostrich eggshells, a common material in Old
World archaeological sequences, and will employ stable isotopes of carbon,
nitrogen, and oxygen in ostrich eggshell to provide improved local records of
past mean annual precipitation, vegetation, and aridity. In sum, these dual
methods will enhance archaeologists' ability to extract chronological and
paleoenvironmental information from many Old World archaeological sequences and
will advance understanding of the timing, tempo, and driving factors of Middle
Stone Age behavioral and cultural innovations.