* 1727960
* Biomechanics Of Noncollagenous Osteocalcin/Osteopontin Protein Complex In Bone
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Dong Qian, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2021
* USD 437,431.00

Bone is a composite material that is made of minerals, collagen and
noncollagenous proteins that are intertwined in structures of different sizes
ranging from the molecular to the whole bone. At the smallest level, collagen
molecules assemble into fibrils. The fibrils are further bonded to form collagen
fibril bundles by a 'natural glue' at the interfibrillar interface. This
interface is primarily made of other proteins such osteocalcin (OCN) and
osteopontin (OPN). While it is generally recognized that the mechanical
properties of the bone such as stiffness and fracture resistance are directly
attributed to the mechanical properties of its constituents, a comprehensive
understanding for the collagen fibrillar interface does not exist. A
computational approach is planned to study the biomechanics of the proteins of
the collagen fibril interface. Successful implementation of this project is
expected to contribute to the field of bone biomechanics and understanding
medical issues with bone such as osteoporosis. Through integration with
research, an educational outreach program will contribute to the development of
a diverse workforce in biomechanics training two PhD students, exposing
undergraduate students to the research program, and engaging high school
students through summer internship in the "NanoExplorer"
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is hypothesized that the fracture and
deformation behavior and the associated energy dissipation in the OCN/OPN
complex are mainly contributed by four key factors: 1) Calcium-mediated
electrostatic bonds between noncollagenous protein matrix and mineral in
collagen microfibril; 2) Hidden length in OPN; 3) Potential post-translational
modification sites in OCN and OPN; 4) Parallel configuration of OCN/OPN within
the interface complex. To test the research hypothesis, an atomistic simulation
approach will be first established to study the interaction between minerals and
non-collagenous proteins (OCN and OPN) with different degrees of post-
translational modifications. Subsequently, the biomechanics of interfibrillar
interfaces will be investigated by exploring a range of spatial configurations,
loading conditions and failure modes. If the above hypothesis is confirmed
through this research, it is expected that new models of bone will take into
account the important effects of noncollagenous OCN/OPN protein complex in bone
rather than those based on merely phenomenological models. This will in turn
significantly impact the ongoing research on the mechanics of bone and other
tissues.