* 1727104
* Investigating the Relationship Between the Structure and Mechanical Behavior of the Lamina Cribrosa
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Thao (Vicky) Nguyen, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2021
* USD 350,368.00

Glaucoma is a blinding disease caused by the progressive death of retinal
ganglion cells and their axons in the lamina cribrosa. The lamina cribrosa is a
fenestrated connective tissue structure in the optic nerve head that
mechanically supports axons as they exit the eye. Glaucoma is the leading cause
of blindness in the US, affecting an estimated 3 million Americans. The
incidence and severity of the disease strongly correlate with the intraocular
pressure, though the level of the intraocular pressure at which glaucoma damage
is detected varies widely. Lowering the intraocular pressure can slow axon loss.
The effectiveness of the treatment varies among patients and 10% of patients
diagnosed with glaucoma eventually go blind. The PIs hypothesize that
deformation caused by the intraocular pressure in the optic nerve head causes
axonal damage. Moreover regional variations in the microstructure of the lamina
cribrosa lead to regions of greater damage. In this project, the PIs will
measure the pressure-induced strains and the structure of the lamina cribrosa.
These will be used to create models of the lamina cribrosa to determine why
certain regions exhibit more deformation and higher stress levels. Understanding
the relationship between the optic nerve head structure and deformation may lead
to the identification of new structural biomarkers for the early detection of
glaucoma using non-invasive imaging and to the development of more effective
patient-specific treatment strategies. Axon damage produces permanent vision
loss in adult glaucoma and early detection is key to preserving vision. The
project will also benefit engineering education by providing research
opportunities to graduate, undergraduate and high school students that involves
state of the art experimental and modeling methods.

The objective of the research is to investigate the extent that anatomical
structure and microstructural features lead to regional variations in the strain
and stress levels. We will apply a recently developed inflation test, which uses
multiphoton imaging and digital volume correlation, to measure the three-
dimensional deformation field in the lamina cribrosa and surrounding
peripapillary sclera. The inflation test method also yields measurements of the
anatomical structure of the optic nerve head tissues. We will analyze these for
regional differences and for eye-specific correlations between the structural
and strain measurements. The data will be used to develop specimen-specific
micromechanical models to study the deformation kinematics of the fibrous
network microstructure of the lamina cribrosa and the structure-properties
relationship of the optic nerve head tissue. Finally, the outcomes of the
experiments and lower scale micromechanical models will be used to develop
specimen- specific finite element models of the optic nerve head and sclera to
systematically evaluate the contributions of microstructural and anatomic
features to the spatial variations in the strain and stress state. The work will
advance fundamental understanding of the biomechanics of the optic nerve head
and elucidate the relationship between the structure and material behavior
through computational modeling and statistical analysis of the eye-specific LC
anatomical structure, microstructure, deformation.