* 1727802
* Establishing a High Resolution Framework for Age Determination
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Sturt Manning, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2022
* USD 200,794.00

Anchoring events in accurate chronological timeframes is of the utmost
importance in answering questions about the past. Scientific developments in the
field of radiocarbon dating have led to what is being called the "third
radiocarbon revolution." These new methods permit archaeologists to construct
more detailed and accurate chronologies than have previously been possible,
often at the decadal scale or less. These more accurate chronologies, in turn,
allow researchers to better understand the pace and timing of key cultural
developments and turning points in prehistoric societies. These developments
have been pivotal in revising understandings of European archaeology, but
similar applications to large-scale chronology-building have lagged behind in
North America. In this project, Dr. Jennifer Birch (University of Georgia) and
Dr. Sturt Manning (Cornell University) will construct for the first time a high-
precision radiocarbon (14C) chronology for select Northern Iroquoian site
relocation sequences in Ontario and New York State. The methods employed include
(a) Accelerator Mass Spectrometry (AMS) dating of short-lived organic material
from select proveniences at 42 Iroquoian village sites and (b) sophisticated
Bayesian Chronological Modeling of those dates - integrating archaeological,
historical and radiocarbon information. The project will provide training for
graduate students, including workshops on chronological modelling and Iroquoian
archaeology at the University of Georgia and Cornell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
significance of this project represents nothing less than the potential
redefinition of the Northern Iroquoian archaeological chronology. A pilot study
by Birch and Manning suggested that in one part of Northern Iroquoia, the
existing ceramic chronology misplaced sites in time by as many as 50-100 years.
This work focusses on the centuries which preceded and followed the first
instances of direct European contact in the Northeast and has significant
implications for the study of the timing and effects of pre- and post-contact
cultural transformations. Understanding how the lived experiences of individuals
and communities articulate with the broad sweep of history is a key theoretical
interest in archaeology. The refined, independent chronology produced by this
project will permit enhanced understanding of the development of Iroquoian
nations and confederacies, the timing and directionality of conflict, and the
introduction of European trade goods, as well as the interplay between these key
societal transformations.