* 1727889
* An Expanded Analysis and Design Framework for Robots that Move by Reshaping their Limbs and Bodies
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Howard Choset, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 466,283.00

This project seeks to extend understanding of locomotion in robots with
articulated bodies and limbs. A gait is a sequence of body shape changes that
ends with the same shape as it starts, and that results in a net repositioning
of the body within its environment. Arbitrarily large repositioning may be
achieved by repeating the sequence over and over. Examples of gaits in four-
legged animals include walking, trotting, cantering, and galloping in horses,
and pronking in gazelles. A robot or animal may use a particular gait depending
on need -- for example, the desired speed of travel will affect the relative
energy efficiency of different gaits. Robots with body configurations similar to
animals may use gaits adapted from nature, however not all robot configurations
have obvious biological counterparts. Furthermore a strictly biomimetic approach
may miss possible gaits that improve upon natural systems. This project will
derive a systematic mathematical framework to search for desirable gaits in
cases that cannot generally be handled using the current state of the art,
including where some movements of the robot body cannot be actively controlled,
or where the movement of the robot causes changes to the surrounding
environment, or where properties of the surrounding environment are controlled
to indirectly influence the movement of the robot. The results of this work will
be applied to robots that can maneuver through challenging media, such as water,
sand or mud. These results will have potential uses in search and rescue,
environmental monitoring, and exploration of hostile environments. The results
will also give insight into the locomotion strategies of biological organisms.
The Principal Investigator has a track record of outreach and educational
activities, including a graduate-level textbook on robotic
locomotion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gait motions take advantage of asymmetries in
the reaction forces generated from a system's interactions with its surroundings
to gain net displacement in a cyclic way. Recent research in robotic gait
locomotion has established a geometric framework for modeling a system's
configuration space in the form of a principal fiber bundle; in such a
formulation, a system -- either robot or animal -- has a configuration space
that can be divided into a shape space and a position space. Gaits are cyclic
paths in the shape space, which when followed, cause displacement in the
position space. This fiber bundle structure has been used with nonlinear control
techniques to analyze and engineer gaits for robotic motion planning, but prior
work has been restricted to systems whose degrees of freedom can be neatly
decomposed into those that are actuated directly and those that parameterize a
symmetry group. Such systems represent only a fraction of the landscape of
realistic locomotion problems, in particular, excluding systems in which energy
efficiency can be derived from nonlinear dynamics involving additional
unactuated degrees of freedom. This project will extend the applicability of
symmetry-based methods for modeling and control to a broader class of problems
in solitary and cooperative locomotion that emphasize efficiency, agility, and
design principles at the boundary of natural and engineered systems.