* 1727930
* SNM: Large-area Manufacturing of Integrated Devices with Nanocomposite Magnetic Cores
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,11/30/2023
* Carlos Rinaldi-Ramos, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 11/30/2023
* USD 1,498,123.00

As predicted by Moore's "law", the past few decades have seen massive reductions
in the size of integrated circuits, enabling the portable, handheld devices now
in everyday use. However, the components that power these devices have not
experienced a similar size reduction. For example, the power adapter of a laptop
computer is only modestly smaller than that two decades ago, and the printed
circuit board inside a smart phone must dedicate between 20% and 40% of the
board area for power conversion and management. To date, efforts towards
miniaturization have been limited by both materials and manufacturing
challenges. To address this gap, this research will study nanomanufacturing
processes to facilitate the scalable synthesis of high quality magnetic
nanoparticles and nanocomposite core materials and the fabrication of compact
power inductors and transformers through assembly of these nanomaterials in a
manner that is compatible with current manufacturing processes, such as silicon
wafer or printed circuit board fabrication. This compatibility will enable fully
integrated and compact system-on-chip or system-in-package power solutions. This
research will be accomplished by fostering collaboration among disciplines
including materials science, chemical engineering and electrical engineering. It
will foster diversity in the profession by involving high school and
undergraduate students in research activities and by broadening participation
through the inclusion and engagement of women and underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to study
synthetic and nanomanufacturing processes that overcome existing integration
challenges while affording breakthrough, high-frequency magnetic performance. An
aim is to research materials that exhibit high magnetic saturation and low loss.
This will be accomplished by leveraging the unique properties of magnetic
materials at the nanoscale through a combination of nanomanufacturing approaches
spanning bottom-up synthesis to directed assembly and nanocomposite formation.
The specific objectives are to: (i) scale-up synthesis of high quality magnetic
nanoparticles via thermal decomposition routes by elucidating the underlying
correlations between synthesis parameters and nanoparticle properties,
leveraging recent developments in the reproducible synthesis of near defect-free
nanocrystals with magnetic properties approaching those of the bulk; (ii) study
methods for large-scale directed assembly of magnetic nanoparticles via
dielectrophoresis into compact power inductors/transformers; and (iii)
demonstrate the formation of bi-phasic nanocomposite cores through large-scale
electro-infiltration of an additional ferromagnetic material. An expected
outcome of this project is to demonstrate scalability through the full-wafer
batch-fabrication of microinductor devices using the developed methods on a
silicon wafer. From a commercial standpoint, nanomanufacturing technologies
providing process-integrable, high-performance magnetic components for power
application have the potential to impact a nearly $12B/year market.