* 1727523
* SNM: Carbon Nanotubes Wafers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Chongwu Zhou, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,490,275.00

This Scalable NanoManufacturing (SNM) research project will advance the scalable
manufacturing of ordered assemblies of carbon nanotubes and of radio frequency
electronic devices and systems fabricated from these assemblies. Semiconducting
carbon nanotubes are among the best semiconductors that have ever been
discovered. They promise to significantly improve the speed, energy efficiency,
and sensitivity of a wide range of electronic devices including central
processing units (the brains) of personal computers, servers, laptops, and
tablets; circuits that send and receive signals for cell phones and
communication devices; and sensors such as those employed when screening for
diseases or new drugs. The tremendous promise of nanotubes was first discovered
25 years ago, but the field has been held back by materials, processing, and
manufacturing roadblocks particularly pertaining to the organization and
assembly of aligned arrays of nanotubes. A novel, multiphase fluid process
recently discovered by this team called tangential flow interfacial self-
assembly with promise for overcoming these roadblocks will be researched in this
project. The project is motivated by compelling preliminary results, in which
the team has assembled nanotubes into aligned arrays to create field effect
transistors (the fundamental building block of electronics) with nearly 10 times
higher on-state electrical conductance than previous nanotube transistors' that
also exceed the on-state conductance of transistors fabricated from state-of-
the-art semiconductors including silicon and gallium arsenide for the first
time. In addition to graduate students, underrepresented researchers and
undergraduate students from primarily undergraduate institutions will
participate in the research effort. The supported graduate students will conduct
science-related activities at a local Boys and Girls Clubs and develop new
activities via collaboration with an outreach specialist. Local K-12 teachers
will also be hosted for summer research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of the project is to assemble semiconducting nanotubes into
aligned arrays that are organized across multiple length-scales and that can be
integrated into devices and circuits, via a continuous scalable process. The
ideal array microstructure consists of parallel semiconducting nanotubes that
are densely packed but individualized at a pitch of 5-10 nanometers. This
microstructure needs to be uniformly repeated on the wafer-scale. Our approach
for scalably realizing this microstructure will be to hierarchically control the
structure and organization of nanotubes via multiple stages of self-assembly.
Specific research activities will focus on: (1) designing and tailoring the
structure of polymer-nanotube conjugates to improve the Nano-, micro-, and
millimeter-scale uniformity and reproducibility of ordered nanotubes arrays; (2)
uncovering the fundamental factors that control the assembly of nanotubes during
the recently discovered tangential flow interfacial self-assembly process; (3)
scaling this process; and, (4) integrating assembled nanotube arrays into
complex devices, circuits, and systems for next-generation radio frequency
communications technologies. At the project's conclusion, the PI aims to
provide: (i) a pilot-scale instrument for the continuous deposition of aligned
nanotube arrays with exquisite control over microstructure; (ii) the first
example of a uniform, densely aligned array of semiconducting nanotubes on the
200 mm wafer-scale - a scale relevant for commercialization; and, (iii)
performance-superior radio frequency low-noise amplifiers and mixers fabricated
from these arrays and wafers, of relevance for next-generation cellular, WiFi,
and Internet of Things technologies.