* 1727478
* Collaborative Research: Emerging Optimization Methods for Planning and Operating Shared Mobility Systems under Uncertain Budget and Market Demand
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Mengshi Lu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 12/31/2020
* USD 125,000.00

Advances in networked communication systems have enabled the use of shared
mobility forms including carsharing and ridesharing. Both government and private
sectors engaged in planning shared mobility systems must choose between
introducing new, shared mobility programs versus expanding existing ones, under
uncertain budget and market demands. In this project, the PI will address the
issue of demand uncertainty in design of shared mobility strategies considering
shared fleet size, type, location design, and operational activities such as
real-time vehicle routing, redistribution, and charging for carsharing systems;
in addition to service region planning and shared mobility. The success of this
project will: (i) advance both the theoretical and the computational frontiers
of optimization methods for use in solving new transportation problems; and (ii)
impact applications of shared mobility that relate to critical civil
infrastructures, supply chain &amp; logistics, and other service industries.
Education plans, including promoting female and underrepresented minority groups
in science, engineering, and management, will be collaboratively undertaken
through the PIs' involvements in various education initiatives at the University
of Michigan and Purdue University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
collaborative research is to derive high-fidelity, data-driven mathematical
models and provably efficient numerical algorithms that innovatively combine
optimization and reinforcement learning for shared mobility system design and
operations. In specific, we characterize shared mobility demand response as a
multi-stage information revealing process, and abstract the corresponding
decision process as sequential resource planning, allocation, and task
prioritization, adjusted by varying decisions in later stages. We derive models
and solution methods based on single-, two- and multi-stage stochastic
optimization and dependent on full knowledge of demand distributions. We also
investigate data-driven distributionally robust optimization methods and machine
learning approaches to address ambiguous demand distributions and budget
uncertainty. The derivation, validation, and calibration of this study aim at
(i) formulating appropriate optimization-based models to characterize decision-
data interdependence in complex shared mobility systems; (ii) deploying data-
driven, distribution-free approaches for handling the distribution ambiguity of
multi-sourced uncertainties in emerging shared mobility services; (iii)
integrating learning approaches to dynamically adapt to endogenous system
information and enhancing solutions from multi-stage optimization processes;
(iv) designing efficient computational methods with solution quality guarantees
to enable practical use of the models.