* 1727661
* Bulk rheology of fault damage zone materials and its implication for interseismic fault mechanics
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Hiroki Sone, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 07/31/2021
* USD 338,895.00

This project aims to better understand the tectonic loading process leading to
devastating earthquakes in major plate boundaries. Advances in the past decade
allows scientists to capture and simulate first-order characteristics of the
earthquake cycle, but challenges remain in understanding the randomness and
spatial variability of earthquake phenomena. This project specifically focuses
on one of the complexities that may arise due to the fact that faults may not
only slip at the very fault plane itself, but the surrounding damaged rock can
also deform to accommodate plate motion. The project, carried out in
collaboration with researchers from National Central University, Taiwan,
involves characterization of damage zone samples from the Chelungpu fault,
Taiwan, coupled with deformation experiments on those samples to explore the
behavior of the damage zone under stress. Better understanding of such phenomena
will illuminate what is still lacking in current earthquake fault models and
lead to improved accuracy of seismic hazard analyses. The project would also
advance desired societal outcomes through a strong research collaboration with
Taiwanese scientists plus the opportunity for graduate students to exchange
scientific ideas and cultural experiences essential to foster future generation
of scientists who will work in an international collaborative
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this study is to characterize
the ductile deformational properties of fault damage zone rocks and to evaluate
the importance of such behavior on fault mechanics. Most analytical and
numerical fault mechanics models treat faults as a frictional interface embedded
between elastic host rocks and does not take into account the peculiar
characteristics of the damage zone surrounding the fault plane. However, damage
zone rocks may undergo time-dependent ductile deformation even under crustal
conditions, which has significant consequences on how shear stress develops on a
fault during the interseismic period. The project focuses on the Chelungpu
fault, Taiwan, where the high-quality core material was recovered from the 2004
International Continental Drilling Project. Detailed description of the fault
damage zones in the Chelungpu fault system will be made with emphasis on
fracture density, followed by creep experiments using damage zone samples to
measure time-dependent strain behavior. Using lab-derived constitutive
equations, deformation behavior of the damage zone under tectonic conditions
will be evaluated. The ductile constitutive law will be combined with fault
frictional properties in a numerical model to quantify the relative contribution
of each domains, damage zone and fault core, to the total fault deformation
during interseismic tectonic loading. Many geophysical observations suggest that
permanent off-fault deformation may be occurring over long time scales (greater
than a year). If, for instance, the partial-coupling of subduction interfaces
inferred from geodetic studies is indeed due to steady off-fault deformation,
the study may impact understanding of the stress accumulation process during
interseismic tectonic loading.