* 1727079
* I-Corps: Rapid Generation and Testing of Vaccine Candidates using Protein Nanoparticles
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2017,08/31/2018
* M.G. Finn, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 08/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project derives from its
ability to potentially accelerate the process of discovery and manufacture of
new vaccines and immunological therapies. These products contain several
different components that act together to direct the immune response against a
particular pathogen or disease. The technology developed here makes the assembly
of these components a rapid and modular process, starting from a platform that
naturally alerts the immune system to the presence of a molecular signature of
infection. By speeding the construction of vaccine and immunotherapeutic
candidates, we will make the overall discovery process faster and more
effective, and the production process faster and less expensive. By shortening
the time of discovery and manufacture, the pharmaceutical industry as a whole
can be more responsive to emerging threats. The technology can also be
potentially applied to immunotherapy against cancer and other diseases.

This I-Corps project combines two core capabilities: the development of protein
nanoparticles derived from viruses as platforms that stimulate the immune system
toward molecules attached to them, and highly efficient chemical reactions that
make attachments to the protein nanoparticles easy and scalable. Since the
molecules that define different infectious agents or disease states can vary
widely, such efficient connecting reactions are necessary to make the
construction of vaccine candidates routine and modular. Research has defined the
methods and linkages needed, and has validated the use of certain protein
nanoparticles as effective immune-stimulating agents. Proofs of concept have
been achieved for certain bacterial and parasitic infections, characterized by
the display of unique sugar-like molecules on the surfaces of the infectious
organisms. The combination of the flexibility of the approach, potentially
applicable against a wide variety of diseases, and the ability to rapidly
produce promising nanoparticle agents quickly and on large scale, makes the
technology attractive for transition from the academic laboratory to potential
commercial clinical application.