* 1727357
* Collaborative Research: Spatial Utilization and Social Interaction in Non-Complex Socieites
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Danielle Macdonald, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2023
* USD 107,669.00

Most of the world's societies today rely on food produced by humans, whether by
farming or other aspects of landscape management. Dr. Lisa Maher, of the
University of California, Berkeley, and Dr. Danielle Macdonald, of the
University of Tulsa, examine the long-term impacts of the transition from
hunting, gathering, and fishing to the earliest food-producing societies in
prehistory located in the Middle East. While this transition was gradual and
nonlinear, with lots of fits and starts, comparatively little research has been
done on the hunter-gatherer communities whose lifeways set the stage for the
origins of agriculture and later urbanization. This research explores this
earlier period, approximately 20,000 years ago, to understand changing social
organization and human-environment interactions through the analysis of a large
hunter-gatherer aggregation site, and to reconstruct the broader social and
economic relationships between people at this site and others in the surrounding
hunter-gatherer world. Changes in the mechanisms of social organization during
this time are integral to understanding how hunter-gatherer groups organized
themselves and how these lifeways were re-organized with food-production,
changing how people perceived and understood the natural world. Combining
excavations at a hunter-gatherer aggregation site with analysis of occupation
traces, material culture ties to contemporary sites, and environmental records
permits rigorous evaluation of prehistoric adaptations to fluctuating
environmental conditions and the sustainability of different lifeways. Today,
these issues remain at the forefront of local, national and global agendas as
populations invest in evidence-based water conservation strategies.
Understanding the responses of past people, foragers and farmers alike, to
changing environmental and water resources provides a necessary long term record
of adaptation and has great impact for future planning. Partnering with local
Jordanian communities and institutions, this research supports local initiatives
to provide education about related climate and culture change and promote
heritage conservation and environmental stewardship, particularly with local
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address long-term changes and explore the
nature of hunter-gatherer behavior at the cusp of agriculture, Drs. Macdonald
and Maher, along with an international team of researchers, will examine the
high-resolution archaeological record of multi-season, prolonged and repeated
habitation of the region's largest and densest hunter-gatherer aggregation site
in Jordan. Here, ~20,000 years ago, hunter-gatherers congregated from across the
region, leaving traces of architectural structures, human burials, and symbolic
artifacts, hinting at emerging village settlement, economic intensification, and
ritual behaviors associated with dwelling and intensive landscape use almost
10,000 years earlier than previously known from Neolithic farming villages.
Through these lines of evidence, researchers examine how people were integrated
into a broader regional landscape of social interaction and how they adapted to
the changing environment. Issues of resilience in the face of dramatic
environmental change, sustainable lifeways and practices, and dynamics of how
and why people establish, maintain and, sometimes, strengthen economic and
social connections to each other during times of social upheaval resonate today,
and were important aspects of human behavior from at least the transition from
hunting-gathering to agriculture. There is much to be learned about the causes
of global food and climate challenges today from this kind of detailed
archaeological study of past societies, as well as about strategies for how
people developed productive relationships with each other and the landscape to
address such challenges.