* 1727422
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Social Life of TBI: The embodied and constructed meaning of moderate/severe Traumatic Brain Injury in the United States
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Susan Shaw, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2019
* USD 25,200.00

Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) is an acute physical injury of the brain suffered
by millions of Americans every year. Such injuries are largely invisible, poorly
understood, and almost always lead to extensive and life-long consequences for
survivors, their caregivers, families, friends, and wider communities. In the
research supported by this award, University of Arizona doctoral student Austin
W. Duncan, under the supervision of Dr. Eric Plemons and Dr. Susan J Shaw, will
investigate the shifting meaning and sociocultural ramifications of the injury
in the contemporary United States. The goal is to understand how the meaning is
created and how it changes and is changed by bodily experiences and social
interactions of individual survivors with those around them, including
governmental and non-governmental (NGO) policymakers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researcher will trace how TBI becomes a chronic condition at three distinct but
inter-related levels: 1) individual TBI survivors; 2) caregivers, families,
friends, and associates; and 3) governmental and non-governmental policies and
programs. Data will be collected through intensive fieldwork in Seattle,
Washington. The researcher will employ a mixed methods approach, including:
participant-observation with community, organizations, and TBI support groups;
open-ended stakeholder interviews; focus groups; case studies with individual
survivors and those closest to them; and semi-structured interviews with state
and civil society staff and policymakers. Taken together, these data sources
will allow the researcher to access and assess the post-treatment and
rehabilitation consequences of the injury across individual, social, and
political realms. Finally, by investigating a concrete example of the social
effects of physical brain damage, findings from the research will contribute to
new theoretical understanding of the role that the brain plays in the
functioning of the physical, social, and political bodies.