* 1727575
* 2017 Graduate Climate Conference; Woods Hole, Massachusetts; November 10-12, 2017
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2018
* Raffaele Ferrari, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 03/31/2018
* USD 20,000.00

This award supports the 11th Graduate Climate Conference (GCC), held 10-12
November 2017 at the Marine Biological Laboratory of the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institute in Massachusetts. The GCC is an annual interdisciplinary
climate conference organized by and for graduate students. It provides a
discussion forum for students conducting research on climate in a variety of
disciplines including atmospheric dynamics, ocean dynamics, ocean biology and
chemistry, atmospheric chemistry, climate dynamics, paleoclimate, and human
dimensions of climate variability and change. The meeting is intended to help
students familiarize themselves with the breadth of climate science, gain
exposure to the enormous range of tools available to address climate-related
questions, and understand how their research fits into the broader landscape of
current climate science. The conference seeks to better prepare graduate
students for scientific inquiry in a field that increasingly demands
interdisciplinary approaches. Funds provided here support travel and subsistence
for 50 to 60 students chosen through a competitive process which places emphasis
on selecting a cross-section of applicants that reflects the diversity of the
next generation of scientists, and recognizes the value in a wide range of
geographic and ethnic backgrounds.