* 1727662
* Wave Loads and Structural Fragility Behind Impermeable and Permeable Obstacles
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Andrew Kennedy, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2022
* USD 319,216.00

Inundation from storm waves and tsunamis has caused great damage to buildings
and infrastructure both in the United States and worldwide. Reduction of damage
and overall risk mitigation remain priorities for coastal communities now and in
the future, but these goals are in some ways limited by engineering design and
analysis tools. Damage from storm waves and tsunamis is well known to be
diminished behind structures or vegetation, but it has proven surprisingly
difficult to translate this general knowledge to specific guidelines and
standards for engineers and planners. This project will use theory, numerical
models, and results from field and laboratory measurements to investigate the
degree of damage reduction behind sheltering structures. Two notable features of
this analysis will be the consideration of sheltering obstacle degradation
during an event, and a framework for probabilistic analysis that will allow
design for different levels of risk. Useful quantification of loading for
sheltered structures will remove a major impediment to accurate design and
planning for inundation events. This project will help to improve load estimates
in ways that will be directly applicable to many instances of engineering
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike hazards such as earthquakes, Inundation
Event (IE) loading from storm waves or tsunamis can vary on scales of O(10m),
and is greatly affected by the surrounding natural and built environments.
Uncertainty in computing the local hazard and local loading remains the greatest
obstacle in determining fragility for planning and structural design: Loads
behind obstacles have been shown to decrease significantly when compared those
from bare-earth conditions, but these decreases cannot yet be quantified for
general conditions. Prediction becomes even more difficult when considering that
some obstacles may be permeable to flow (vegetation), or may degrade over the
course of the IE, changing loading. This project will examine IE hazard
intensities, loading, and fragility for structures located behind a single row
of obstacles using (1) Scaling and theoretical analyses; (2) Computational fluid
dynamics simulations; (3) Structural analyses; (4) Existing field and laboratory
data. Analyses will further consider the effects of obstacle degradation using
fragility modeling of the obstacle itself. Results will consider uncertainties
using surrogate modeling, which will both illuminate the major factors in
loading and fragility uncertainties, and will suggest avenues through which
results might be improved.