* 1727029
* MRI:  Acquisition of a differential scanning calorimeter for undergraduate research and training
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Gerald Van Hecke, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 08/31/2020
* USD 84,362.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation Programs. Professor Gerald Van Hecke from
Harvey Mudd College and colleagues are acquiring a differential scanning
calorimeter (DSC). A differential scanning calorimeter measures the temperature
that a material undergoes a change in phase (for example from solid to liquid),
the heat necessary to promote the phase change, and glass temperature changes.
The capacity of a material to adsorb heat (heat capacity) and the detection of
polymorphic crystals can be studied. The instrument is used in research on
atmospheric aerosols and the study of potential materials for thermal energy
storage media. The DSC provides research opportunities in calorimetry at Harvey
Mudd, sister Claremont Colleges, and at least two local community colleges which
greatly increases the training of young researchers in this technique.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This calorimeter enhances research and education at all
levels. It aids researchers in thermally characterizing aqueous atmospheric
aerosols and in exploring eutectic and peritectic behavior in binary mixtures of
simple carboxylic liquids. These later materials have potential use in thermal
energy storage materials. Finally, the DSC is used to determine the thermal and
phase properties of emergent materials for coupling magnetism to ferroelectric
crystalline propwerties above ambient temperature.