* 1727668
* Collaborative Research:   Co-Extrusion of Organic-Inorganic Colloidal Inks for Energy Conversion Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Marta Hatzell, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 08/31/2021
* USD 236,150.00

Energy storage (batteries) and energy conversion systems (fuel cells) are
composed of planar, layered structures often referred to as membrane electrode
assemblies. One of the primary limitations with these systems is the multi-step
materials processing associated with manufacturing. Extrusion manufacturing
methods offers the opportunity to combine multiple materials systems at once for
integrated and engineered part development for electrochemical systems. One of
the key challenges in achieving this is the engineering of colloidal inks
capable of producing uniform parts with controlled properties. In this project,
colloidal inks, which can be described as semi-solid or semi-liquid, consist of
platinum coated carbon particles in a polymeric base. The work will investigate
how these complex inks behave under extrusion conditions, and how they interface
with other co-extruded inks. A fundamental understanding about co-extrusion
processing of colloidal inks will potentially enable facile and scalable
manufacturing methods for multi-layered structures and components common in
electrochemical systems. Moreover, colloidal co-extrusion has broad application
in the manufacturing of novel composite materials, organic electronics,
thermoelectric, photovoltaics, bio-materials, and batteries. In addition to
providing graduate and undergraduate students research experiences, this project
will contribute towards broadening manufacturing education in K-12 programs in
the Nashville and Atlanta areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex material systems
are rarely processed using co-extrusion based approaches due to the inherent
difficulties which arise due to mechanical and fluid induced instabilities.
These instabilities are well documented and broadly understood for single
component extrusion processing (e.g. polymers), but there have been limited
studies that probe multi-component colloidal materials. The research objective
of this work is to explore the interactions between soft and hard colloids
during co-extrusion processes. The work specifically seeks to understand how
interactions between components in an ink affects viscoelastic properties and
promote or dampen ink mixing or delamination mechanisms. This work will utilize
advanced characterization techniques (scattering and microcopy) to probe colloid
structure information and define unique constitutive equations to describe
functional properties in extruded colloidal inks. Moreover, these constitutive
relationships will be used to engineer colloidal inks that promote interfacial
stability during extrusion processes. This work is fundamental in nature and the
product of this work is relevant to the manufacturing community as well as the
rheological, electrochemical, and colloidal science communities.