* 1727378
* Understanding and Leveraging the Effect of Nanoscale Roughness on Macroscale Adhesion
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Tevis Jacobs, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2021
* USD 305,123.00

Many of the modern technologies produce miniaturized devices used in
applications from electronics, communications, medicine as well as others. The
small size of these devices leads to unique issues in their manufacture and use.
However, many of these emerging devices and manufacturing techniques face a
problem with stickiness or adhesion. Specifically, when small-size parts come
into contact, they spontaneously stick together and cannot easily be pulled
apart. This problem significantly limits the performance and reliability of
otherwise promising technologies. This grant supports fundamental research to
understand the dependence of adhesion on surface roughness. This project will
develop new ways to measure roughness at small sizes, and also new ways to
control it. Ultimately, the insights gained from this investigation will enable
the intentional modification of roughness during manufacturing to improve the
performance of the final devices. The investigation is being conducted by an
international team of researchers, and incorporates specific programs for
education both for engineers in industry to put the research into practice, and
also for grade-school students to increase interest and participation among the
next generation of American engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this
award are: (1) to identify the length scales of surface roughness that most
strongly impact adhesion; and (2) to develop fabrication strategies to
rationally modify topography at these scales to control adhesion. First, the
investigation will use transmission electron microscopy to characterize
previously unmeasured scales of topography on technologically-relevant
materials, and then use a custom micromechanical tester to measure their surface
adhesion. Experimental results will be analyzed in the context of existing
analytical and numerical models, in order to evaluate and then improve these
models. The experiments will be complemented by large-scale computer simulations
of identical surfaces, in order to gain atomic-scale information about the
material response. The simulations will be carried out through a strong non-NSF-
funded collaboration with the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology in Germany.
Second, using advanced lithographic techniques, the small-scale roughness of
test surfaces will be systematically varied and quantitatively linked to changes
in properties. This will enable both experimental tests of rough-surface models,
as well as the demonstration of routes to modify surface roughness to achieve an
optimal surface adhesion. This investigation will have direct impact on
microscale devices and on advanced manufacturing, both of which require precise
understanding and control of surface properties. Further, the experimental
validation of roughness models will have application to rough surfaces more
broadly from automotive components to road surfaces to medical implants.