* 1727433
* Non-classical Micromorphic Continuum Model for Granular Microstructure Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Anil Misra, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 07/31/2022
* USD 380,086.00

This award supports fundamental research for development of new analyses methods
that will accurately and efficiently describe the mechanical behavior of
granular solids and its relation to microstructure and grain-interactions.
Granular solids are ubiquitous and impact diverse areas of engineering and
science such as material development, transportation and infrastructure systems,
pharmaceuticals and drug delivery, and natural processes in geophysics. These
materials span the spectrum from highly consolidated dense solids formed of
particulate precursors to confined packings of non-cohesive particles. The
response of these materials to imposed mechanical loads characteristically
exhibits a range of complex behavior. By manipulating the microstructure and
grain-interactions the mechanical behavior can be controlled and additive
manufacturing can be exploited to fabricate such materials with predictable
properties. The current methods used for the predicting the mechanical
performance of these materials suffer from inefficiencies and inaccuracies. Such
knowledge will open the door for the design of novel granular solids that have
superior weight-to-stiffness/strength ratio, vibration control capabilities and
other unusual properties. There is an increasing demand for accelerated
development of such materials in infrastructure, aerospace, biomedical and
automotive industries. Consequently, the results of this research will have
beneficial impact upon the U.S. economy and society. This interdisciplinary
research will draw from a number of disciplines including manufacturing,
mathematics, material science and engineering. The research results and
techniques will be highlighted at the campus outreach events designed to attract
students into STEM disciplines and recruit students into graduate programs. The
interdisciplinary nature of the project will help attract participation from
underrepresented groups and introduction of higher-level mechanics concepts into
engineering education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grain-pair interactions and
granular structures have a strong effect upon the collective behavior of grains
in granular solids. Therefore, approaches are needed that are different from the
many micromechanical or multi-scale methods that have been conceived within the
framework of conventional continuum and discrete particle mechanics. The
research project is aimed at developing a novel non-classical micromorphic
continuum model using the granular micromechanics paradigm. The outcome of the
project will be the development of tools and methodologies for describing
mechanics of these materials and will result in following: (1) continuum model
of materials with granular microstructures accounting for fluctuations in grain
displacements and grain rotations in the framework of granular micromechanics;
(2) rationale for the need for enhanced continuum approach based upon empirical
data; and (3) validated methodology for practical application of these models.