* 1727490
* Next Generation Deep Drawing Using Smart Observers, Close-Loop Control, and 3D-Servo-Press
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Brad Kinsey, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2022
* USD 380,438.00

Smart factories represent the fourth industrial revolution where, for example,
automation and data exchange in cyber-physical systems, with respect to a single
process or across an entire manufacturing facility, are exploited to improve
processes and product performance. With enhanced understanding of material
behavior (including failure), state-of-the-art automation, connected systems,
and advances in computational time, such smart factories are attainable. This
award seeks to implement smart factory principles to realize a robust,
intelligent sheet forming process capable of making real time process
adjustments. To achieve this goal the University of New Hampshire (UNH) will
collaborate with the Production Technology and Forming Machines (PtU) Institute
at the Technische Universit√§t Darmstadt in Germany. This award, which supports
the research undertaken by UNH, centers on understanding the fundamental aspects
of sheet metal behavior under non-uniform deformation conditions, the prediction
of process conditions leading to material failure, and the sensing of failure
modes. The resulting modeling predictions and material's knowledge will be
integrated into the unique sheet forming capabilities at PtU for evaluation of
real-time control capabilities. No NSF funds will support PtU activities.
Success will translate into higher processing capabilities (more efficient
processes capable of processing a wider range of materials) which is of great
significance to US based automotive, aerospace, and energy based industries.
Planned personnel exchanges will provide exceptional educational and cultural
opportunities for the researchers involved in the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this research are to (i) exploit the
flexibility of a 3D servo-press to improve the formability of sheet metal
components (ii) establish the scientific understanding to identify non-linear
deformation trajectories for process improvement, (iii) investigate an acoustic
emissions (AE) sensor to predict failure in sheet metal components, and (iv)
create a framework for smart factory process implementation and benefits. If
processes can automatically be adjusted based on variations in the material,
lubrication, process conditions, etc. as the process progress, failure of the
material, which is a concern in sheet metal forming due to the thin gauge of the
blanks, can be avoided, and improvements in the dimensional accuracy and final
properties of product can be achieved. The research will capitalize on the
strengths of the two institutions with respect to forming machine at PtU and
material characterization and modeling at UNH. Personnel exchanges and regular
communications will assure the overall success of the collaboration.