* 1727350
* Pay Secrecy Policies and Pay in U.S. Workplaces
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Jake Rosenfeld, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 07/31/2019
* USD 259,475.00

Surveys indicate that prohibitions against discussing wages and salaries are
widespread throughout U.S. workplaces. Yet little is known about the
consequences of these pay secrecy policies. This project fills the research gap
by fielding the first longitudinal survey of U.S. workers that includes
questions about pay secrecy policies and workers? pay. The investigators will
collect and analyze responses from approximately 3,000 workers to determine if
and how the discouragement or outright prohibition of employee discussions about
pay is related to who gets paid what. The survey results will allow the
investigators to examine whether a lack of knowledge about co-workers? pay
disadvantages women relative to men, and racial/ethnic minority workers relative
to white workers, when it comes to negotiating pay. As a result, this project
will contribute to knowledge about gender and racial/ethnic inequality in
contemporary workplaces. It will also uncover the industries and occupations in
which pay secrecy policies are most common and consequential for workers? wages,
as well as other important outcomes, including the productivity and
profitability of establishments that do and do not maintain pay secrecy
policies. The project expands on recent theoretical and empirical research
examining workplace factors that influence the distribution of organizational
rewards. By examining whether information asymmetries introduced by management
influence pay dynamics, the project will contribute to understandings of sources
of wage inequality in the contemporary era, as well as existing scholarship on
how managerial practices influence various types of inequality ? such as gender
and racial/ethnic ? in the workplace. It will also expand knowledge of the
organizational determinants of pay by uncovering if and how differential access
to information in organizations influences wages and salaries. The project will
accomplish these tasks through a longitudinal survey of U.S. workers that
includes an oversample of employees in a state where a new law penalizes
employers that maintain pay secrecy policies. By surveying workers before and
after the law is implemented, the investigators will measure whether changes in
prohibitions against discussing pay are associated with changes in pay in a
context in which lawmakers proscribe such managerial behavior. For respondents
in other states, the longitudinal design allows the investigators to measure
whether a move to a more transparent workplace, or a change in a workplace?s
policy about discussing wages and salaries, is associated with a change in
respondents? pay. These survey results will inform policymakers at the state and
federal level about the likely consequences of restricting pay secrecy policies.