* 1727779
* Collaborative Research: An Economic Iterative Learning Control Framework with Application to Airborne Wind Energy Harvesting
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Christopher Vermillion, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 03/31/2019
* USD 245,625.00

The objective of this project is to pioneer new techniques for controlling
systems that operate in a repetitive manner, using information from previous
iterations to improve the performance at each successive iteration. Unlike
existing techniques that seek only to improve position tracking along a path,
this research project will focus on the iteration-to-iteration improvement of
economic metrics such as energy generation/expenditure, total iteration time, or
monetary cost. The control techniques created in this research will be
applicable to a wide variety of systems for which repetitive control is
essential and there exists a clear economic objective to improve upon from one
iteration to the next. Example applications include assembly line and
manufacturing operations (an over $1 trillion industry where parts are produced
by the thousands and minimizing manufacturing time and energy expenditure is
critical), actively-controlled exoskeletons (which control a repetitive human
walking gait), and airborne wind energy systems. This research will focus
specifically on airborne wind energy systems, which replace the conventional
tower with tethers and a lifting body to harness high altitude winds using very
little material. These systems can generate substantially increased energy
through repetitive crosswind flight, rather than stationary operation, and there
exists a significant opportunity to improve the energy generation performance
from one repetition to the next. The research will be augmented by education and
outreach activities, including the creation of wind energy-inspired
undergraduate classroom modules, development of a kite design activity at the
Charlotte Engineering Early College High School, and summer opportunities at a
regional airborne wind energy company, Windlift, Inc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will derive new control theoretic knowledge for a unique economic
iterative learning control framework that focuses on maximizing or minimizing a
profitability index rather than mere tracking performance. Specifically, the
learning framework will blend two mechanisms that will transform the state of
the art in point-to-point iterative learning control. First, unlike traditional
point-to-point iterative learning control approaches where the waypoints are
pre-specified and only the behavior between waypoints can be adapted from one
iteration to the next, the framework will enable adaptation of the waypoints
themselves from one iteration to the next. Secondly, an inner loop flexible-time
iterative learning control module will allow the waypoint arrival times and
total iteration time to vary from one iteration to the next. This will enable
the research team to tackle time-optimal and energy-optimal problems through an
iterative learning framework, which has not been accomplished in a general sense
to-date. Considering that the waypoint adaptation law and flexible time
iterative learning module comprise two interconnected subsystems, a small gain
stability analysis framework will be used to derive bounds on the allowable
variation of waypoints from one iteration to the next. Finally, the application
of the ILC framework to repetitive crosswind flight of AWE systems will provide
an online learning mechanism for the optimization of crosswind flight, which is
especially important due to the complex and uncertain dynamic models of these
systems (which can often render offline crosswind trajectory optimizations
ineffective).