* 1727870
* Augmented Tube Models for Blends of Star and Linear Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Sachin Shanbhag, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2022
* USD 246,159.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational
research and education into the development of fast and accurate models of flow
behavior in polymers. Properties of synthetic polymers can be tuned by
engineering their molecular structure. This allows polymers to be used in a
variety of applications ranging from packaging to automobiles, and from fabrics
to surgical sutures. Polymers are typically processed in the liquid or melt
state, where the molecular structure strongly influences flow properties. This
relationship between molecular structure and flow properties is often studied
using a theory called the tube model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Failures of the
standard tube model can be traced to the manner in which it simplifies
"multibody interactions" between polymer molecules. These interactions are more
accurately described by a simulation model called the slip link model, which is
unfortunately computationally costly. This project seeks to combine the strength
of tube model (speed) with that of the slip link model (accuracy) through the
development of augmented tube models. If successful, this research will provide
a template for blending theories and simulations, which is expected have far
reaching consequences for materials characterization, even outside the polymer
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award also supports the education of minority
students at Florida State University by providing modern training in materials
modeling, Markov chain Monte Carlo, and statistical analysis. The software and
datasets developed by the research team will be made publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational research and
education into the development of fast and accurate models of flow behavior in
polymers. The tube model is a popular mean-field theory for entangled polymer
melts. Unfortunately, it fails consistently even for relatively simple systems
like binary blends of monodisperse polymers with widely separated relaxation
times. On the other hand, different slip link models, all of which explicitly
treat entanglements between chains as slip links, are remarkably successful for
such systems. This is primarily due to the different treatment of a relaxation
mechanism called constraint release, in the two models. In slip link models, the
description of constraint release is "natural", while it can be complicated, and
still inaccurate, in the tube model. A drawback of slip link models is their
computational cost. This project seeks to combine the strength of tube models
(speed) with that of the slip link models (natural and accurate representation
of constraint release). The overarching research objectives are (i) to explore
the development of augmented tube models, which combine these strengths, and
(ii) to test these augmented models on the computationally intensive inverse
problem of inferring the composition of a polymer mixture from experimental
measurements of rheology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award supports the
development of a fast slip link model called ecoSLM, and its validation, using
binary blends of star and linear polymers. Research activities to service the
overall objectives are broken down into four specific tasks: (i) validating the
ecoSLM against all available experimental data on linear-linear, star-linear,
and star-star blends, (ii) using the validated ecoSLM to map out the design
space to help identify regions where the tube model fails, (iii) developing
augmented tube model, which uses ecoSLM to guide the tube model to the correct
physics/parameters, and (iv) to use these augmented tube models for inverse
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project explores the augmentation of a mean-
field theory with a stochastic simulation model, ecoSLM, in order to combine
speed with accuracy. If successful, it can provide a template for other problems
in materials science that seek to combine a mean-field theory with simple
simulation models. Using a Bayesian framework for inverse modeling, this can
have far reaching implications for materials characterization, even outside the
polymer industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.