* 1727268
* Understanding Neurodegeneration Across the Scales
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Ellen Kuhl, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 400,000.00

With an increasing life expectancy, neurodegeneration has arguably become the
most challenging malady of the century. The most common type of
neurodegeneration, Alzheimer's disease, causes a devastating and progressive
loss of cognition for which there is currently no treatment or cure. Protein
tangles, axonal injury, and structural degradation are classic hallmarks of
Alzheimer's disease. Growing evidence suggests that these features are shared by
a number of other neurodegenerative disorders including traumatic brain injury,
chronic traumatic encephalopathy, and Parkinsonism. Yet, the molecular
mechanisms of neurodegeneration remain poorly understood. The overall goal of
this research program is to establish a mechanistic, bio-chemo-mechanical model
of neurodegeneration to simulate and predict normal and abnormal
neurophysiology. Towards this goal, the objective of this project is to probe,
model, and simulate the tau-microtubule complex to reveal the underlying failure
mechanisms of individual axons. This project is truly transformative in that it
will open new avenues to understand neurodegeneration from bio-chemo-mechanical
principles. This project will feed into a new multidisciplinary
undergraduate/graduate course at the interface between mechanics and the
neurosciences. Many members of our team are individuals from underrepresented
groups who actively serve as role models in various organizations where they
will promote this work and recruit underrepresented individuals to join this
project. To enhance scientific and technological understanding, we will continue
to participate in the National Biomechanics Day, the annual International Brain
Bee competition, and Stanford Brain Day.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In an integrative
approach that combines theory, experiment, and simulation, this project will
characterize tau structure using cryo-electron microscopy, identify the
molecular mechanisms by which tau modulates microtubule assembly using molecular
dynamics simulation, characterize tau-microtubule function using small angle
X-ray scattering, and interpret the molecular failure mechanisms of the tau-
microtubule complex using kino-geometric sampling. This knowledge will enter a
multiscale computational model to predict the failure mechanisms of the axon
from bio-chemo-mechanical principles. This model will provide fundamental links
between microtubule polymerization, tau-microtubule binding, and tau-tau cross-
linking on the molecular level and stiffness, viscosity, and damage on the
cellular level to quantitative failure thresholds for the tau-microtubule and
tau-tau interfaces, the microtubule bundle, and the axon as a whole. This
project will have broad scientific, social, and economic impact, in that it will
stimulate discovery in neurodegeneration and provide enabling, biomechanics-
based technologies to characterize damage thresholds, identify potential drug
targets, and design inhibitors to slow down, block, or reverse neurodegenerative
disorders.