* 1727074
* Enhancing Research and Curriculum at California State University Dominguez Hills Through the Acquisition of Next-Generation Sequencing Instrumentation
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Kamal Hamdan, California State University-Dominguez Hills Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2021
* USD 216,310.00

An award is made to California State University Dominguez Hills (CSUDH) to
acquire an Illumina MiSeq next-generation sequencer. The addition of this
instrument to this campus will enhance research and teaching at the Hispanic-
serving, Minority-serving institution. With CSUDH's increased commitment to
cutting-edge research, the MiSeq will be the cornerstone of a plan to build
infrastructure and capacity in the biosciences. The primary users will employ
the MiSeq to study topics including bacterial evolution, environmental
microbiology, developmental biology, and plant evolutionary genetics. The
primarily low-income, Hispanic and African American undergraduate and graduate
students who perform research in the faculty members' labs will use the current
industry-standard MiSeq technology to answer these broad biological questions.
These and other faculty members will incorporate authentic research experiences
using the MiSeq into the courses they teach, potentially reaching hundreds of
students per year. Additionally, CSUDH faculty will work with faculty from the
local high-poverty K-12 school district and community colleges to include the
MiSeq and genomic data in their curricula to build a bridge to biology careers.
The increased interaction of faculty and students across these institutions will
strengthen the educational pipeline and help these underserved students
visualize successful careers as scientists.

The on-campus capabilities of CSUDH's team of new, research-driven investigators
in the biosciences will be dramatically enhanced by the acquisition of a MiSeq.
Initially, three research groups and five research projects will use the next
generation sequencing technology. The MiSeq has the potential to assist faculty
researchers in making contributions in the following areas: characterizing the
effects of environment and genotype on microbial evolution, determining the role
the nectar microbiome plays in pollinator preferences, identifying both the
genetic and microbial factors that contribute to neuron development and function
in zebrafish, and predicting the effects of climate change on plant evolution.
This equipment will greatly increase the research productivity of faculty and
student researchers, allowing the researchers to easily and cost-effectively use
techniques such as metagenomic sequencing, bacterial whole genome re-sequencing,
transcriptomics, targeted sequencing, and genotyping-by-sequencing. Further, the
addition of this instrument to CSUDH facilities will help catapult the
institution into a higher tier of research institutions, increasing
opportunities for faculty and students.