* 1727237
* Effect of Alloying and Thermo-Mechanical Processing on the Deformation of Hexagonal Close-Packed Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2022
* K. Linga Murty, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 12/31/2022
* USD 490,266.00

Hexagonal close-packed (HCP) metals such as titanium, magnesium and zirconium
alloys are commonly used for structural applications in energy, transportation
and biomedical technologies, and a thorough understanding of their mechanical
integrity is central for their in-service sustainability. Correlating fine-scale
structure of the alloys with their resistance to deformation at service
temperatures will allow for new understanding of the mechanisms that control
alloy performance, and can provide guidance for design of high-strength, durable
components. This award supports fundamental scientific research to understand
the role of alloy composition and structure on mechanical properties in
zirconium-based alloys. The research brings experimental testing together with
computational modeling to predict the behavior of these alloys based on the new
knowledge of their composition, structure, and how these relate to properties
and performance in service. The work will lead to new scientific understanding
that can be applied to a number of important alloy systems, and will provide
excellent educational opportunities for students participating in the research.
Particular emphasis is placed on broadening participation in scientific research
through engagement in K-12 outreach programs which will allow high school
students the opportunity to participate in the research, along with
undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
addresses the influence of thermo-mechanical treatment and alloying on creep
anisotropy of zirconium alloys with emphasis on niobium addition and heat
treatment. The addition of niobium as an alloying element has been shown to lend
better performance and durability, and this research aims to understand the
phenomena controlling this behavior. Creep anisotropies in these alloys will be
investigated in the different regimes such as power-law and viscous creep, as
well as at high stresses in the power-law breakdown region. Corresponding
deformation microstructures will be characterized for a thorough understanding
of the underlying creep mechanisms and the biaxial creep anisotropy. The
knowledge derived from this research can be applied to understand the plastic
deformation mechanisms of other HCP alloys at high temperatures, and can provide
robust tools to predict dimensional changes in service. This research involves
both experimental and modeling approaches, and the findings will be integrated
into classroom teaching for training the next generation of Engineers.