* 1727007
* MRI: Acquisition of a high performance 3T magnetic resonance system for high resolution human brain imaging
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Ralph Adolphs, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2019
* USD 980,000.00

This NSF Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Award will enable a three-year
grant to purchase a major upgrade to the magnetic resonance imaging scanner used
for studying the function and structure of the human brain by neuroscience
researchers at the California Institute of Technology and their national and
international collaborators. The award will support the upgrade of the existing
Siemens Tim Trio 3T scanner at the Caltech Brain Imaging Center to the latest
Siemens Prisma platform. The upgraded scanner will provide clearer and more
detailed images of the human brain. Such an improvement in imaging capabilities
will enable Caltech researchers to address fundamental problems such as how the
brain learns from experience, how the brain makes decisions and how brains
support the ability to learn from and interact with other people in social
contexts. This new equipment will ultimately help Caltech researchers obtain a
better understanding of how the brain works, how it is wired up, and how it may
dysfunction in disease. That knowledge, in turn, will contribute to efforts to
build artificially intelligent systems. The grant will also enable students and
post-docs to obtain experience in using state-of-the-art brain imaging
equipment, through classes taught at Caltech that offer hands-on-experience as
well as through the participation of trainees in research projects that utilize
the equipment. Taken together, the cutting-edge science enabled by the new
equipment, and the training of the next generation of young scientists on it,
will contribute substantially to cognitive, decision and social neuroscience at
Caltech, in the US and worldwide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To advance understanding
about how the brain supports the capacity of humans to learn, make decisions and
mediate social interactions it will be necessary to make progress in three
distinct domains. First, there is a need to develop a much more detailed
circuit-level understanding of the neural mechanisms underlying these various
computational processes by resolving the functional properties of discrete
neuroanatomical sub-divisions within each of the relevant brain areas of
interest such as the amygdala, ventromedial prefrontal cortex, striatum and
midbrain. Second, it is necessary to address how the various sub-processes that
are implemented in these distinct sub-systems are ultimately integrated together
at the systems level to drive complex behavior. Third, it will be important to
characterize how the various computations and neural implementations differ
across time, tasks and individuals. The Siemens Prisma scanner provides
technical capabilities that are uniquely suited to advance progress in each of
these three domains at the California Institute of Technology. The new platform
will offer significant improvements in the quality of high resolution fMRI scans
obtained from brain structures of interest, by minimizing dropout and geometric
distortion, and by increasing signal-to-noise. These capabilities will also
enhance the stability of the images obtained and hence improve test-retest
reliability, while the improved gradient set will offer major gains in the
quality of diffusion weighted imaging, and of functional connectivity data.