* 1727260
* Collaborative Research: Biophysical and Molecular Mechanisms of Ultrafast Endocytosis at Neuronal Synapses
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Shigeki Watanabe, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2020
* USD 341,664.00

Physical forces determine how the membrane of a living cell changes shape.
Endocytosis is a membrane process that is essential for bringing molecules into
the cell. Viruses often gain entry into cells by hijacking the endocytic
process, and thus it is critical to understand how physical forces contribute to
membrane remodeling and, specifically, to endocytosis. One place where
endocytosis is important is in the transfer of packets of material from one
nerve cell to another at a nerve synapse. How this type of endocytosis occurs
remains a mystery. Recent experiments have discovered a novel, ultrafast,
endocytic mechanism at synapses that occurs within 50 milliseconds. The
mechanisms underlying the ultrafast endocytosis, however, remain poorly
understood. The goal of this project is to gain mechanistic insights into this
novel endocytic pathway. Since defects in endocytosis at nerve synapses may
cause neurodegenerative diseases, the work will lay the foundation to understand
synapses in different diseases. To educate citizens and attract young people
into science research, the investigators will create opportunities for high-
school students to participate in research-based scientific activities, deliver
guest lectures about the research at high schools and host high school teachers
in the lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, we will take synergistic
experimental and computer modeling approaches to test these models. The Watanabe
lab will perform localization and perturbation experiments to reveal the
molecular organization and requirements. The Agrawal lab will use the molecular
information to build computational modeling to test the passive and active
mechanisms and predict the time-scales. The work will be the first unified
effort to investigate vesicle dynamics regulated by elastic and dissipative
forces. In addition, the research will provide a validated modeling framework
for future exploration of membrane-protein dynamics and cellular interface
remodeling.