* 1727000
* MRI: Acquisition of Ultra-High Resolution Electron Beam Lithography for Nanoscience in Southeast Louisiana
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Igor Rubtsov, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2020
* USD 635,950.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award allows Tulane University to acquire a
tool to enable fabrication and imaging of materials and devices at the nanometer
scale, to support nanoscience and nanotechnology research across southeastern
Louisiana. Faculty from Tulane, Louisiana State University, Xavier University of
Louisiana, and the University of New Orleans are engaged in this effort. Users
include faculty from physics, chemistry, materials science, electrical
engineering, chemical engineering, biomedical engineering, and mechanical
engineering departments. The tool will be deployed in the Tulane
Micro/Nanofabrication Facility which is the hub for micro- and nanoscale
fabrication efforts in the region. Projects that utilize this tool will pursue
advances in telecommunications, atomic scale devices, pharmaceutical design,
chemical catalysts, high speed computing, and much more. Tulane and neighboring
institutions are expanding education and research in materials science and
engineering, and this tool will be an asset in advancing those efforts. In
addition to enhancing shared research and educational objectives, the tool will
help expose students from underrepresented groups to nanotechnology through a
variety of outreach activities and partnerships. It will also provide an
important capability to the growing tech economy of the greater New
Orleans/Baton Rouge region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award enables
Tulane University to acquire an ultra-high resolution electron beam lithography
and electron microscopy system to support nanoscience and technology efforts
across southeastern Louisiana. Faculty representing Tulane, Louisiana State
University, Xavier University of Louisiana, and the University of New Orleans
are participating, representing departments from physics and chemistry to
biomedical and mechanical engineering. Compared to existing nanofabrication
capabilities in the region, the requested equipment will enable a six-fold
increase in resolution, a ten-fold improvement in writing speed, more than a
ten-fold improvement in stability; it will increase the write area by more than
100,000 times, as well as additional features that are currently unavailable.
Researchers using the instrument will pursue a variety of projects, including
nanoscale optical antennas to be used for flat lenses, orbital angular momentum
phase plates, structural biology characterization, and 2D infrared spectroscopy.
Devices composed of 2D transition metal chalcogenides and 1D nanowires will be
created for high speed and low energy consumption computing. Other projects
include directed self-assembly of block copolymers, generation of nano-origami
3D structures from interfacial strains, functionally relevant models of the
nervous system, new composite materials, silicon nanowire-based sensors, and
much more. The tool will also support the recent significant growth of materials
science and engineering education and outreach efforts at universities in the
region, including the first materials engineering PhD program in the state (at
Tulane) and programs such as the Louisiana Alliance for Minority Participation
(LAMP).