* 1727096
* Unveiling Dynamic Relations from Corrupted Data Streams
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Andrew Lamperski, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 557,139.00

Systems such as financial markets, neural systems, the power grid, and weather
systems are governed by networks of interacting processes. In such systems, the
complexity of processes and their interactions makes mathematical modeling from
first-principles ineffective. In these cases, models of the relationships
between the processes can be obtained directly from measured data. However,
methods to create models of interacting systems from data should account for
common ways that data become corrupted. In real-world systems, sensor readings
can be corrupted, clocks can get out of sync, and messages can get lost in
transmission over a wireless network. Thus real-world data can be noisy, it can
be recorded out of order, and parts of data can be missing. This project builds
a novel framework for identifying interdependencies between components that
comprise a networked system with realistic modeling assumptions on the measured
data from system components. The project will provide provable guarantees and
analysis results on the extent of the impact of data corruption on the
reconstruction of the interaction topology. Based on the analytical insights,
strategies will be devised for designing sensor systems and networks that are
less sensitive to data corruption. The work will have important ramifications
for network models arising in biology, physical sciences, engineering, and
economics. Methods developed will be particularly relevant for identifying
relationships in the face of data-corruption, including imperfect timing and
lost information that are common in low cost and energy constrained sensing
systems. The project will also include development of graduate level course and
hands-on experience for undergraduates in designing and deploying sensor
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dynamic relationships between interacting
linear systems can be modeled via a directed graph with transfer functions
associated with the edges. Over the last decade, a rich collection of methods
that identify graphical structures as well as the transfer functions have been
devised. However, in the area of determining interaction topologies, there is a
paucity of methods that account for, and quantify, the extent of the errors
introduced due to several common types of data corruption, such as sensor noise,
time-stamp inaccuracy, or packet loss. Utilizing techniques from estimation
theory and graph theory, this project will characterize the degradation that
corrupted data streams can cause on network identification and estimation
algorithms. In particular, it will show how corrupt data can lead to the
prediction of spurious relationships if existing algorithms are applied without
accounting for data corruption. Furthermore, the work will characterize how
these spurious relationships can spread through a network when multiple data
streams are corrupted. To remedy the situation, the work will show how strategic
placement of high-fidelity sensors can localize the influence of corrupted data.
For engineered systems such as power grids and Internet-of-Things networks, the
work will lead to methods for designing networks which are resilient to data
corruption. The theoretical analysis of the methods will be accompanied by
simulations, as well as experiments on a test-bed performing distributed sensing
and computation.