* 1727090
* Dynamic fragmentation and inelastic energy partitioning at the base of the seismogenic zone
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Scott Johnson, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 08/31/2022
* USD 407,169.00

Strike-slip faults like the San Andreas Fault in California represent major
threats to life and property owing to the repeated generation of large
earthquakes. Less than 20% of the total energy released during an earthquake
radiates away from the source as seismic waves that cause ground shaking. Thus,
a large portion of the energy is dissipated around the fault as frictional heat
and by a variety of processes that lead to rock damage. During each earthquake,
the rocks surrounding the ruptured segment of the fault are fragmented by
cracking of individual mineral grains. Over many earthquake cycles, these rocks
become so damaged that their elastic properties change, and this causes changes
in the speed and preferred propagation direction of seismic waves. These so-
called damage zones are therefore of great importance for understanding seismic
hazards. Despite their importance, there is almost no direct information on the
vertical extent of damage zones within active faults like the San Andreas, but
this information is critical for our understanding of the energy budget through
the entire seismogenic zone. The combination of modeling and field-based results
from this work will allow improved characterization of seismically active faults
in the deeper reaches of the seismogenic zone, including conceptual and wave
speed models that can be used to better predict ground shaking directions and
intensities. The open-source codes and analytical protocols developed in this
project will be made available through existing public portals, and will have
many community applications including the relationships between microcrack
orientation and state of stress, interpretation of seismological data, and
analysis of brittle damage and fragmentation of ceramics and advanced composite
materials. Additional desired societal outcomes include full participation of
women in STEM and development of a globally competitive STEM workforce through
graduate and undergraduate student training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives
of this project are to: (1) comprehensively characterize the microfracture
density and fragment size distributions for garnet and feldspar grains along
three transects across a seismogenic fault/shear zone exhumed from near the base
of the seismogenic zone (the Norumbega fault system, Maine), (2) apply physics-
based fragmentation modeling to estimate fracture energies associated with the
garnet fragmentation, (3) determine whether fragment size distribution analysis
can be used to indicate that an exhumed fault or shear zone had a seismogenic
history, (4) pursue the implications of the results for inelastic energy
partitioning in the seismic source, (5) document asymmetrical damage around the
shear zone core and quantitatively characterize the elastic and seismic
properties of the rocks to characterize the bi-material effect, and (6) develop
and disseminate protocols for using electron backscatter diffraction techniques
to analyze mineral and rock fragmentation. Addressing the above objectives
provides an opportunity to test hypotheses related to the source energy budget,
styles of rupture propagation, and the relations between loading conditions and
resulting rock microstructures in the deeper seismogenic zone. The research team
will also assess whether intense fragmentation of brittle minerals can be used
as a seismogenic signature at depth, as it is at the surface. Recognition of the
importance of microfracturing for macroscopic behavior and the ability to treat
it quantitatively is growing in both Earth sciences and materials engineering.
The results of this project will provide a framework for future efforts in both
fields, and for collaborations between them.