* 1727472
* Gas-Phase Alloying and Sintering Kinetics of 3D Printed Ni Scaffolds
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Ashley Paz y Puente, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 12/31/2022
* USD 431,535.00

The fabrication of metal parts with increasingly complex geometries is of
interest to several industries. In particular, metal scaffolds are good
candidates for a variety of applications from batteries to biomedical implants,
due to their low density and high surface area. However, many technologically
important alloys are difficult to fabricate in scaffold geometries using
traditional manufacturing, and even newer approaches such as additive
manufacturing (often known as 3D printing), have significant challenges. A new
process has been theorized for making these metal scaffolds through a two-step
approach, which will enable an assortment of different materials to be produced
from the same precursor printed metal part. This award supports research to
understand the fundamental mechanisms of kinetics and thermodynamics that
control this new process. Because of the wide range of engineering applications
for metal scaffold structures, results from this research will promote
technological innovations in a number of manufacturing sectors including energy,
automotive and biomedical industries. Through recruiting and outreach
activities, traditionally underrepresented groups in STEM will be involved in
this research effort, which will engage students at an early age and help
diversify the engineering career pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the
ability to create near-net-shape metallic parts with high geometric complexity
has made powder-bed additive manufacturing techniques attractive, many
engineering relevant alloys are difficult to fabricate with high quality due to
poor sintering, internal porosity, and cracking. One alternative approach is to
decouple the printing and alloying by using particle-based ink printing to
create the desired geometry from a pure metal or simple alloy that is known to
print successfully, and then further alloy the part in a separate step using a
deposition process and homogenization to reach the target composition. This
approach is ideal for creating metallic scaffolds, taking advantage of the open
porosity and small diffusion distances. The overall aim of this project is to
study the fundamental sintering and alloying kinetics of such scaffolds using a
combination of conventional metallography and in situ X-ray tomographic
microscopy. The phase and pore evolution will be systematically studied as a
function of geometry, composition, powder and strut size, and anneal time and
temperature and the mechanical behavior will be computationally predicted and
experimentally determined.