* 1727010
* MRI: Development of a Local Air Traffic Information System (LATIS) for UAS Collision Avoidance Research
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Randal Beard, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,035,063.00

This project, developing a Local Air Traffic Information System (LATIS)--a
lightweight, mobile, low-cost, short-range sensor, aims to contribute to
avoiding UAS (Unmanned Air System) collisions. Automated sense and avoid (SAA)
and other technologies for collision avoidance and coordination of UAS, or
drones, are currently an area of major nationwide and worldwide importance and
interest. The number of daily UAS flight operations is exploding and will likely
outstrip manned aviation by orders of magnitude. To deal with this revolution in
usage of U.S. and international airspaces, a major current research area is the
development of technologies that enable a UAS Traffic Management (UTM) system
that allows safe, efficient low-altitude UAS operations. This project develops
LATIS for UAS collision avoidance research. The team aims to develop an
instrument that enables research on methods for tracking and controlling many
drones in a drone-aware zone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LATIS includes a phased array
radar for localized drone tracking, software for sensor processing and drone
command and control, and an airborne module which includes an air to ground
wireless link and autopilot interface. Current solutions for multi-million
dollar air traffic control systems are misaligned to the needs of the smaller,
low altitude, and range limited UAS. This project will provide a lightweight,
mobile, low cost, short range sensor applicable to this problem set. The phased
array radar and connecting ground based system will be capable of identifying
and tracking drones that are lost in the ground clutter of current air traffic
control systems. The airborne module interfaces each drone with the ground
station and phased array radar and includes a custom reconfigurable computing
platform suitable for small UAS platforms that will allow future concepts for
UAS mesh networks and coordinated control to be tested with the instrument.
Users will implement UAS tracking, guidance, communication, and coordination
algorithms on the instrument and generate flight test telemetry data that will
validate results and guide research in a range of technologies for UAS traffic
management. The instrument will be managed by the NSF Industry-University
Collaborative Research Center for Unmanned Air Systems (C-UAS), and will allow
users within C-UAS and collaborating organizations to expand the capabilities of
what may be safely implemented with UAS and delve deeper into research on the
intersection where theory and simulation transition to real-world
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;With growing
commercial interest and market opportunities, high visibility in the media and
among the general public, and rapid advances in research in sensors, control
algorithms, and novel applications, UAS research is currently in an opportune
position. The instrument will be used to test algorithms and answer research
questions needed to deploy a future air traffic management system for thousands
of drones making package deliveries and a wide range of other commercial
services. Significantly, the system will allow researchers to test concepts for
the drone traffic system that the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration's UAS Traffic Management System consortium, which is closely tied
to C-UAS member organizations, is beginning to explore. The instrument comprises
lightweight, low power technologies suitable for UAS applications that have only
been enabled by the latest digital processing platforms. The risk of key
subsystems has been given careful attention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently
society has witnessed rapid advances in UAS enabling technology. The inability
to guarantee safety when flying UAS has greatly hindered the scope and
applications for which these vehicles can be used. This technology has the
potential to transform the way commercial, scientific, and military industries
operate, but can only be realized if the UAS can be safely integrated into
national and international airspaces. The LATIS system will allow for the
testing and implementation of safe and efficient UAS operations in a local
environment and demonstrate a methodology for integration of vehicles into the
national airspace. When in operation, the instrument will provide information
that will guide future research efforts and inform development of new regulatory
frameworks by assisting the Federal Aviation Administration in monitoring and
validating technological innovations in UAS tracking, guidance, and control, and
will form part of a revolution in the way society interacts with the national
airspace.