* 1727054
* Collaborative Research: First Year Experience for Engineering, Computer Science &amp; Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Mark Tufenkjian, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 07/31/2021
* USD 464,977.00

California State University, Los Angeles seeks to meet the need for a diverse
STEM workforce through the expansion and scale-up of a first-year experience
(FYrE@ECST) program for undergraduate students at its College of Engineering,
Computer Science, and Technology. The institution serves primarily Hispanic,
first-generation, Pell-grant eligible, commuter students, and is an access
institution, offering many kinds of students the opportunity to study and
complete an engineering or computer science degree. The FYrE program aims to
build a stronger academic foundation during the students' first year by
developing the cultural and social capital necessary for students to
successfully navigate their undergraduate experience. The program uses evidence-
based strategies to promote student success, including working with student
cohorts, offering peer-assisted mathematics Supplementary Instruction,
emphasizing hands-on labs, building classes that integrate mathematics and
physics, and providing a faculty mentor throughout students? first year.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is the expansion
and evaluation of the FYrE model. The performance of each student cohort will be
tracked during their first year, and continue for the duration of their time on
campus. A multivariate, structural equation modeling (SEM) approach will be used
to quantitatively respond to a set of research questions about the impact of the
interventions on student attributes. The results of this work will include new
knowledge about the first-year experience of low-income, Latinx-majority
commuter student populations in the context of the development of their
identities as engineering students. Research will be conducted on the impact of
a first-year experience program that integrates engineering education best-
practices such as cohorting, supplemental instruction, summer bridge
experiences, a project-based Introduction to Engineering course, and integrated
mathematics-physics courses on student persistence and academic performance.
This knowledge will improve the ability of American universities to serve the
growing population of low income Hispanic students, especially commuter students
who cannot take advantage of built-in cohorting that takes place in on-campus
living situations. Best practices for supporting success of first-year
engineering students from underrepresented minorities have often been developed
and implemented at predominantly white institutions. In a public Hispanic-
serving institution in which most students are members of one or more
underrepresented minority, scaling these best practices can be challenging. The
FYrE@ECST program is designed for scalability and sustainability and may provide
insight into successful strategies for supporting student success at similar
institutions.