* 1727020
* Melting of compressed iron-alloys by monitoring atomic dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Jennifer Jackson, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2022
* USD 329,260.00

The Earth's core is 16% of the planet by volume. It is composed primarily of
iron, but includes a quantity of lighter elements whose presence, but not
identity, is inferred from geophysical measurements. The core consists of a
solid inner section surrounded by a convecting, liquid outer layer. It creates
Earth's magnetic field, protecting the planet from space weather events such as
solar flares, and provides the heat for plate tectonics as the liquid core
freezes. The core begins approximately 2900 km below the Earth's surface, making
it difficult to determine its exact composition and temperature profile, so
scientists rely on laboratory experiments and an evolving model to infer core
characteristics. Under this NSF award, the PI is developing a new application of
the Mössbauer effect utilizing synchrotron X-radiation to populate data points
on the melting curve of an iron-nickel alloy, a primary component of Earth's
core. This project will provide support and training for students at the
undergraduate and graduate level, who will be trained in experimental research
utilizing national synchtrotron radiation facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laser
heated diamond anvil cells, time-resolved synchrotron Mössbauer spectroscopy,
x-ray diffraction and a recently developed fast temperature readout spectrometer
are used to carry out these measurements. X-ray photons at one of iron's
Mössbauer resonant energies are focused on the sample in a laser heated diamond
anvil cell, and when melting occurs, the characteristic Mössbauer signal
abruptly decreases. Thus, time-resolved Mössbauer spectroscopy provides an
excellent diagnostic for the first melt formed in the sample chamber. These
outcomes will represent a significant step towards understanding the melting of
iron-rich alloys at conditions of terrestrial-type planetary cores. This is in
addition to applying a new method that measures the atomic dynamics to the
effort of determining melting at high-pressures. The proposed research agenda
offers a unique synergy and training ground for the involved students to apply
state-of-the-art experimental techniques at multiple facilities, including
advanced radiation sources at national facilities, to scientific problems in the
area of high-pressure melting investigations of Earth materials, an active area
of research.