* 1727292
* Mixing Elastic Waves to Nondestructively Characterize Microstructure During Additive Manufacturing of Metals
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Abdalla Nassar, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2021
* USD 358,000.00

Additive manufacturing (AM) is a revolutionary way to directly form structural
components. It is transforming the manufacturing industry, however quality
assurance testing of safety critical components is creating a bottleneck in
advancement of the state of the art. The complex physics involved in the
solidification of metal parts results in nonuniformities across multiple length
scales. Many non-uniformities, such as voids and lack of fusion, are detectable
in off-line, x-ray based, computed tomography (CT) scans, but others, occurring
at the micro-scale, are still difficult to quantify. Currently there is no
nondestructive method capable of estimating material strength properties and
build quality during the actual manufacturing process. Elastic wave propagation
through the material, which is indicative of the material's elastic properties,
will be used to address this short coming. This work researches how to
effectively use laser induced thermal stresses to generate the elastic waves in
the material surface layers, and how to extract material properties from the
measured wave propagation. By using a noncontact laser source, the technique can
be integrated into the manufacturing environment to characterize material as it
is formed on a layer-by-layer basis. This information will be leveraged to
provide quality assurance testing and feedback into closed loop process control
and to clear the bottleneck in commercializing AM for safety critical
components. This innovation, training of students, and outreach to teachers as
part of this project will help the United States maintain a leadership role in
manufacturing. No current technology is capable of interrogating the
microstructure of material during additive manufacturing (AM). However,
nonlinear ultrasonics has the capability to nondestructively characterize the
features of material microstructure that dictate strength. While the contact
transducers customary for nonlinear ultrasonics are not appropriate for the AM
environment, laser actuation and reception of ultrasound is tractable, thus
nonlinear laser ultrasonics is suggested as the solution. The research objective
of this project is to correlate the interaction of elastic waves with material
microstructure within an AM environment. To achieve this objective, the
hypothesis that Rayleigh surface waves generated by a pulsed laser and
propagating in a metal part during layer-by-layer deposition mix together
according to the principle of superposition will have to be falsified. A dual
slit mask/lens assembly will be researched with the aim of actuating Rayleigh
waves at two dominant frequencies. Nonlinear mixing of these Rayleigh waves will
generate sum and difference harmonics. By falsifying the hypothesis, the
interaction of elastic surface waves will be proven to be a viable method for
nondestructive material characterization during AM. The research will lead to
understanding how to describe material nonlinearity in terms of the mutual
interaction of Rayleigh waves and provide a correlation between sum/difference
combinational harmonics and the strength-related material nonlinearity causing
them.