* 1727458
* Election Sciences Workshop
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2017,11/30/2018
* Paul Gronke, Reed College
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 11/30/2018
* USD 9,350.00

General Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Election sciences is an emerging field of
scholarship that focuses on the systematic study of election administration and
conduct. The aim of scholars in this field is to identify problems, provide
valuable data and performance measures to assess and reform election systems to
ensure the highest levels of integrity and voter access. The Election Sciences
summer conference will bring together a group of political scientists,
statisticians, computer scientists, and legal scholars interested in building
and diversifying the field. The conference complements scholarly efforts to
identify the intellectual boundaries of election sciences, define primary
research questions, create a network to support junior scholars and graduate
students, and create curricular materials for use in graduate and undergraduate
education. The conference embodies NSF's mission to broaden participation in
science that benefits the national interest and enhances security. This
conference and the research that will come out of the conference will help to
assure that American elections are accepted as legitimate, use safe and secure
technology, and maximize public participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The Election Sciences summer conference complements a
national effort led by senior scholars in political science, and in partnership
with selected scholars in law, computer science, and public policy. The primary
aim of these efforts is to build and institutionalize election sciences as a
scholarly field of study. Political scientists played a central role in helping
to understand the problems in the American election system that contributed to
the election crisis of 2000. This work helped to shape subsequent federal
election reform legislation, and contributed research for the presidential
commission established after the 2012 elections. Significant barriers to entry
to the election sciences field still exist for younger scholars. Election
scientists work primarily with voter registration and voter history files, both
of which present challenging data and statistical inference problems. The field
also lacks recognition as a defined "section" in professional organizations,
making it difficult to participate in professional conferences as a cohesive
intellectual field, thereby diluting the intellectual contributions. Scholars
need to be trained how to interact with election officials, state legislators,
and other policy makers in meaningful ways. Finally, there is no agreed upon set
of curricular materials train a new generation of election scientist. This
conference will work to reduce such barriers. The conference follows established
models in our field (political methodology, visions in methodology, law and
politics, history of congress) by offering a series of small, focused summer
conferences, targeted particularly at younger scholars and graduate students.
The deliverables from the conference, beyond valuable professional connections,
will be a series of research papers, curricular materials, and ideally an
academic volume or special issue of an academic journal.