* 1727401
* Model to Full-Scale Validation of Peak Pressure Mechanisms in Buildings that Cause Cladding Failures and Windstorm Damage
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Chris Letchford, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2023
* USD 387,753.00

Fundamental to wind engineering is the need to understand and model the
underlying physics of flow separation of wind loading on civil infrastructure
(e.g., buildings), as unlike any other engineering domain, these structures are
not prototyped but rely almost exclusively on wind tunnel tests at vastly
reduced length and lower velocity scales. Wind tunnel results are rarely
validated due to the complexity of instrumenting the structure and the long
duration required to observe design events. Most windstorm damage to buildings
is initiated with cladding failures at locations where very high suction
pressures are observed on the building, typically near corners and edges where
the flow separates from the structure under peak and fluctuating pressures. Wind
tunnels have become ubiquitous for obtaining wind loads on all types of
structures, but discrepancies between peak and fluctuating pressures generated
in the separated flow regions on roofs of low-rise structures modeled in
boundary layer wind tunnels and observed in the field have been long-reported.
This project will investigate the flow mechanisms that cause these very high
suctions at near full-scale using the NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering
Research Infrastructure (NHERI) Wall of Wind (WOW) facility at Florida
International University to determine if current small-scale wind tunnel tests
are able to reproduce them and to determine which incoming flow characteristics
are most critical in causing the high suctions. From parametric studies of
separating flows, the modeling criteria critical in developing these peak
pressures will be isolated and the ability to simulate them at reduced scales in
typical wind tunnel studies will be ascertained. In this way, confidence in
traditional wind tunnel testing can be validated and current experimental
procedures improved and verified. This detailed knowledge will provide greater
confidence in wind tunnel testing and generic wind tunnel data for engineers to
use, and ultimately translate to reduced windstorm damage to civil
infrastructure. This project will train a postdoctoral researcher; work with the
Troy Middle School in Troy, New York, on a National Future Cities Competition
for a "windy city;" and incorporate the research outcomes into a graduate course
on wind engineering and the institution's Bedford Program on progressive
buildings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to provide a mechanistic
characterization of the flow physics of separating shear layers, and the effect
of the full turbulence spectrum of the approach flow on peak and fluctuating
pressure generation in the vicinity of separation. From a fundamental fluid
mechanics viewpoint, there is a need to understand the applicability and
scalability of decades of fundamental research on separated flows, which has
been performed predominately at low Reynolds Numbers and in low turbulence
flows, on full-scale civil infrastructure. Using the WOW facility, a large-scale
bluff body will be exposed to a range of turbulent structures and intensities at
very high Reynolds Numbers, and flow and pressure fields will be studied
simultaneously. This project will investigate why the presence of both small-
scale (high frequency) and large-scale (low frequency) turbulent structures in
the freestream are needed concurrently to cause the largest magnitude pressures
within the separation region and how these scale from model to full-scale. A set
of systematic measurements of the unsteady characteristics of this canonical
flow phenomenon at high Reynolds Numbers will be beneficial to the fluid
mechanics community to understand the simulation limitations of a wide class of
flow phenomenon. In addition, the results of this research will provide a
benchmark for validation of computational fluid dynamics codes. With an advanced
understanding of mechanics of the generation of peak and fluctuating pressures
at large physical length scales and near full-scale Reynolds Numbers, guidelines
and recommendations on appropriate physical modelling of the flow field will be
provided; additionally, correction factors for wind tunnel results will be
developed. Data from this project will be archived and made available in the
NHERI Data Depot (https://www.designsafe-ci.org).