* 1727757
* Decomposition Framework for Non-convex Nonsmooth Optimization with Applications in Data Analytics
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Mingyi Hong, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2023
* USD 426,765.00

Rapid advances in sensor, communication and storage technologies have led to the
availability of data on an unprecedented scale. Depending on the source, these
data may represent measurements, images, texts, time-series and a variety of
other formats. Significant challenges remain in translating the increasing
amount of data to useful and actionable information. The objective of this
project is to address this information dilemma through the lens of modern large-
scale optimization. This project supports research on methods to effectively
process large-scale, unstructured, complex data so as to be usable in
applications such as bioinformatics, smart energy systems, manufacturing, and
healthcare. The project will also engage graduate students in the research
activities and will support outreach to undergraduate STEM students through an
existing program at the PI's university.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will
focus on the construction of a general optimization and computational framework
that enables a number of promising but challenging large-scale data-intensive
applications. The research comprises two major thrusts. The first will build and
analyze a novel optimization-based primal-dual decomposition framework that
transforms a large, tightly coupled, non-convex problem into a sequence of
independent subproblems solvable by parallel machines. The second applies the
decomposition framework to a number of important emerging data-intensive
applications, including high-dimensional clustering, topic modeling, and robust
high-dimensional regression. Fundamental questions, such as optimality,
convergence rates, and scalability in high dimension will be investigated. The
project will test the developed methods using data from two important energy
applications: smart energy meters and real-time residential photovoltaic
inverters.