* 1727428
* Modeling and Design of Enhanced Strength and Ductility Through Grain Boundary Engineering--A Study of Boron Carbide Based Superhard Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Qi An, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 07/31/2022
* USD 481,279.00

Strength refers to a material's ability to withstand failure or yield, while
ductility is its ability to permanently deform without fracture. Many important
engineering applications require high strength and yet ductile materials, such
as in cutting tools, body armor for soldiers, and manufacturing process. One
promising candidate is boron carbide, a so-called superhard ceramic names so
because of its strength; however, it has low ductility. In poly-crystalline
materials, the strength and ductility are commonly associated with
microstructural features at the lower length scales (micrometers and below).
There is a significant knowledge gap regarding the impact of microstructure on
the strength and ductility of superhard ceramics. This project is directed
towards the study of the physical mechanisms that underlie the relationships
between microstructure, and strength and ductility of boron carbide based
materials using computational modeling and simulations. The project will also
establish design principles based on the knowledge gained for the development of
new boron carbide based materials with enhanced strength and ductility. The
design strategies will be extendable to a variety of other superhard materials,
such as borides, carbides, and diamond. The research will be integrated into
both undergraduate and graduate education, as well as outreach activities for
local high school students. The research project will also target the
participation of women and under-represented minority students in science,
technology, engineering, and math disciplines.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
research objective of this project is to illustrate how microstructure
determines the deformation and mechanical processes in boron carbide based
materials. The research team will apply a multiscale approach coupling atomistic
modeling and the mesoscale phase field method to (1) investigate the impact of
grain boundaries on mechanical properties, deformation, and failure mechanisms
of boron carbide; and (2) establish the design principles to enhance the
strength and ductility of boron carbide through engineering of grain boundary
properties with microalloying. The research will make original contributions in
elucidating the origins of the strength and ductility of polycrystalline
superhard ceramics under realistic conditions. The materials design principles
will be applied to inspire experimental synthesis of stronger and tougher boron
carbide based materials for commercial applications.