* 1727460
* Acquisition of LA-ICP-QQQ-MS equipment for in situ trace element and isotopic research and training at the University of Maine
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Andrei Kurbatov, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 298,269.00

This project will enable the University of Maine to acquire a mass spectrometer
for geoscientists to investigate Earth system processes, such as crustal
subduction and paleoclimate. The instrument is capable of measuring minute
concentrations of elements over distances the thickness of a human hair to learn
how rocks are cycled deep into the earth and then back to the surface as magma.
The mass spectrometer adds the dimension of time by obtaining the ages of rocks
at time scales ranging from days to billions of years. The versatile analytical
capability of the mass spectrometer is used in the study of past climates and
ocean conditions by making the same type of measurements in rocks and fossils
from places as diverse as beneath oceans and in caves. The mass spectrometer
will serve as a regional facility, promoting and stimulating collaborations at
colleges throughout the state of Maine.

The acquisition of a laser-ablation inductively-coupled-plasma triple-quad mass
spectrometer (LA-ICP-QQQ-MS) by the University of Maine will further research
into Earth system processes that cut across the geosphere, hydrosphere,
cryosphere, and biosphere, The state-of-the-art instrument will measure trace
element and isotopic data at the micro-scale to examine the geologic archive,
such as daily growth bands in foraminifer shells, or zones within single zircon
crystals spanning billions of years of Earth history. Diffusion and geodynamical
modeling integrate the geochemical data with field observations whose spatial
and temporal scales range from microns to kilometers and days to billions of
years. These data will enhance understanding of tectonic processes and
terrestrial and marine paleoclimate records. The research projects include
petrology and geochemical studies of rocks that are the origin of subduction-
zone magmas and the reconstruction of past climate and ocean conditions. The
mass spectrometer will provide extensive training and research opportunities and
enhance the analytical and technological literacy for a diverse group of
students from a variety of STEM disciplines at the University of Maine and a
number of other colleges in the state of Maine.