* 1727525
* Microstructural Impact on the Machinability of Titanium Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Patrick Kwon, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 07/31/2021
* USD 599,768.00

Titanium alloys have an excellent combination of light weight and high strength,
and thus are desirable for a number of engineering applications. Before final
production, most titanium parts must undergo a machining process, which is often
difficult and costly. Damage to both the titanium part and the machine tool are
common, and little is known about what leads to this damage or how it can be
controlled. This award supports fundamental research to investigate the
mechanisms of deformation and wear during the process of machining titanium
alloy parts. The very fine-scale structure of the alloys holds important keys to
identify the root causes of tool wear, cutting behavior, and segmented chips in
titanium machining, and understanding the fundamental relationships between this
structure and processing will allow researchers to build the knowledge needed to
to identify cutting tool design strategies and to optimize the alloy structure
for better machinability, and predict the performance of a component. This new
knowledge will have broad applicability in a number of manufacturing industries,
including aerospace, automotive, and infrastructure. Additionally, strong
educational benefits will result from this award, including diverse
opportunities and experience for students in state-of-the-art research programs.

This interdisciplinary team will bring researchers from Mechanical Engineering
and Materials Science together to develop a fundamental understanding of how
differences in the microstructure of titanium alloys affect machinability
metrics. The microstructure of titanium alloys is quite complex, and most alloys
(including the most common commercially used alloy, Ti-6Al-4V) have two distinct
phases: an anisotropic hexagonal close-packed (HCP) phase, and a more isotropic
body-centered cubic (BCC) phase. As a result of prior forming and heat treatment
processes, many combinations of the two phases in various morphologies and
textures are possible. This work will investigate how the microstructure prior
to machining affects machinability metrics such as chip segmentation, tool wear,
process dynamics, and the surface integrity of a finished product. The objective
of this work is to identify and quantify the interplay between the titanium
microstructure and these machinability metrics. A successful outcome will lead
to science-based insights and rationale for choices of tools and cutting
parameters that are tuned to the microstructure and composition of an alloy, and
result in machined components with high structural integrity. This new knowledge
will lead to the ability to describe and anticipate many observed phenomena such
as micro-chipping on cutting tools, segmented chips and excessive tool wear at
high cutting speeds. This will lead to rational approaches to reduce the overall
processing cost by optimizing material specifications for machinability and
product performance, as well as identifying improved ways to machine titanium
alloys.