* 1727086
* Improving Student Success in STEM by Improving Faculty Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 11/15/2017,10/31/2024
* Davida Fischman, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 10/31/2024
* USD 2,979,749.00

This project is an institutional transformation project at California State
University, San Bernardino (CSUSB), a comprehensive Hispanic Serving Institution
with a diverse student body of nearly 21,000 students most of whom are first
generation college students. A major goal of this transformation project is to
improve undergraduate student retention in the STEM disciplines by improving
student learning. The focus of the project team is to use sustained professional
development in instructional methods for STEM faculty, including associated
incentives, to improve the learning environment. The objectives of the project
are to: increase the knowledge, understanding, and effective use of inclusive,
evidence-based teaching practices and course-design among new and experienced,
part-time and full-time faculty; increase the ability of department chairs to
effectively support and evaluate faculty in the area of teaching; and build the
capacity and sustainability for offering faculty professional development that
is responsive to our student population, student learning and assessment data,
faculty needs and interest, and the institution's evolving context. The strategy
for reaching this goal is to implement and sustain a community of practice model
of professional development that will encompass four different types of faculty
learning communities: a new faculty orientation program; STEM institutes for
part- and full-time faculty members; department chair learning communities; and
a facilitators' learning community. A special project focus is understanding the
specific factors that contribute to the attrition of both female and
underrepresented minority students and the role evidence-based teaching
practices can play in mitigating these factors. The fifth year of the project
will focus on dissemination. In collaboration with the California State
University Chancellor's Office, the PI team will create professional learning
communities at all CSU campuses to help others adapt and adopt their change
model. What is learned from this project has the potential to help STEM programs
at other institutions. The PI team will share information beginning in the third
year of the project about how to take a coherent approach to supporting,
developing, and evaluating the STEM faculty for the ultimate benefit of the
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI team's design of the four different types
of faculty learning communities draw on Kezar's (2013) theory of change and
Wenger's (2000) community of practice model for professional learning.
Particular emphasis will be placed on understanding specific factors that
contribute to attrition of female and underrepresented minority students in the
STEM fields, such as cultural isolation, cultural incongruence, lack of critical
mass, inadequate support systems (Cole &amp; Espinoza, 2008; Fries-Britt,
Younger &amp; Hall, 2010; Lagesen, 2007; Maton, Pollard, McDougall Weise &amp;
Hrabowski, 2012; Museus &amp; Liverman, 2010; Villareal, Cabrera &amp;
Friedrich, 2012); lack of self-efficacy (Baber, Pifer, Colbeck, &amp; Furman,
2010; Byars-Winston, Estrada, &amp; Howard, 2008; Cole &amp; Espinoza, 2008);
"chilly" classroom climates, and perceived bias among faculty (Atkinson, 2012;
Cole et al, 2008; Diekman et al, 2010), and the role evidence-based teaching
practices can play in mitigating these factors.