* 1727491
* Explaining Variation in University Responses to New Legal Mandates in an Uncertain Legal Environment
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Sandra Levitsky, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 466,790.00

This study examines how universities seek to comply with new federal laws in the
context of an uncertain legal and social environment. The degree to which
universities comply with legal mandates is shaped not only by enforcement
agencies, rewards and penalties, but also by public pressure from social
movements and the media, the availability of resources, and by a desire to
achieve or maintain status in the field of higher education. This research
engages important questions about why some schools go well beyond compliance
with the law while others seem to struggle to comply. The project will make
intellectual contributions to the study of 1) law and organizations and 2)
processes of institutional change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hypotheses for how
universities respond to new legal mandates are derived from research on law and
organizations. To test these hypotheses, the study will construct and analyze
(1) an original quantitative data set capturing the publically available
policies of 382 American universities at two points in time, and (2) a secondary
data set of independent variables measuring school rank and resources, together
with external pressures universities face with regard to litigation,
administrative oversight, media attention, and social movement activism.
Quantitative analyses will help researchers understand how administrators in
higher education make decisions about how -- and to what extent -- they should
revise policies and practices to accord with the requirements of laws. The
longitudinal research design seeks to capture university responses to new legal
mandates over time. The study also involves a set of six in-depth university
case studies which will generate further insights into the decision-making
processes of administrators.