* 1727572
* Collaborative Research:  Processing Films from Multi-Functional Polymer Dispersion Blends
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Adrienne Stiff-Roberts, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 12/31/2021
* USD 510,565.00

Polymer dispersions are a general class of materials in which fine particles of
polymers are dispersed in water. These materials are used commonly in several
industries, including medicine, paints and coatings, automobiles and plastics,
and equipment exists for processing these traditional polymer dispersions.
However, processing thin films from multi-functional polymer dispersion blends
(combining two or more types of dispersed particles) poses a significant
challenge due to lack of fundamental understanding. Control over film properties
is extremely difficult because minor changes in polymer dispersion processing
conditions or chemistry can lead to unpredictable particle sizes and shapes.
This award will enable a path towards the rational design of polymer dispersion
blends to achieve films with multifunctional properties, such as films with
responsive optical properties, reusable anti-microbial films, and mechanically-
robust organic solar cells. The new knowledge generated by this award has the
potential for rapid impact on existing industrial applications by helping them
become more sustainable, as well as the development of new applications. This
award will provide research opportunities to underrepresented groups in science
and engineering and help disseminate science and engineering knowledge to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this research is to establish
fundamental process-structure-property relations to guide the predictive design
of blended polymer dispersions for multi-functional applications. This work will
use a systematic, synergistic and iterative approach among simulations,
synthesis and characterization to understand the morphology and self-assembly of
multiple components with variable miscibility in a solvent, such as emulsions
comprising two or more organic macromolecules, primary organic solvent,
secondary co-solvent, surfactant, and water. Polymer dispersions will be
simulated by a mesoscale computational method that has been used to study and
predict the phase behavior and properties of emulsification, polymer aggregates,
and complex self-assembled structures. Emulsion-based, resonant infrared matrix-
assisted pulsed laser evaporation will be used for the thin-film deposition of
polymer dispersions, which is critical to eliminate the mutual dependence
between the emulsion process and the nature of film formation. This deposition
process, specifically the laser-target interaction and laser-generated plume
characteristics, will be explained using coarse-grained molecular dynamics. The
deposited films will be investigated using standard materials and device
characterization techniques. The outcomes of this work will provide a predictive
theoretical framework to elucidate the mechanisms that determine how disparate
polymer dispersions blend in solution and in films.