* 1727540
* Effect of Variability on Fall Risk and Energetic Cost in Biped Walking
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Kathleen Hill, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 07/31/2021
* USD 344,679.00

When both people and biped robots walk, they move through approximately the same
motion at every step, but not exactly the same motion. The differences in their
motions appear to contribute to the risk of falling. The exact relationship
between this variability (differences in motion) and falling events is unknown.
Variability may also affect how much energy is required to walk but again the
relationship between variability and energy required is unknown. The robustness
is defined as achieving a reduced risk of falling and also requiring minimum
energy in spite of the presence of variability. This project will determine
which aspects of variability decrease robustness. The project will also
investigate if increasing the duration of the double support period of gait (the
period when both feet are on the ground) increases robustness. The research will
lead to a diagnostic tool to determine likelihood of biped falling. This tool
can provide clinicians with valuable insights into how changes in walking gaits
affect the fall risk. This work will also lead to improved capabilities for
biped robots, which in turn will significantly increase their utility. The fall
risk diagnostic tool will be adapted into an experimental activity for middle
and high schoolers to introduce the concepts of diagnostics and estimation. The
research is expected to broaden participation by strengthening the connection
between engineering and people's wellbeing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will involve theoretical- and simulation-based work that will consider how a
novel combination of the double support controller and joint variability alters
robustness. This study will develop multiple double support controllers and
prove both theoretically and through simulation that increasing the duration of
the double support period increases robustness. Different double support control
formulations will be compared, and the formulation that results in the most
robust gait will be determined. Using simulations, the role of the magnitude,
frequency, and continuity in joint variability at each joint will be analyzed by
systematically altering the modeled variability and simulating the gait until
the model falls. Because variability at one joint is likely to interact with
variability at other joints, it will be altered using a fractional factorial
experimental design paradigm. This study will use the simulations to determine
which easily measurable gait characteristics are correlated with robustness.
These measurements will be combined to form a diagnostic tool that can
accurately predict gait robustness using a computationally realistic number of
steps. The diagnostic tool will be used to design new gaits that are optimized
for robustness.