* 1727395
* Collaborative Research: CyberTraining: CDL: Preparing Instructors to Offer Experimental Courses in an Updated PDC Curriculum, and Broadening Participation
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Ramachandran Vaidyanathan, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2019
* USD 34,856.00

This effort will develop a cadre of college faculty to pioneer a shift in the
computer science curriculum to ensure students are educated in the use of 21st
century platforms that pervasively incorporate parallel and distributed
computing (PDC). Twentieth century computers were mostly built on the principle
of a single processor, executing a sequence of operations. That model is tightly
bound into curricula, even though the last decade has seen widespread deployment
of multi-core processors, graphics processors, online servers, and the internet
of things, all of which depend on the much different PDC mindset for problem
solving and programming. Financial, technical, scientific, engineering and
medical companies, government laboratories, the department of defense, the
intelligence community, and many other sectors are desperately seeking employees
who can exploit PDC systems, because the existing workforce was heavily steeped
in the older sequential model. Even new graduates continue to learn the old
approach because of the considerable inertia in the educational system. Thus, by
turning the tide toward incorporation of PDC into the early stages of computer
science education, through teaching the teachers, this project will
strategically serve the national interest, as stated by NSF's mission: to
promote the progress of science; to advance the national health, prosperity and
welfare; and to secure the national defense. It will be a significant step
toward modernizing the emerging workforce to have the computing skills needed
for the United States to maintain leadership in all of these
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Parallel and Distributed Computing
Curriculum Development and Educational Resources (CDER) with the IEEE Computer
Society Technical Committee on Parallel Processing, developed curriculum
guidelines for parallel and distributed computing (PDC) that guided PDC aspects
of the ACM Computer Science Curricula 2013. The guideline sought to shift
courses in the first two years from the sequential model toward the PDC
paradigm. In the modern world, students must see PDC as an aspect of
computational problem solving from the very beginning. &lt;br/&gt;This project
will update the curriculum guideline, with special foci on big data, energy,
distributed computing, and exemplars. It will offer grants (encouraging
participation by institutions serving underrepresented groups) for faculty to
work on course development and attend a workshop where they will be trained in
the use of PDC, and in experimental course design and evaluation. The workshops,
offered each summer of the grant period, will also support attendance by
industrial and government stakeholders to help build a network of relationships.
Additional instructors will be offered travel support to attend the workshops,
beyond the course development grants.