* 1727867
* RCN-UBE Incubator:   Consortium for the Integration of Ethical Research Practices into Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences in the Biological Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Laura Diaz-Martinez, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 08/31/2019
* USD 49,989.00

Course-based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs) have emerged as a viable
mechanism to increase student access to authentic scientific opportunities.
Current evidence in the bioeducation literature indicates that student
engagement in CUREs results in significant gains in their development of
scientific reasoning skills, attitudes, and persistence in the domain. Authentic
research experiences have likewise been shown to positively influence students'
interest in scientific inquiry and their ability to "think like a scientist."
While the above corpus of research has focused extensively on student outcomes
within CUREs, more recent efforts have articulated the need to examine the
extent to which contextual features and affordances within such learning
environments mediate students' academic and professional development. Among
these factors, the ability to conduct research in an ethical and responsible
manner is argued to be of critical value, as it is one of the hallmarks of
rigorous scientific investigation. Although the need to engender ethical and
responsible research practices in students is therefore apparent, to the best of
our knowledge, no studies have examined the integration of ethics/RCR education
within CURE contexts, despite its broader importance to professionalism within
the scientific community. Furthermore, it is unclear to what extent existent
ethics/RCR frameworks are amenable to CURE instruction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed initiative seeks to address these concerns
through the formation of a consortium and structured activities that will foster
sustainable relationships between individuals from diverse organizations,
including minority-serving institutions, two-year colleges, research
universities, and professional societies, who will be tasked with the
exploration of ethics and responsible conduct of research within CUREs in the
biological sciences. Specifically, network activities and products will: a)
define and describe the current state of ethics/RCR education within bioscience
CUREs; b) detail the perceptions of postdoctoral fellows, faculty, and
administrators responsible for teaching and scholarship in the areas of CURE
implementation and bioethics in regard to the long-term role of ethics/RCR in
research-driven courses; and c) enhance both participants' and the publics'
knowledge of ethics education in the context of authentic, research-based
coursework through the dissemination of a public consortium website,
presentations, and publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being
jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO), Division of
Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources
(EHR), Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to address
the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A
Call to Action (http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/).