* 1727676
* GOALI: From Powder to Functional Actuators: Binder Jet Printing of Magnetic Shape Memory Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Stephen Ludwick, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 08/31/2022
* USD 330,723.00

Magnetic shape-memory alloys are metal alloys that can change shape quickly in
the presence of a magnetic field. These materials can potentially provide a more
robust replacement for complex, high-precision actuation devices, which can be
prone to frequent failure. At present, the application of functional magnetic
shape-memory alloys is limited by their high cost and difficulty forming into
complex shapes. Additive manufacturing, a method of producing parts with very
complex shapes in a layer-by-layer fashion, may provide a solution to this
problem. This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI)
award supports fundamental research to understand the effects of additive
manufacturing processing on the properties and performance of magnetic shape-
memory alloys. This knowledge will enable the production of magnetic shape-
memory alloys with complex shapes that can ultimately be used in high precision,
large stroke actuators, and will also facilitate manufacturing other magnetic
materials with enhanced properties. The collaboration between a university
research team and a global US-based company will support fast transition from
basic research to application, and will enhance student training. These exciting
materials and processes will be used in outreach activities to increase interest
and awareness of K-12 students, their teachers and parents in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is hypothesized that magnetic-field-enhanced
binder jet additive manufacturing will produce complex-shaped, polycrystalline
magnetic shape-memory alloys with aligned microstructures and functional
properties that are better than currently casted polycrystalline magnetic shape
memory alloys. The basic research in this award will focus on defining how
magnetically enhanced binder jet printing affects the microstructure and
properties of functional magnetic shape memory alloys over several length
scales. In order to test the hypothesis, the research team will (A) investigate
the fundamental relationships among impurities, composition, functionality, and
sintering and printing parameters, (B) quantify the effects of magnetic
alignment parameters on anisotropy and functionality in the as-printed and
sintered state, and (C) identify major sources of differences between printed
and single crystal magnetic shape memory functional actuator components through
performance testing on prototype actuators.