* 1727081
* MRI: Acquisition of a SQUID magnetometer to support research and education in engineering, physical, biological and geological sciences
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Michael Banks, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 09/30/2019
* USD 499,791.00

This project will acquire a state-of-the-art superconducting quantum
interference device (SQUID) magnetometer. The proposed instrument will measure
the magnetic properties of materials with 100-fold better sensitivity than
magnetometers currently available to the PI and co-PIs, and provide new
capabilities for measuring magnetic properties as a function of temperature and
sample orientation. The proposed magnetometer will be able to characterize the
magnetic properties of minute quantities of magnetic material over a temperature
range from 1.8 K to 1000 K. Currently, no measurement system with comparable
capability is available to researchers and small businesses in Oregon. The
proposed acquisition of this equipment will fill a critical void in the research
infrastructure of Oregon, serving as a shared resource for measurement needs of
many users. The instrument will be vital to shortening the scientific discovery
and technology development. Advanced magnetic and biological imaging methods
developed using this instrument will further enhance the research infrastructure
to provide valuable new capabilities for scientists. Graduate and undergraduate
students participating in the research projects will gain experience in advanced
measurement techniques on a platform widely used in research and development
laboratories worldwide. The PIs will leverage the established partnerships with
community outreach programs at Oregon State University to involve high school
and underrepresented freshmen in research. The availability of this instrument
will help attract excellent researchers to Oregon universities and
companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed SQUID magnetometer will critically
support and enable an unprecedented trans-disciplinary range of research in
engineering, materials science, physics, chemistry, biology and geology in
Oregon. The instrument will support diverse research activities including the
following: (a) measuring the properties of new materials for next generation
magnetic random access memory, (b) measuring the magnetism of ocean/lake
sediments to better understand the geomagnetic dynamo, geological surface
processes and earth climate, (c) calibrating advanced magnetic imaging
techniques for the development of spintronic circuits, (d) characterizing
magnetite particles found in salmon olfactory tissue to locate the elusive
magnetoreceptors that enable these fish to successfully navigate through their
annual migrations, (e) measuring temperature-dependent magnetic properties of
magnetic nanoparticle tracers to enable biomedical imaging techniques with sub-
cellular resolution in living tissue, (f) characterizing the anisotropic
magnetic properties of novel composite materials prepared for 3D inkjet
printing, (g) measuring the weak magnetic signature of novel multiferroic
materials and transparent conductors, and (h) evaluate magnetic phase
transitions in novel nanostructured superconductors.