* 1727184
* Student Travel Support for IEEE Radar Conference 2017; Seattle, WA, May 8-12, 2017
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2017,09/30/2017
* John Sahr, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 09/30/2017
* USD 7,500.00

The IEEE Radar Conference is an annual flagship conference on radar systems and
signal processing, sponsored by the IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems
Society. The 2017 IEEE Radar Conference will be held in Seattle, WA from May 8
to May 12, 2017. About 450 to 500 attendees are expected. Radar is an important
technology to the United States (US) and is used in defense, security,
transportation, weather monitoring, and many other emerging applications
including collision-avoidance automobile radar, self-driving vehicles, non-
invasive patient monitoring, and medical imaging/diagnostics. To support the
training of the next generation scientists and engineers working on radar
technologies, this NSF grant will provide partial travel support for graduate
students to present their research papers at the conference and learn the
cutting-edge research and development in radar systems. The travel grants will
be awarded competitively to graduate students from US universities who will be
presenting papers at the conference. The awardees will be selected by a
committee of the conference and the paper quality will be considered in the
selection process. The conference organizing committee has pledged to match NSF
support with the same amount of funds from corporate sponsors. The total amount
of funds will support a minimum of 15 awardees.