* 1727185
* Understanding the Multiscale Mechanics of Nerve Endings to Address Visceral Pain
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* David Pierce, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 07/31/2021
* USD 432,481.00

Visceral pain associated with irritable bowel syndrome afflicts 13% of the US
population, costing approximately $30 billion annually. Mechanical distension of
hollow visceral organs evokes visceral pain. Drugs for visceral pain affect both
peripheral and central nervous systems (CNS) due to similar cellular sensory
pathways. Patients treated in this way suffer brain and spinal nerve related
side effects, and among those, physical dependency and addiction are
particularly important. Visceral pain by mechanical distension of organs
initiates in the periphery, making it possible that targeting the receptors of
biomechanical loading could reduce the brain and spine side effects. This
project aims to understand the biomechanics of visceral nerves as relates to
chronic visceral pain. This research will reveal novel therapeutic targets in
the nerve ending-tissue complex specific to visceral organs, minimizing CNS side
effects and improving health and quality of life for patients suffering chronic
visceral pain. This project will engage students from underrepresented groups,
particularly women, in middle school, high school and university through
integrated outreach. Research in the PI's and Co-PI's labs will be integrated
with outreach and diversity programs at the Danbury Library and UConn to engage
students from underrepresented groups, particularly women, in middle school,
high school and university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this
project is to understand the multiscale biomechanics of colorectal tissue and
the micromechanical environment surrounding sensory nerve endings in both
control (healthy) and TNBS-treated (in pain) colorectums. The central hypothesis
posits that factors governing visceral mechanosensation and sensitization
include: 1) varying mechanical properties across different layers of colorectal
tissue (e.g. mucosal, muscular), 2) distinct micromechanics at couplings between
nerve endings and their extracellular matrix, and 3) dynamic changes in tissue
biomechanics following colorectal tissue damage and nerve ending regeneration
(in TNBS-treated colorectum). This work aims to determine: 1) tissue-level
biomechanics of mucosal and muscular layers of colorectum from both control
(healthy) and TNBS-treated (in pain) mice, 2) micro-mechanical environments of
individual colorectal sensory nerve endings from both control and TNBS-treated
mice, and 3) the impact of nerve ending stress/strain on functional
heterogeneity of visceral neural mechanosensation and sensitization via
multiscale modeling and simulation. This project leverages novel approaches,
including: a mouse IBS model of pain produced by trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid
(TNBS), genetic sensory nerve labeling, optical tissue clearing, and multiscale
modeling of mechanosensation together with nonlinear soft tissue biomechanics
and imaging of collagen fibers. This research will introduce previously
overlooked biomechanics as a critical factor in visceral nociception and pain,
establish novel biomechanical tools and expand current knowledge of visceral
mechanosensation and pain.