* 1727158
* Meeting: The Developmental Biology of the Sea Urchin XXIV, The Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, MA, April 5-9, 2017
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Athula Wikramanayake, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Paul Krieg
* 02/28/2018
* USD 10,000.00

The 24th Developmental Biology of the Sea Urchin (DBSU) Meeting will be held at
the Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL) from April 5-9, 2017 in Woods Hole, MA.
Since 1980 this conference has been held approximately every 18 months to bring
together the international community of developmental and cell biologists who
use sea urchins as a model system for research. The recent deliberate inclusion
of investigators working on other non-canonical model systems has made it a
unique and important meeting for a broader community of developmental
biologists. The DBSU meeting now includes participation of researchers working
on the cell and developmental biology of other marine invertebrate models (e.g.
other echinoderms, tunicates, hemichordates, cephalochordates, mollusks,
cnidarians, ctenophores and sponges). There is no other meeting that focuses on
the comparative development of marine invertebrates and the 24th 'Sea Urchin
Meeting' will continue to serve as an important venue for promoting
collaborations between scientists working on non-canonical marine invertebrate
model systems. The meeting sessions, which are divided into plenary sessions,
concurrent sessions and poster sessions, will highlight experimental findings
that contribute to our understanding of how a fertilized egg becomes an embryo
with many distinct cell types. Moreover, there will be sessions that address
questions such as how stem cells arise, how animals regenerate lost body parts,
and how changes in the marine environment are negatively impacting marine
invertebrates. These questions are of great interest to the public and relevant
to human health. The meeting will promote the participation of junior scientists
and the participation of scientists from groups typically underrepresented in
the sciences. In addition, this meeting will have an education session that will
promote the use of marine invertebrate embryos in undergraduate teaching of
developmental biology and in community outreach.

Marine invertebrate model systems have made major contributions to our current
knowledge of many aspects of biology, including developmental biology. The
diversity of marine invertebrate model systems that will be featured at this
meeting will provide opportunities to continue the systems level comparisons of
development and evolution in phylogenetically informative bilaterian and non-
bilaterian taxa. This meeting will also highlight recent advances in our
understanding of the molecular mechanisms that specify embryonic polarity in
oocytes and embryos, mechanisms regulating mitotic patterns, novel ideas on the
evolution of nervous systems, gene regulatory network level analyses on
morphogenesis, insights into the evolution of stem cells and regeneration, and
the ecological and environmental influences on embryonic and larval development.
In addition, there will be a session on application of relevant recently
developed techniques (e.g. genome editing) to manipulate development in non-
canonical marine invertebrates.