* 1727138
* Bacillus Genetic Stock Center Emergency Funding
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Daniel Zeigler, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2018
* USD 185,000.00

Bacillus plays a vital role in microbiology research. This widespread and
diverse group of bacteria synthesizes a large array of antibiotics, fine
chemicals, vitamins, and industrial enzymes. Bacillus bacteria serve as
production platforms for biofuels and ecofriendly pesticides. Some species are
useful as probiotics or in vaccine production; others play important roles in
health care, food safety, and bioterrorism prevention. Bacillus research
provides deep insights into the physiology, development, and behavior of
bacterial cells. The Bacillus Genetic Stock Center (BGSC) maintains a
centralized collection for useful Bacillus strains. Each year, BGSC strains are
used for hundreds of innovative projects nationwide, resulting in peer-reviewed
publications and US patents, undergraduate teaching lab experiences, and high
school science fair projects. NSF support will strengthen the nation's
scientific infrastructure by ensuring that this resource remains available to
America's scientific research and education communities.

The BGSC will collect, maintain, document, and distribute Gram-positive,
endospore-forming bacteria, not only from Bacillus but from many closely related
genera. The backbone of the collection is devoted to B. subtilis, a model
organism and biotechnology workhorse. Included are two complete knockout
libraries covering every non-essential gene in the organism and a third "knock-
down" library covering the essential genes. A wide variety of genetic tools for
modulating gene expression and for constructing new strains are also stocked.
The collection is rounded out with sizable holdings of the biopesticides B.
thuringiensis and Lysinibacillus sphaericus, the thermophile Geobacillus, the
food spoilage organism B. cereus, the plant growth-promoting Paenibacillus, and
other important species. Cultures will be collected and stored cryogenically at
a secure site at the Ohio State University and made available to qualified
scientists and educators. Strain data will be made publicly available on the
BGSC website (http://bgsc.org) and integrated into Bacillus gene and genome
databases in the USA and Europe.