* 1727605
* DMREF: Dynamic Control of 3-D Printed Hierarchical Soft Materials via Computation-Guided Molecular Design
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Charles Sing, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Peter Anderson
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,195,230.00

3-D printing enables the rapid creation of precisely shaped items for everyday
use, from customizable, engineered items such as vehicle parts and manufacturing
prototypes, to patient-specific medical devices like stents and prostheses.
Through use of computer programmed instructions, this technology is currently
capable of making uniform items with micrometer precision. 3-D printing is
already a revolutionary technology, but still cannot create the truly advanced
materials found in living systems that adapt and transform upon stimulation by
altering structures across length scales. For example, chameleons change their
color by adjusting their skin structure at nanometer length scales. This
research seeks to significantly advance the frontier of 3-D printing by
introducing the new on-the-fly dynamic capability of tuning material structures
down to the nanoscale. This capability will be achieved by designing self-
assembling materials, where the self-assembly can be controlled by precisely
adjusting the stresses in the printing process. This approach will enable
chameleon-skin-like materials capable of rapid color adaptation to be made. This
interdisciplinary team brings together expertise on making materials, testing
how these materials flow, and printing these materials. This is then combined
with advanced molecular simulation to design and evaluate possible materials
capable of meeting the criteria for controlled on-the-fly printing of nano-scale
structures. These new materials will benefit society and the U.S. by adaptably
printing new items with potential applications in camouflage, antireflection
coatings, metamaterials, and displays. The research will also involve the
training of students with broad expertise spanning chemistry, engineering, and
physics, via both student mentorship and educational outreach to students
underrepresented in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use the
stresses in out-of-equilibrium 3-D printing processes to 'dial-in' hierarchical
structural features in printed structures. A class of candidate materials known
as bottlebrush block copolymers can form nanometer structures that readily
deform under an applied stress. Bottlebrush block copolymers are a promising
materials platform because they possess a large molecular design space. The PIs
will develop and implement a screening methodology to explore this design space
and determine optimal bottlebrush block copolymers for hierarchical printable
materials. A holistic approach to computer-driven design will combine scalable
synthesis, large-scale simulation, and rheological characterization to
systematically design polymer molecules to yield desired, flow-induced nano-
structures. This design procedure will be implemented to optimize 3-D printed
nanostructured materials 'on-the-fly', culminating in a proof-of-concept of 3-D
printed materials with heterogeneous photonic (i.e. color) properties. Along
with this broad goal, this research will address fundamental questions in
developing new, scalable polymer chemistry, driven self-assembly, and the
rheology of bottlebrush block copolymers.