* 1727774
* Collaborative Research: FACET: Quantifying the topographic response to tectonic processes in southern Taiwan
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Tammy Rittenour, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2021
* USD 292,786.00

The interaction of climate-driven erosion and tectonic processes shape and
sculpt Earth?s topography through a range of processes. The processes can be
gradual, such as the slow, continuous collision of tectonic plates lifting a
landscape above sea-level, or they can be catastrophic such as rare, high
magnitude earthquakes or large tropical cyclones that drive erosion by landslide
processes. This project, a collaborative effort between U.S. and Taiwanese
researchers, is aimed at understanding how such processes interact over a range
of timescales using southern Taiwan as a natural laboratory. Specifically, this
project will advance knowledge by elucidating the erosion processes responsible
for shaping the landscape and how tectonics and climate influence these
processes. The collaboration with Taiwanese and U.S. scientists will build
international research capacity while understanding the topographic signature of
hazardous tectonic, climate, and erosion processes, such as earthquakes,
typhoons, and landslides. The project benefits society or advances desired
societal outcomes in many ways. Graduate student training, U.S.-Taiwan graduate
student workshop activities, and early career scientist support will develop a
competitive STEM workforce. Additionally, the project will facilitate the
interaction among Taiwanese scientists and graduate students with U.S. graduate
students through a summer graduate student workshop tectonic geomorphology co-
taught by the research team and forge new research collaborations between U.S.
scientists and Taiwanese scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
explore the interaction of climate driven erosion, tectonics, and topography
along the steep topographic gradient in southern Taiwan. The U.S. and Taiwan
research team will test the ideas that (1) detachment-limited stream power
erosion model predicts the fluvial response to tectonics in southern Taiwan; (2)
catchment averaged erosion rates estimated from cosmogenic radionuclides provide
reliable estimates for hillslope erosion in southern Taiwan; and (3) deformation
and mountain building processes propagated towards the south in southern Taiwan
at about 60-90 mm/yr. The team will quantify river incision and hillslope
erosion through the Holocene to constrain the magnitude of landscape
disequilibrium along strike of the steep topographic gradient. River incision
will be estimated by dating strath terraces perched well above modern river high
water marks. Hillslope erosion throughout the Holocene will be constrained by
estimating paleo-erosion rates with cosmogenic nuclides in the sediments on the
terraces. Additionally, the research team will quantify structural data and
integrate these with geodetic and geophysical data to understand the kinematic
evolution and tectonic processes along strike. The integrated geomorphic and
tectonic picture of the study area will provide a rigorous test of the
underlying physical controls of river incision in a tectonically active
landscape and constrain the rate of orogenic processes using geomorphic,
topographic, and kinematic information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-
funded by the NSF Office of International Science and Engineering.