* 1727918
* SNM: Additive Nanomanufacturing of Integrated Systems for Customized Personal Health Monitoring
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Kira Barton, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,660,175.00

In today's economy of planned obsolescence, most consumer electronics can only
be customized at the software level. In contrast, hardware that is specific to
the user is out of economic reach for the vast majority of the world's
population. Therefore, one of the key manufacturing challenges of the 21st
century is the sustainable, energy-efficient, and cost-effective customizable
production of systems that are personalized to each individual. This need is
especially acute in the medical arena, in which personalized health monitoring
requires integrated systems that are customized to the unique physiological
composition and the geometric form of the individual. This Scalable
NanoManufacturing (SNM) research project explores the surface chemistry and
physical processes needed to directly print three-dimensional integrated systems
with nanoscale features, and strategies to monitor and assure quality control of
the printed materials and structures. These techniques can be used to realize
three-dimensional customized systems such as smart contact lenses, which would
enable a paradigm shift in continuous and non-invasive health monitoring by
integrating sensors that can detect chemical changes in the body with wireless
communication and power to transmit data to the user. This research combines
several disciplines including nanomanufacturing, modeling and simulation,
process control, system integration, and in situ characterization. The societal
impact of the work is through public education workshops, outreach programs, and
a new university course on advanced
nanomanufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current nanomanufacturing research has
focused on high-volume, high-throughput techniques to produce millions of
identical parts, making it impossible to customize integrated systems at a deep
hardware level. To address these challenges, the research team will explore a
new methodology to directly print functional nanomaterials onto non-planar,
flexible surfaces with unparalleled spatial resolution in three dimensions. The
manufacturing platform combines spatial atomic layer deposition with
electrohydrodynamic-jet printing, and incorporates in situ process monitoring
and control. The research spans disciplines from molecular control of surface
chemistry, to modeling coupled electro-chemo-mechanical processes that occur
during printing on a curved or non-planar surface, to characterizing the impact
of geometric tolerances on component performance. The additive nanomanufacturing
platform enables integration of multiple functions including power, sensing, and
logic into a smart contact lens that can interface with sensitive regions of the
human body to monitor chemical/electrochemical changes at the cellular level. A
fundamental understanding of the physical, chemical, thermal, and transport
phenomena that guide the precision and accuracy of the manufacturing process
will be the focus of the research, which will unveil the underlying scientific
challenges to printing integrated systems at the nanoscale.