* 1727744
* Exploiting Network Structure in Routing Problems: Applications to School Bus Routing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Sunil Chopra, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2022
* USD 618,802.00

Public school districts in the United States are under great pressure to improve
operations and reduce costs of support services in order to better support
classroom education. Expanding on a partnership with a densely populated
suburban school district, this project provides a comprehensive approach to
improving student transportation needs. The project will support optimization-
based approaches to district-wide school bus routing that address staggered bell
schedules, mixed fleet capacity, community bus stops, and after school
transportation needs. More broadly, this research project will support better
planning and decision-making for urban public transit in locations with grid-
like road networks. The educational component includes the involvement of K-12
teachers in developing modules to help students understand the value of
operational methods to provide decision-making support for complex, practical
problems, such as transportation planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
introduces an innovative approach to the joint problem of vehicle stop selection
and vehicle route generation, leveraging the underlying grid-like structure of
the road network to obtain robust, implementable solutions. Methodological
advances revolve around analyzing the Covering Path Problem with non-uniform
distances between stops. While the Covering Path and Hamiltonian Path Problems
are in general NP-hard, even on general grid graphs, this project will
investigate trade-offs between stop-minimizing designs and length-minimizing
designs. Starting with analysis of the single vehicle, single destination
covering path problem on a complete grid, the problem setting is generalized to
consider the multiple vehicle, multiple destination problem. Complexities in the
school bus routing context, including robustness to demand, staggered school
starting schedules, and mixed capacity fleet availability are also addressed.
This research will lead to advances in route optimization modeling and solution
approaches and contribute to a growing literature on routing problems with
special network structure.