* 1727894
* SNM: Manufacturing Autonomy for Directed Evolution of Materials (MADE-Materials) for Robust, Scalable Nanomanufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,11/30/2022
* Max Shtein, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 11/30/2022
* USD 1,679,413.00

The development and manufacturing of cutting edge materials typically involves
time-consuming materials and process design phases, followed by extensive
testing of samples to adjust process conditions as the manufacturing scales up
from the lab, to pilot plan, to industrial process scale. These distinct steps
drive up the cost barrier to introduction of new and improved materials into the
industrial pipeline and increase the cost of domestically manufactured advanced
nanomaterials. Fortunately, recent developments in numerical modeling, additive
manufacturing, and rapid testing of materials suggest that a new approach to
material development and nanomanufacturing, where the previously distinct and
time-consuming phases could be carried out nearly instantaneously to arrive at
optimal material structure as well as process conditions for its manufacture.
The focus of this award is to revamp the traditional, open-loop synthesis of
nanostructured materials by: 1) using a versatile 3-D printing approach to
manufacture these nanomaterials and nanostructures, 2) incorporate material
property characterization directly into the printing process, and 3) use an
artificial intelligence (AI) algorithm to adjust on the fly process conditions
to achieve desired material properties. These concepts and components will be
integrated into technical coursework, hands-on research opportunities, and
outreach workshops to a broad range of students and the public. The co-PIs plan
to leverage existing outreach and educational activities through their group's
collaboration with a local museum, as well as curricular and extracurricular
activities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The approach and framework is an investigation
of process modeling, materials synthesis and characterization, and system design
to autonomously discover new material configurations and reduce manufacturing
defects and uncertainty. This AI framework will "understand" process-structure-
property relationships, manufacturing constraints, and, importantly, statistical
variations in material properties and manufacturing quality. The intellectual
merit of this study is the discovery of general nanomanufacturing tools and
feedstocks, with supervisory genetic algorithms, that autonomously correct for
defects and compensate for innate manufacturing inaccuracies by a search for
alternative designs; this is in contrast to standard tools that minimize
uncertainty (e.g. environmental controls) or rely on post-fabrication
characterization with human intervention. The framework will be tested using
nanoscale additive manufacturing (AM) as the fundamental manufacturing tool and
nanostructured metamaterials as the application. The paradigm and nanoscale
metamaterials made via this approach have far-reaching impacts on scalable
nanomanufacturing for integrated systems. The paradigm of systems that
autonomously evolve parameters to meet construct specifications is extensible to
macroscale additive manufacturing and pharmaceuticals where the process
parameter space and chemistries available is vast, and design is not intuitive.
Additive nanomanufacturing has the potential to transform metamaterial design by
enabling design in 3-dimensions (3D) with multiple materials, creating complex
composite metastructures.