* 1727346
* Optimizing the Temperature and Chemical Stability of Fly Ash Aluminosilicate Composites at the Nanoscale
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Claire White, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 07/31/2021
* USD 320,000.00

This research project centers on understanding and optimizing the temperature
and carbonation resistance of low embodied energy cementitious composites for
elevated temperature applications, such as fire walls and refractory materials.
Use of Portland cement and refractory concrete in society accounts for a sizable
amount of energy utilization due to the need for material manufacturing and
transportation. Furthermore, Portland cement-based concrete does not perform
adequately at elevated temperatures due to decomposition of the main strength-
giving constituent, leading to costly repair and replacement. The research to be
conducted in this project will promote the use of industrial byproducts in the
construction and refractory industries, and therefore encourage further
reductions in energy utilization associated with these sectors. The research
outcomes of this project will be incorporated into high school teaching modules
on materials relating to energy and the environment. In regards to promoting and
encouraging underrepresented minorities in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics, including young females, this project will enable high school and
undergraduate interns to be trained in research during summers and over the
academic year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research project is to
uncover and optimize the elevated temperature stability and carbonation
resistance of chemically-activated cementitious composites, based on
aluminosilicate chemistry, using a multifaceted experimental approach. Ambient
temperature reaction kinetics and setting times will be investigated using
ultrasonic analysis combined with isothermal calorimetry, where calcium-based
additives will be utilized to control setting times and short-term mechanical
behavior. The molecular structure of chemically-activated metakaolin- and fly
ash-based pastes will be elucidated using X-ray pair distribution function
analysis and infrared spectroscopy for a range of elevated temperatures, and the
project will include the use of in situ carbonation/elevated temperature
measurements at synchrotron facilities. Furthermore, given the susceptibility of
cementitious materials to dehydration-induced cracking and loss of mechanical
properties, the impact of alumina particle and fiber reinforcement on the
microstructural (and atomic) behavior of the aluminosilicate composite will be
uncovered using synchrotron and lab-based X-ray microtomography. Ultimately this
project will generate the fundamental knowledge on the atomic and
microstructural behavior of low embodied energy aluminosilicate cements at
elevated temperatures, with the long-term aim of integrating this material into
applications where conventional concrete quickly degrades due to exposure to
high temperatures and aggressive chemicals.