* 1727544
* Mechanics-Targeting Strategies for Biofilm Prevention and Remediation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Vernita Gordon, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 07/31/2022
* USD 370,765.00

Biofilms are communities of microbes that are bound to each other by a matrix of
polymers and proteins that they produce in which to live. Biofilms foul and
corrode pipes, and partially cause chronic infections in animals and humans. The
biofilm "hides" the bacteria from many antibiotics and bacteriocides, and also
masks them from the immune system. This project is to determine the role of
shear mechanics in the creating the biofilms made by an important pathogen that
affects humans. This will benefit society by laying the groundwork for new
approaches to preventing and clearing biofilms that target mechanical
characteristics. Today the approaches to preventing biofilms focus, with limited
success, on developing surfaces that resist bacterial attachment or that kill
bacteria. Mature biofilms often resist treatment, except by mechanical removal,
and mechanical breakup of biofilms can also increase vulnerability to
conventional antibiotics. Almost nothing is known about how different matrix
materials control the mechanics of biofilms. This research will improve biofilm
prevention and remediation and benefit public health and infrastructure where
biofilms are a problem such as in the piping of water treatment plants, and oil
transport piping. Educational modules to be developed in the first Educational
goal will be aligned with standards for high school curricula in biology,
physics, and math, provide an experiential understanding of how scientific
knowledge is developed and teach discipline-crossing core concepts. The second
educational goal will lead to better strategies for improving the long-term
undergraduate STEM pipeline for both traditional and under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a model organism with
well-characterized genetics and molecular biology, and also readily forms
biofilms with important industrial and medical impact. Biofilm mechanics will be
measured using rheology. Controlled stress will be applied to single bacteria
and to bacteria within biofilms, and the resulting signaling, phenotypic
changes, and biofilm development will be measured. Genetic manipulation will be
used to elucidate how specific gene products contribute to specific mechanical
properties and to mechanosensing, signaling, and biofilm initiation. Research
Aims are: (1) determine the role of shear mechanics in triggering the signal
that initiates biofilm development - this will reveal design principles for
surfaces that thwart mechanosensing and thereby prevent biofilm initiation; (2)
determine the role of specific biofilm components in contributing to mechanical
resilience of the mature biofilm - this will result in strategies for disruption
and clearance that are tunable to specific matrix composition and mechanical
properties; (3) determine the mechanosensory response of constituent bacteria to
biofilm stiffness and strain - this will indicate how to reduce biofilms'
ability to dynamically adapt and increase their mechanical robustness. (1)
Research Aim 1 will result in a new paradigm for biofilm prevention that targets
highly-conserved signaling mechanisms for which evolutionary escape will be
difficult or impossible. (2) Research Aim 2 will result in a new framework for
understanding the mechanics of biofilms as composites. (3) Research Aim 3 will
result in new knowledge of how biofilms may act as multicellular, force
sensitive "tissues".