* 1727447
* CAREER: Mixed-Signal Photonic Integrated Circuits for Energy-Efficient High-Speed Data Interfaces
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/17/2016,02/29/2020
* Vishal Saxena, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 02/29/2020
* USD 460,824.00

Proposal No.: 1454411 &lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Mixed Signal Photonics Integrated
Circuits for Energy-Efficient High-Speed Data Interfaces&lt;br/&gt;Vishal Saxena
(Boise State University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: This research harnesses
photonics to satisfy ever-growing government, industry, and consumer needs for
data bandwidth, while significantly reducing the increasingly voracious energy
footprint that accompanies Internet cloud use. Photonics uses light instead of
electronics to perform a variety of functions such as information processing and
transfer. While most of us still work in offices and meet friends in person,
mobile and networking device capability has enabled massive online business and
social transaction growth. The Internet and its cloud-based services are used
for production systems, banking, entertainment, social interaction, information
distribution and research. Resulting information accumulation is fueling the
rise of "big data," as well as the powerful correlation tools that help analysts
spot financial trends, prevent diseases, combat crime and improve quality of
research. More and more, we put content in the cloud for easy access from
anywhere and at any time, with data growing exponentially. All this data
transfer uses a surprising amount of energy. To reduce data center energy
consumption while increasing data capacity by over ten fold, this research will
investigate novel hybrid data communication interfaces, using light rather than
electrons to process and transfer data at higher speeds. The potentially
explosive increase in data rates enabled by these hybrid photonic interconnects
could lead to several transformative applications, such as future exascale data
centers, terabit speed local area networks, and massively-parallel computing for
big data applications. These hybrid photonic interconnects will not only have a
broad impact on the semiconductor industry, but also US energy sustainability
and security, as more energy-efficient computing systems would reduce carbon
footprint of the Internet cloud. Further, to prepare students for the workforce
with the necessary skills to drive future technology, the project includes a
strong educational component. Interactive learning methods will be employed to
teach electronic circuits and to bring photonics to integrated circuit design.
The project also incorporates a high school outreach program, with an annual
Smart Environments for Sustainability-themed one-week summer camp for high
school students that commits to fostering women and minority group
representation in integrated circuit design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technology
development leveraging integrated photonic circuits and optical interconnects
has thus far largely focused on binary communication using silicon photonic
modulators. To enable future optical interconnects for higher data rates and
energy-efficiency, researchers must reconsider the hybrid integrated circuit
paradigm. An important technology enabler is the high-speed signal processing
capability of integrated photonic devices. The research approach will first be
to develop a photonic design kit with standard cell libraries and compact models
to enable large scale integration of photonic devices into hybrid integrated
circuits. Researchers will employ photonic device high-speed optical domain
signal processing into novel circuit configurations, exploit synergistic
interaction between electronic and photonic components, and form a mixed-signal
photonic architecture. Next, to exploit photonics beyond binary interconnects;
researchers will develop novel mixed-signal photonic data converters, which they
will use to demonstrate an advanced modulation transceiver architecture that is
scalable to terabits per second data rates with order-of-magnitude lower energy
consumption. Research outcomes will empower integrated circuit researchers by
equipping them with a new photonics expertise to tackle nano-scaled technology
design challenges, where data transfer bottlenecks constrain system performance.
The photonic design kit will lower industry barriers to help facilitate
photonics adoption into integrated circuits; resulting mixed-signal photonic
data converter architectures will set a new paradigm by achieving greater than
10 GHz sampling rates with significantly reduced energy consumption over
existing complementary metal?oxide?semiconductor (CMOS)-only architectures.
Researchers will broadly disseminate project results by developing online
educational material for a new CMOS photonics integrated circuit design graduate
course, and through international journals and conferences.