* 1727039
* MRI Development of the Scripps Ocean Atmosphere Research Simulator (SOARS)
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Kimberly Prather, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2023
* USD 3,143,165.00

It is critical that we develop tools for improving our understanding of the
impacts of natural systems on the climate system as the Earth undergoes
unprecedented change. It is difficult to determine the impact of the oceans on
clouds and climate in field studies due to complexities added in by human
pollution, even out over the oceans. The PIs will development of a state-of-the-
art environmental simulator that will allow studies of ocean impacts on clouds
and climate in the presence and absence of human based pollution. The Scripps
Ocean-Atmosphere Research Simulator (SOARS), will provide wind, waves,
atmospheric, biological, and thermal controls capable of simulating real-world
conditions in a laboratory scale simulator. SOARS will simulate the complex and
interacting physical, chemical and biological components of the marine
atmosphere boundary layer (MABL) driven by wind, waves, and microbial processes
under varying scenarios of temperature, from tropical to polar, atmospheric gas
phase concentrations, and ocean pH. An integrated, temperature-controlled smog
chamber will allow unique studies of ocean-atmosphere exchange and atmospheric
reaction studies. SOARS will be the only instrument in the world capable of
studying the current and future states of the ocean/atmosphere system thus
uniquely capable of simulating Earth?s rapidly changing ocean-atmosphere system.
The ability to simulate biological, physical, and photochemical processes in a
controlled laboratory setting will enable interdisciplinary studies at an
unprecedented level. SOARS will be housed at the Hydraulics Laboratory (HLab) at
Scripps Institution of Oceanography (SIO). The HLab has been a focal point for
oceanic and atmospheric research for more than 50 years, providing experimental
facilities for national and international scientists, including UCSD researchers
and students. SOARS will support new science by enabling interdisciplinary teams
of scientists to collaborate on quantifying ocean-atmosphere exchange and
reaction processes. It will serve as a test bed for the next generation of
instrumentation thus improving at-sea measurement techniques to address
significant unknowns relevant to global change. SOARS will serve as a training
tool for the next generation of interdisciplinary scientists cross-trained in
marine biology, climate, atmospheric sciences, oceanography, and engineering. In
addition, SOARS will facilitate classical fluid dynamical and engineering
studies, as well as STEM education through practical demonstrations for UCSD
classes on fluid mechanics that the soon-to-be decommissioned Wind Wave channel
in the Hydraulics Laboratory has traditionally supported. The HLab and its
affiliated wave channels have become popular for outreach activities at SIO
(including artists, film makers, news media and on-site educational visits) and
supports UCSD?s commitment to diversity. SOARS will leverage diversity programs
promoted at SIO and by the Center for Aerosol Impacts on Climate and the
Environment Center (CAICE), a major future SOARS user. Both SIO and CAICE
actively seek opportunities to engage diverse audiences in Earth systems
science, and SIO has recently appointed two diversity officers to increase
broader participation in the STEM fields by inclusiveness in research,
education, and outreach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The motivation for SOARS lies in
the critical role the marine atmosphere boundary layer (MABL) plays in weather,
atmospheric chemistry, climate change, national security interests, and offshore
civil engineering. SOARS will play a critical role in basic and applied research
in these arenas as well as in educating and training the next generation of
scientists and engineers working in these fields. The presence of biological,
chemical and physical feedbacks on exchanges through the MABL makes the creation
of controllable laboratory simulators essential to the understanding of these
complex processes. SOARS will enable study of the full complexity of ocean-
atmosphere exchange processes through interdisciplinary studies by chemists,
biologists and physical oceanographers. Not only is SOARS designed for
experiments using wind, waves and biology in natural seawater, with a
controllable atmosphere, simulating tropical through polar conditions, but the
conditions will also be customizable allowing experiments to unravel natural
impacts on clouds and climate, as well as futuristic simulations of increasing
CO2 levels and changes in ecosystems. Such studies will allow one to unravel
impacts of human versus natural processes on our climate at a unique level.