* 1727591
* Collaborative Research:  Bone Adaptation-Driven Design of Scaffolds with Spatially-Varying Architecture for Enhanced Growth
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* JULIAN NORATO, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 07/31/2022
* USD 339,279.00

Synthetic bone scaffolds are porous inserts used to repair bone defects that
would not otherwise heal on their own, providing mechanical support while
allowing bone regeneration inside the pores. Among the biocompatible materials
used for their fabrication, calcium phosphate ceramics (CaPs) have received
significant attention because their stiffness is similar to that of bone. The
material system considered in this project consists of CaP scaffolds made by
Direct Ink Writing, an additive manufacturing technique whereby rods of a
colloidal ink are deposited in alternating layers and subsequently sintered. An
outstanding challenge in the clinical use of these scaffolds is the lack of
complete integration of the bone into the scaffold pores. Complete
osteointegration is hindered by two limitations in existing scaffold design
methods: they only consider scaffolds made of straight rods, and they are not
directly driven by a measure of bone integration. This award supports
fundamental research to formulate the first computational framework for the
design of patient-specific CaP scaffolds made of curvilinear rods and driven by
bone adaptation. Results of this research have the potential to substantially
increase the clinical viability of synthetic scaffolds for large defect repair,
with tangible and significant treatment and financial benefits for patients. In
addition to bone scaffolds, this research will advance design methodology that
may be applied to related material systems, such as architected porous surfaces
in orthopedic implants, scaffolds for cell tissue culture, particulate filters
and self-healing materials. A summer exchange of undergraduate and graduate
students between the two collaborating institutions will provide training
opportunities for the next generation of material designers. This award will
also support outreach to high school students via summer residential camps.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the goal of formulating the first computational
design methodology for patient-specific bone scaffolds with spatially-varying
architecture for complete bone regeneration, this project will couple topology
optimization techniques with bone adaptation simulation. In particular, this
project will 1) formulate a framework to simultaneously model bone adaptation
within the bone-scaffold system while readily accommodating changes in the
scaffold design; 2) incorporate adequate measures of osteointegration and
scaffold strength to incorporate as design criteria; and 3) formulate a design
representation of the scaffold architecture that allows for local property
control while ensuring manufacturability. The computational design framework
will be validated via material and mechanical characterization of scaffolds
designed, and via an in vivo study in pigs.