* 1727518
* Mechanobiology of Joint Morphogenesis: Manipulating Salamander Limbs
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* James Monaghan, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2021
* USD 651,300.00

Mechanical forces play a role in skeletal joint development. Alterations in
motion or mechanical forces at the joint can result in joint deformity or
dysplasia. In this project we will examine the role of mechanical forces in
joint development in the axolotl, a salamander capable of regenerating its
limbs. Limb regeneration uses the same developmental processes as growth, but
facilitates an environment in which the mechanical and biochemical environment
can be manipulated during (re)growth. We will determine the role of 1) lack of
motion; 2) altered motion, and 3) lack of cellular response to motion during
limb growth. Computational models will be used to determine the mechanical and
biochemical environment of the developing limb, to predict changes in shape of
the joint, and to compare with experimental joint shapes. This research will
help to elucidate the role of mechanical forces in joint development, the
cellular signaling mechanisms that are involved in responding to the joint's
mechanical environment, and how the mechanical environment can be manipulated to
alter joint shape. The objective of our outreach component is to excite people
about mechanobiology in the context of limb regeneration. We will tap into the
rich Center for STEM Outreach at Northeastern, which aids in recruitment,
logistics, and planning of outreach activities. For example, during the course
of this project, we will train high school students through Northeastern's Young
Scholar Program, which places high school students (often underrepresented
minorities) into labs for summer research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel animal
model, the axolotl (Mexican salamander), will be used to explore how mechanical
signals and cellular transduction of those signals regulate limb morphogenesis.
It is theorized that cyclic hydrostatic stress influences biomolecular transport
and osmotic stress influences ion channel signaling in cartilage. These
mechanical factors play a critical role in transduction of the mechanical
environment into a biological response. We will examine the effect of: limb
denervation, tissue grafting resulting in a reverse flexing limb, and inhibition
of ion signaling using gadolinium in the water during regeneration.
Computational models of the experiments will be generated to determine
mechanical stresses and biochemical diffusion gradients and simulate cartilage
morphogenesis. This work will combine a tissue level finite element model with
reaction/diffusion equations for biomolecular reactions, particularly the Ihh-
PTHrP pathway that is critical to cartilage growth. By combining animal
experiments with computational modeling the critical mechanical and biochemical
signals (and their interaction) can be explored during joint morphogenesis.