* 1727049
* Insurance Markets: Guaranteed Return Products and Graduate Student Training Workshops
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Motohiro Yogo, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2023
* USD 201,489.00

This research project will investigate the causes of the rapid decline in and
lack of revival of the variable annuities (VA) market since the 2007/2008
financial crises. The VA market accounts for about 40% of life insurer
liabilities in the U.S. and ever increasing proportion of the US population has
come to rely on it for old age support as defined benefit pension plans have
declined over time. Yet very little is known about this market---how it operates
and how it changes over time. The proposed research has two parts. The first
part of this research project will assemble a large data set from various
sources and use this data set to study the sources of the sharp decline in the
VA market since the 2007/2008 financial crisis. The second part of the research
project focuses on developing a course to train students to conduct research in
the operation of the variable annuities market. The data collected for this
project, which will be made available to other researchers, will encourage more
research into this market. Given the increasing importance of variable annuities
in retirement planning and the lack of understanding of this market, the results
of this research project could lead to better policies to strengthen the VA
market hence encourage better retirement planning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insurance is important for household welfare and life
insurers play an important role in the market for financial intermediation. The
variable annuities (VA) market makes up almost 40% of life insurer liabilities
in the U.S., yet very little is understood about the functioning of this market.
This market witnessed a sharp decline during the 2007/2008 financial crisis and
has not rebounded since. This research project will assemble a large panel data
set from various sources and use it to investigate the sources of the market
decline. The research focuses on both supply and demand side factors in
analyzing the market decline. The large rich panel data set will allow the PI to
identify the sources of the effects of supply and demand side factors in the
market's decline as well as test three different hypotheses as to why the market
declined during the financial crisis. The second part of the study will develop
a curriculum to teach graduate students to do research on various aspects of the
VA market. The results of this research project will not only give us a better
understanding of the variable annuity markets and life insurance generally; it
will also help policy makers design better policies to encourage informed
planning for retirement. By so doing, the proposed research will contribute to
long-term savings, stable retirement incomes, and the stability of the U.S.
economy.