* 1727445
* Understanding Materials and Processing Related Effects in 3D Printing of Sustainable Cementitious Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Narayanan Neithalath, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 06/30/2022
* USD 325,000.00

3D printing or digital fabrication of cementitious materials enables automated
production of building elements or whole structures in successive layers,
directly from digital models. Recent advances in automation and control has
enabled maturing of 3D concrete printing technology to make robust construction
possible. This process has the potential to reduce on-site labor and energy
requirement, speed up the construction process, and reduce construction-related
risks. A major advantage of 3D printing in construction, apart from cost
reduction and acceleration of construction, is its potential to provide
enhancements in building performance through innovative geometries that
otherwise cannot be realized. This project builds on the premise that, with
wider acceptance of 3D printing of cementitious materials, the emphasis will
shift to materials design and processing to ensure performance, long-term
durability, and sustainability. Sustainable cement-free binder systems such as
alkali-activated binders can be designed to provide advantageous properties for
extrusion-based processing (e.g., early stiffening), which will be utilized in
this project through targeted experiments and computer simulations. The
objective is to link the material design of sustainable binder systems for 3D
printing and the process of printing itself. The research outcomes will enable
the use of alkali-activated binders in 3D printed concrete elements, and open
new avenues for industrial ventures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
harnesses knowledge from multiple disciplines (chemistry of binding materials,
flow of granular media, materials processing, computational modeling) to
contribute to the science and engineering of 3D printing of sustainable concrete
elements. The research will include compositional manipulations of alkali-
activated binders for 3D printing in order to achieve desirable rheological and
early-age stiffening response. The influence of paste properties (particle types
and their chemistry and sizes, activator chemistry, rheology aids) and extruder
characteristics (sizes and geometry, extrusion pressure), including their
interactions, will be evaluated to better understand the resulting rheology of
the printed material. Discrete element-based numerical models will be used to:
(i) elucidate the particle-scale processes influencing flow, (ii) accurately
predict the flow behavior, and (iii) establish the link between particle-scale
mechanisms and process-level extrusion rheology. This study will also contribute
significantly to our understanding and potential mitigation of liquid phase
migration, overburden-related instability, and layering effects which are unique
to extrusion-based 3D printing. The integrated activities will enhance our
fundamental understanding of material design and processing effects in 3D
printing of high-performance sustainable concrete binder systems.