* 1727139
* Collaborative Research: An integrated mantle to surface study of the causes and consequences of high topography in the Northern US Cordillera
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Brian Yanites, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 08/31/2021
* USD 239,880.00

Recent theoretical advances suggest processes occurring deep within Earth's
mantle can have significant impacts on topography at Earth's surface. As
topographic history of a region can influence the climate and biologic
evolution, understanding the role of the mantle in shaping the landscape is
paramount to understanding the Earth as a system. A major barrier to the study
of mantle and surface process linkages is that few locations exist where time
histories of past mantle and surface events can be well constrained. The inland
northwest, which includes the well-studied passage of the Yellowstone hotspot,
offers a unique opportunity to examine the role mantle dynamics play in mountain
uplift and landscape evolution. This project, which focuses on field sites in
Oregon and Idaho, is designed as an integrated mantle to surface study that
quantifies the regional erosion history and the structure of the upper mantle
beneath this region. Results from this work will motivate generalized models
incorporating different mantle processes and the topographic response to a range
in uplift patterns. As a result, our findings, while specific to our field
sites, may help shed light on mantle and surface interactions around the globe.
The project will support three graduate students and three Primary Investigators
from separate collaborating research institutions. The project also unites
academic scientists and research students with public educators and science
communicators through a partnership with two eastern Oregon organizations:
Wallowa Resources, an organization that engages in educational outreach,
environmental action, and renewable energy programs and Wallowology, the only
natural history museum in this region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role
of mantle dynamics in driving uplift and landscape evolution is a critical and
poorly understood facet of geodynamics and geomorphology research. This project
will explore mantle driven epeiorogenic uplift and landscape evolution north of
the Yellowstone plume track in the rugged and mountainous Inland Northwest of
the United States. Nowhere else has a continent experienced such a recent and
profound interaction with a mantle plume, making this area the ideal candidate
for the examination of lithosphere-scale responses to mantle dynamics. Guiding
our investigation are four testable hypotheses of lithospheric and landscape
responses to the Yellowstone plume: (1) uplift and erosion following
lithospheric loss through delamination, (2) uplift and erosion following
lithospheric loss through drip-like Rayleigh-Taylor convection, (3) uplift and
erosion following flattening of the buoyant Yellowstone plume, and (4) erosion
driven by faulting induced drainage reorganization. We will build on a strong
foundation of prior seismic, geologic and landscape studies across northeastern
Oregon and central Idaho. This targeted study will resolve regional landscape
evolution and its relation to imaged mantle structure via the integration of
geologic and geomorphic field observations, low-temperature thermochronology,
and detrital cosmogenic radionuclide derived erosion rates and mantle tomography
through geodynamic and landscape evolution modeling. The research will generate
models that relate mantle dynamics to uplift and landscape development,
constrained by data from our study area and applicable to other locations
throughout earth history. This work will help to refine plate-tectonics theory
by providing a robust study of intraplate deformation not related to plate
boundary forces. Furthermore, we anticipate this study will give the clearest-
yet measure of the importance of sub-crustal mantle deformation on landscape
evolution, a critical topic in studies from the Andes to Tibet.