* 1727336
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The interaction of expectations and evidence in pragmatic inference and generalizations
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Amanda Pogue, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 01/31/2019
* USD 11,813.00

Spoken language not only communicates information about a speaker's thoughts or
desires; it also conveys information about the speaker's identity. By simply
listening to speakers' voices, accents, and word choice, we can learn a great
deal about them, in addition to what is being talked about. Previous studies of
language processing, however, have almost exclusively focused on the linguistic
signal abstracted from individual speakers, investigating what listeners think
is true about the world based on what an individual speaker has said. The
project aims to explore the mechanism by which listeners extract information
about the speaker through processing the linguistic signal. It then addresses
the question of whether, and if so how, the increased knowledge about the
speaker facilitates language comprehension. This research, consequently allows
researchers to build a foundation for exploring how young children may learn
speaker differences, which can contribute to new pedagogical tools for helping
children to better interact with, and learn from, diverse populations. Secondly,
the work will likely have industry applications for artificial intelligence
technology, allowing it to better adapt its functionality to an individual
user's talking style. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation project employs
two approaches to investigating what information listeners extract from spoken
utterances. First, a large-scale online survey technique will be used to solicit
responses from participants from a wider variety of linguistic and cultural
backgrounds than those included in previous studies. Participants are exposed to
utterances produced by two speakers and subsequently answer questions that probe
their sensitivity to across-speaker differences. In the second set of
experiments, a combination of an artificial language learning paradigm and an
eye-tracking methodology will be used to study real-time language comprehension
behaviors. Listeners' eye-gaze will be used to gain fine-grained information
about the real-time development of their linguistic expectations. By combining
these experimental approaches, the researchers elucidate how the human language
comprehension system derives fine-grained expectations for future
linguistic input and how the mechanism develops as a function of increased
knowledge about linguistic communication.