* 1728957
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Community Policing Preparedness and the State
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Catherine Lutz, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2018
* USD 25,200.00

The research supported by this award investigates changing linkages between
local communities and the nation state in the contemporary United States. As
distributor of welfare, administrator of bureaucracy, provider of security, and
in many other ways, the state is critical for local life. But the nature of that
relationship is dynamic, shifting over time and place in ways that change our
understanding of what a government is at all levels of scale. This project asks,
What are the key new elements of that relationship now? And what are their local
effects? Noting how central discussions of security have become in recent years,
the researcher approaches these questions through the lens of local policing and
the increased use of equipment once reserved for the military. What does this
apparent blurring of state and community lines tell us about the local impact of
the nation state today? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out
in the Washington/Baltimore area by Brown University doctoral student, Jessica
Katzenstein, under the supervision of Dr. Catherine A. Lutz. She will focus on
how this equipment is made available and why police departments choose to obtain
it; how personnel are trained in its use; and how its availability affects their
sense of responsibility for threat response and their relations with local
citizens. To gather data, she will employ a range of anthropological research
methods including: interviews, participant observation in trainings and ride-
alongs, and spatial analysis of equipment movements. Findings from this project
will provide important insight into what militarization signifies about the
contradictions and shifts in state influence in a historical moment in which
community police have more effective resources and yet more limited room to use
those resources without public challenge, and where they are called upon to
serve as homeland defense against a broadening array of threats. This
information will help to build new social scientific understanding of new
aspects of what the nation state now means for local communities.