* 1728915
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Linguistic Outcomes of Minority Language Maintenance: Yiddish in New York
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2019
* Gregory Guy, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2019
* USD 10,144.00

The pace and intensity of globalization have many linguists concerned about the
viability of the world's endangered and minority languages. Much is known about
how language policy, standardization, and educational practices affect minority
language maintenance at the macro-level of the speech community. Comparatively
little is known about how these same factors influence inter-speaker variation
and the spread of language change within successfully "maintained" language
varieties. This dissertation addresses this empirical gap in research on
language maintenance by analyzing the factors that constrain variation in
Yiddish, a language spoken by nearly 150,000 New Yorkers. Despite popular
reports about the demise of the language, the number of native speakers has
risen each year since 2010 -- a surprising fact considering that this growth
cannot be attributed to the influx of new immigrants from Eastern Europe. Under
the direction of Dr. Gregory R. Guy, doctoral candidate Isaac L. Bleaman will
carry out sociolinguistic interviews in Yiddish with male and female speakers
from New York's two Yiddish-speaking communities: (1) ultra-Orthodox Hasidim,
whose commitment to Yiddish is a linguistic reflex of a broader ideology that
opposes acculturation to non-Jewish society; and (2) Yiddishists, whose
commitment to the language does not preclude them from participating in
"mainstream" (including non-Jewish) institutions and cultural practices, e.g.,
public schooling. Despite their shared linguistic background and geographic
proximity, the two communities have very little contact with one another.

The analysis focuses on both a phonetic variable below the level of speakers'
awareness (release burst duration in word-initial stops) and a morphosyntactic
variable that is the focus of explicit correction (number marking on verbs with
postverbal plural subjects). The quantitative data extracted from
sociolinguistic interviews are supplemented by qualitative data from a text
correction task, which will be used to determine the features that speakers deem
to be standard or non-standard. Finally, the spoken data are compared with
archival recordings of European speakers, in order to assess the rate and
trajectory of linguistic change within the two communities.