* 1728851
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigation of second language lexical representation and processing of Mandarin tones
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Robert DeKeyser, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2020
* USD 14,819.00

As the national language of the People's Republic of China, Mandarin Chinese has
obvious importance in the modern world. Progress in our understanding of how
Mandarin can be learned more effectively is thus of national interest for the
United States. Mandarin is a lexical tone language, where pitch cues on
syllables distinguish words. Learning lexical tones is known to be difficult for
native speakers of English, however, the nature of the difficulty and its causes
are not well understood beyond the earliest stages of learning. This project
will address two main questions: First, what are adult second language learners'
mental representations of Mandarin tone categories like? Second, what is the
nature of the difficulty learners have during real-time word
recognition?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A first set of experiments will use behavioral
measures of accuracy and response time to make inferences about the quality of
listeners' mental representations for a specific Mandarin tone (Tone 3) and its
variants (allotones). If learners' responses are less accurate or slower for one
variant of Tone 3, this may indicate a bias in their perception, potentially due
to common teaching practices that emphasize only one form of Tone 3. A second
set of experiments will examine event-related potentials (ERPs) and behavioral
decisions in response to spoken Mandarin words. Specifically, research will
examine the N400 response to words and nonwords and compare it to the behavioral
decisions that follow. While previous behavioral research suggests learners have
severely decreased sensitivity to tones in disyllabic words, this new research
will provide real-time evidence of learners' responses to tones, potentially
revealing sensitivity that is not captured in behavioral decisions. Results will
contribute to our understanding of the acquisition of lexical tones by adult
second language learners and may lead to improvements in learning and teaching
of Mandarin and other tone languages.