* 1728454
* Modeling and Control of a NextGen Circulation Control Based  Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Kimon Valavanis, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 08/31/2020
* USD 424,996.00

This project aims at characterizing and accurately modeling the dynamics of
fixed wing aerial vehicle with novel control concept, namely circulation
control. Circulation control is the most effective active flow control method
for lift enhancement purposes when compared to traditional control surfaces
commonly used in aircraft. The circulation control wing (CCW) includes an air
delivery system that "blows" air uniformly on the trailing edge of the wing
through an air supply unit that is integrated with the main fuselage of the
vehicle. While the CCW concept has huge benefits over the current state-of-the-
art, there is a distinct need for improvements in the fundamental modeling and
control aspects of such design. This project will lead to a comprehensive and
verifiable theoretical and experimental methodology to develop the mathematical
model and control strategies using an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) platform as
the test-bed. The results from this project will lay a foundation for designing
a full-scale unmanned circulation control aerial vehicle and contribute to a
general understanding of implementation of circulation control in other
applications. The fundamental understanding gained from this project will help
design new aerial vehicles with the CCW concept that can deliver significantly
enhanced aerodynamic efficiency, increased useful payload during cruise flight,
delayed likelihood of stalling, and reduced runway requirements during take-off
and landing. The project activities are also integrated with undergraduate and
graduate educational experience.

There exist several mathematical models for conventional UAVs, but there is no
analytical or experimental model of the circulation control-based aerial vehicle
designs. Also, the effect of circulation control on the aerodynamic
characteristics of the new configuration aircraft are not known and, as a
result, standard design techniques for control design cannot be applied to these
new UAV designs. The research focus of this project is on providing a
comprehensive methodology to derive a detailed mathematical model and equations
of motion for the UAV with circulation control. The design methodology will be
developed for various cases: CC-on, CC-off and CC-on-demand. The newly
formulated models and derived controllers will be validated first through
extensive simulation studies using X-Plane simulator environment and then
through flight experiments using a retrofitted ReadyMadeRC Ananconda test
platform. The outcome of the research is expected to be a verified and validated
design. The project's methods will accurately characterize the effect of
pitching moment, stability and control derivatives due to circulation control. A
unique feature is the navigation controller derivation that accounts for
changing blowing conditions depending on the on-going mission. Further, the
circulation control system controller dynamically adjusts the blowing rate in
accordance to set objectives and/or the required lift enhancement; this prevents
operating the control system at full capacity at all times.