* 1728155
* Collaborative Research: Documenting the transition from contraction to extension in the Ruby-East Humboldt-Wood Hills Metamorphic Core Complex, Southwestern U.S. Cordillera
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Allen McGrew, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2022
* USD 206,620.00

The mountainous western U.S., commonly referred to as the Cordillera, has
experienced near constant geologic deformation and reorganization over the past
few hundred million years. Large mountain ranges have been created and
destroyed, volcanism has flared up and died away, and an enormous section of the
west, basically from Salt Lake City, Utah to Reno, Nevada, has roughly doubled
in size due to extreme stretching and extension of Earth's upper crust. This
extended region, the Basin and Range province, has been the focus of decades of
research and exploration by geoscientists and prospectors, and now hosts some of
the largest mineral deposits in North America. Despite years of investigation
using a wide range of methods, fundamental questions persist about the
mechanisms that drove extension. Central to these debates is the timing and rate
of deformation. Fundamentally, evidence from different depths of the crust yield
differing interpretations, with evidence from the deeper earth documenting
older, Cretaceous (approximately 70 million years ago) deformation, whereas
studies of the shallower crust highlight later, Miocene (approximately 15
million years ago) processes. This study proposes to bridge the gap between
these two data sets and reconcile these seemingly disparate histories by
focusing on an exceptionally well-exposed section of crust in the Ruby Mountains
- East Humboldt Range - Wood Hills Metamorphic Core Complex, an area of
northeastern Nevada that is also of great economic interest due to its situation
in the heart of North America's richest gold-producing province. The rocks that
make up these ranges represent a thick column of the crust that was brought to
the surface and tilted on its side during extension, and offer an unprecedented
view into the geologic processes operating across multiple crustal levels. A
suite of relatively new isotopic dating techniques will document the time -
temperature history of the rocks and thus the full history of tectonic uplift.
The research conducted during this study will provide important societal
outcomes through training of undergraduate students in an important STEM
(science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) discipline, thus
contributing to development of a globally competitive workforce. The project
will also contribute to increased scientific literacy and public engagement with
STEM. The project embeds substantial outreach and educational components. The
world-class geology of the study area provides an ideal stage for direct
community engagement through strategic and comprehensive outreach to local
science educators and geoscience professionals. By forging an innovative
collaboration between two R1 Research institutions and Great Basin College--the
institution primarily responsible for training science educators across most of
rural Nevada. The principal investigator's educational outreach will focus on
three main goals; (1) creating and making widely available interactive field
trip guides and tutorials focusing on both the research as well as numerous
fundamental geoscience concepts that can be demonstrated in the proposed
research area; (2) creating permanent and mobile displays for Great Basin
College campuses across the state of Nevada; and (3) creating learning modules
and tutorials for learners at a variety of levels, including dual-credit high
school students enrolled in geology courses, traditional college students, and
education students preparing to become K-12 educators. Outreach materials will
highlight the central role that northeastern Nevada's tectonic history plays in
its citizens' physical and economic well-being. Technical results of the
research will be widely disseminated through presentations at professional
geoscience meetings and the peer-reviewed scientific literature.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most dramatic shifts in the tectonic
architecture of North American in the Phanerozoic is the Late Cretaceous to
Cenozoic transition of the Cordillera from large-scale shortening and crustal
thickening to widespread regional extensional collapse. While certain aspects of
this geologic history are well understood, critical questions remain unresolved
regarding the distribution, rates, style, and timing of the early extensional
evolution. Key to addressing these crucial questions are the metamorphic core
complexes--regions where extreme crustal extension has exposed thick crustal
sections with protracted tectonic histories. However, each of the classic
metamorphic core complexes of the northeastern Great Basin yield fundamentally
disparate interpretations of the timing and tectonic significance of exhumation
depending on whether the data derive from deeper or shallower structural levels.
In each case, lines of evidence drawn primarily from higher temperature
thermochronometry, integrated Pressure-Temperature-time paths, and structural
analyses of mid- to deep-crustal rocks suggest older, more protracted and often
more complex exhumational histories; in contrast, low-temperature
thermochronometry and syntectonic sedimentation commonly record a simpler and
more youthful record of widespread Miocene extensional unroofing. This study
will directly address these problems and bridge the current gap in understanding
by using low- and medium-temperature (Uranium-Thorium)/Helium and
40Argon/39Argon thermochronology within a detailed and well-understood
structural framework to constrain a complete cooling and exhumational history
for northeastern Nevada's Ruby Mountains - East Humboldt Range - Wood Hills
metamorphic core complexes. By integrating a range of thermochronometers and
field relationships this study will reconcile disparate exhumational histories
derived from disconnected investigations of deep-crustal and upper-crustal
processes. In doing so, it will directly test competing hypotheses for the
onset, duration, and driving forces of Basin and Range extension and exhumation.
Specifically, this proposal will address three key questions: (1) when did
extension initiate in the Ruby Mountains - East Humboldt Range - Wood Hills
metamorphic core complexes, (2) how did the crustal geotherm evolve during the
Cretaceous to present, and (3) if early phases of extension occurred, why did
they fail to produce a syntectonic stratigraphic record?