* 1728813
* Water Science and Technology Board Core Support
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Deborah Glickson, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2022
* USD 360,055.00

1728813&lt;br/&gt;Eide&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water is the most critical of all
natural resources. The need to enhance our knowledge of water resources and the
ways in which society conveys, stores, distributes, and increases access to
water in appropriate qualities and quantities for a range of purposes has become
urgent. Particularly as population growth, land use changes, and the variability
in climate have challenged the natural capacity of ground and surface water
systems to replenish themselves, greater understanding of water resources in all
parts of the hydrological cycle and of ways to develop new approaches to
monitor, model, recycle, and treat water is crucial for societal and
environmental health and security. This award is for partial core support for
the Water Science and Technology Board which serves as the focal point for water
issues at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. As part
of this role the Board brings scientific and engineering attention through
publications to respond to a range of water resource questions and is an
immediate resource and point of reference for the government on behalf of the
water science and engineering community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Board's
objectives include advancing discovery, understanding, and application of the
most current science and engineering approaches to a range of water issues;
fostering cooperation and exchange among government, academia, industry, and
other stakeholders on pressing topics in the water resources arena; and
promoting teaching, training, and education in multi-disciplinary water-related
research and technology. Through its consensus reports, convening functions, and
other publications and communications, the Board, comprising subject-matter
experts who serve pro bono, and the Academies staff work with the water science
and engineering community to identify emerging topics relevant to the discipline
and important to government, and provide a neutral forum to explore these topics
on a continuing basis. As a complement to traditional forms of academic
research, the Water Science and Technology Board examines emerging issues
through a form of knowledge generation predicated on convening information and
perspectives from a range of stakeholders. The Board?s activities are unique in
their contribution to increasing knowledge in water science and engineering
because they draw upon the Board?s convening capabilities, which rely upon
dialogue, information exchange, and consensus building. Since 1982, the Board
has fostered facilitated, focused science- and engineering-based discussions
that provide valuable benefits to the water science community, the government,
and public through objective examination and synthesis of pure and applied water
research and its impacts. The ability to support dialogue and information
exchange among different researchers and other stakeholders offers the
opportunity to further advance knowledge in all areas of water science and
engineering. The Board brings scientific and engineering attention to respond to
a range of water resource questions and is an immediate resource and point of
reference for the government on behalf of the water science and engineering
community. The consistent capacity and rigor provided by the Board membership
and staff enable the Board (and the Academies) to provide the broad water
resources discipline with a singular interface with government and policymaking,
and equally, for government with the water resources discipline. Working in
strong collaboration with federal and state agencies, academia, industry, and
nongovernmental organizations in the water resource arena, the Board can receive
and respond to questions and issues raised by the full range of stakeholders in
the water community. The Board works to isolate key topics that require input
from the water science and engineering discipline and facilitates communication
and cooperation among different stakeholders. Through these efforts and its use
of various means of communication and outreach, the Board helps inform public
policy and can engage different generations of researchers, practitioners, and
policymakers in constructive dialogue across the water science and policy
domain.