* 1728497
* SNM: Scalable Nanomanufacturing of Fab Compatible High-Density Nanowire Arrays for High-Throughput Drug Screening
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Gert Cauwenberghs, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,562,878.00

Cells from living animals are very small, and yet measuring them and
manipulating them are critical for producing new medical therapies. There are
encouraging new methods to understand and control cells one at a time, but there
really isn't now the technology to measure and control individually the
thousands or millions of cells needed for a therapy. New approaches to
individually measure and control cells using multiple nanoscopic devices are
sorely needed. This award will study a method to control and measure many cells
simultaneously. The base technology is a high-density platform of nanoscopic
wires that interact with the cells in a culture system. The scalable
nanomanufacturing of nanowire devices will make it possible to build "nanolab-
on-a-chip" machines. Such tiny "laboratories", combined with a patient's own
growing cells could create low-cost, predictive drug-screening platforms to
accelerate drug discovery and personalized treatments. The project provides
training opportunities for undergraduate, high school, and under-represented
minority students in interdisciplinary research in materials science,
engineering, and medicine. It augments and improves the course curriculum, and
fosters a robust translational exchange with industry partners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to overcome the barriers in developing a
nanowire array-based system that enables multi-use, non-destructive, high-
sensitivity measurements in 3D networks that are not possible with patch-clamp,
automated patch, or microelectrode array techniques. Human-derived neurons and
cardiomyocytes, which are highly relevant human models for drug screening, are
studied. The project explores nanoimprint lithography as a scalable
nanomanufacturing method to develop a wafer-scale nanowire neurophysiology
platform scalable to 8000 simultaneous data points for 250 wells with 32
nanowire electrodes each. This scalable fabrication method enables the
integration of nanowires in high densities and large numbers in integrated
systems that comprise on-chip acquisition and digitization electronics and
microfluidic drug intervention channels and wells. Furthermore, new
architectures of multiple height nanowires are devised for screening the effects
of drugs from 3D neuronal and cardiomyocyte networks and fully integrate readout
electronics with the nanowire sensors. Finally, all components on a single, low
cost platform scalable to 1820 wells and 115,840 simultaneous measurement points
are monolithically integrated and the platform validated with a panel of drugs
at the Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute and UC San Diego.
These technical innovations should enable non-destructive intracellular
potential measurements across the depth of a tissue.