* 1728019
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   An ERP Investigation of Individual Differences in the Processing of Wh- Dependencies by Native and Non-Native Speakers
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Alison Gabriele, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 01/31/2020
* USD 18,171.00

Multilingualism is increasingly important in our diverse society, although
relatively little is known about what makes someone a 'good' second language
learner. While children acquire language with relative ease, adults show
persistent difficulty becoming proficient in a second language. It has been
hypothesized that individuals with increased cognitive abilities are better able
to process and comprehend language, suggesting that individual differences in
cognitive abilities may be related to successful language processing. This
dissertation uses electroencephalography (EEG) to examine how individual
differences in cognitive abilities influence second language comprehension,
focusing on how native English speakers and Chinese-speaking learners of English
comprehend complex sentences in real time. Using the brain imaging technique EEG
to examine the processing of a second language has the potential to advance our
understanding of the extent to which the brain is able to reorganize itself to
accommodate a new language in adulthood. Thus, this project holds promise for
providing new insights regarding the nature of brain plasticity more
broadly.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project examines the extent to which
processing in native and non-native speakers is qualitatively similar, testing
the predictions of alternative theories in language learning and language
processing. When a participant reads a sentence like "I wonder who the editor
interviewed Dave with," they must search for the position in the sentence from
which the word "who" originated, a relationship that is referred to as a wh-
dependency. Participants will read sentences such as these as their brain
activity is recorded using EEG in order to track the processing of the wh-
dependency throughout the sentence. The project examines the extent to which the
processing of wh-dependencies in both learners and native speakers involves
predicting parts of the structure that have not yet been encountered and whether
both groups only attempt to complete the dependency in positions in the sentence
that the grammar allows. All participants will also be assessed on a battery of
cognitive tests, in order to determine how individual differences in cognitive
abilities impact native and non-native processing. Using EEG allows for an
examination of whether natives and learners use qualitatively similar processing
mechanisms and whether processing unfolds on a similar time-course, providing a
more precise comparison between the two populations and shedding new light on
the possibilities and limitations of adult second language (L2) acquisition.