* 1728807
* Evaluating Social and Cultural Impacts: Decision Theory Meets Practice
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2018,11/30/2020
* Paul Slovic, Decision Science Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 11/30/2020
* USD 523,687.00

Developments are often promoted because they are expected to result in economic
or environmental benefits to a region, state, or nation. In some cases, however,
these same projects result in negative social, cultural, or health consequences
to the local population. Although these impacts are common and widespread,
methods used to assess the social and cultural effects of initiatives (either
positive or adverse) have received far less attention than methods to address
economic or environmental impacts. Reasons include the usual market-based
perspective of economists or policy analysts and the practical challenges
encountered when evaluating the broad range of social, cultural, or health
effects of a project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal takes an
interdisciplinary perspective to construct better measures of social, cultural,
and health effects using methods based in the decision sciences, environmental
risk analysis, cultural anthropology, planning and policy evaluation, and
psychology and statistics. The underlying premise is that improved measures of
less tangible impacts will require improvements in both analytical and
deliberative approaches. Key tasks include better understanding and
identification of social and cultural impacts, better and more widely accepted
metrics for incorporating qualitative or quantitative measures of these effects,
and new methods that will successfully address uncertain future impacts,
cumulative effects, and community-wide values (in contrast to the individual
values favored under current approaches).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This 2-year
proposal begins with structured interviews with experienced experts to elicit
key concerns and barriers to the routine inclusion of social, cultural, and
health indicators as part of project evaluations. Phase 2 includes experiments,
which will compare the responses of expert and public participants, and
involvement by researchers as part of several ongoing case studies that are now
being undertaken by federal (or state) regulatory and management government
agencies. Phase 3 is a review and revision of project findings in light of the
comments of experts drawn from Phase 1, and then the dissemination of results
through papers and conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes of the project
will help analysts to better represent and evaluate the community-based health,
social, and cultural components of impact assessments, thereby leading to
reduced levels of social conflict and more widely acceptable public policy
initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.