* 1728841
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impact of Alternative Regimes of Property and Ownership on Economic Growth
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Robert Hayden, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 25,192.00

Privatization has been widely promoted as a vehicle for increasing market
participation and stimulating economic growth. There are, however, multiple
legal and cultural models within which private property and ownership are
constituted, and industries that inadequately manage those terrains have been
proven to be particularly vulnerable. This project, which trains a graduate
student in how to conduct rigorous, empirically grounded scientific fieldwork,
explores what factors contribute to the success and durability of new economic
ventures in contexts where legal and cultural regimes of property vary. The
findings of this project will be disseminated to organizations and stakeholders
involved in informing public policy aimed at enhancing the participation of
underrepresented stakeholders in the economy, and developing improved inclusion
in decision-making models, thus improving economic security. The research also
fosters international scientific cooperation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ognjen
Kojanic, under the supervision of Dr. Robert M. Hayden of the University of
Pittsburgh, will investigate whether ownership and private property constitute
different analytical concepts within certain labor and industrial contexts, and
what are the political economic, and cultural implications of that distinction.
Looking at a worker-owned factory in Croatia, a site marked by emergent markets
following entry into the European Union, this research has three objectives: (1)
to track the transformation of concepts of property, (2) to explore the economic
relations that emerge from worker-ownership to determine the corporate form
being developed, and (3) to examine how workers articulate a political and
economic ideology of ownership separate from those of property. Over the course
of 12 months, Kojanic will conduct semi-structured interviews, participant
observation, and archival research. This case study will contribute to the
debate on property relations in social sciences by testing the analytic value of
the underused concept of ownership, as differentiated from the concept of
property.