* 1728749
* Doctoral Dissertation: Criminal Offenders, Access to Resources, and Recidivism
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Marva Goodson, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2019
* USD 31,000.00

Many of those under court supervision after a criminal conviction have limited
resources, due to issues such as poverty, disability, unemployment, living in
high crime neighborhoods, and homelessness. While members of a person's social
networks can provide access to such resources, women offenders have especially
limited network support, in part due to the stigmatizing effects of a
conviction. This project will conduct interviews with female felons on parole or
probation as a way of analyzing whether certain personal networks, including
experts, problem solving help, and personal support, influence rates of
recidivism. Consequently, this project will consider whether policies and
practices, some of which prohibit offenders from interacting with certain people
such as other ex-offenders, influence offenders' social networks, access to
resources, and recidivism.

This project will apply egocentric social network analysis theories and
techniques to understand the structure and composition of women offenders?
personal networks and access to key resources. The project will seek to
determine the association between access to resources and the likelihood of
offenders' recidivism. To do so, the project will interview 160 women offenders,
80 of whom were on parole and 80 on probation, from 16 Michigan counties that
include rural, suburban, small town, and urban areas. Data will be collected on
offender characteristics, network member characteristics, tie/relationship
characteristics, and overall network characteristics. De-identified data from
the project will be made publicly available. The project will test single-level
and multilevel models to ascertain the effects of offenders' social networks on
recidivism.