* 1728395
* Collaborative Research: Modeling Sample Selection for Multi-Level Data Structures
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Olga Chyzh, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 07/31/2023
* USD 272,013.00

General Abstract&lt;br/&gt;An important part of political science research
entails the analysis of events data in which the researcher accounts for when
events occur, how often they occur, and tries to explain why they occur.
Examples of interest to political scientists include topics like wars, mass
protests, and coups, for instance. One of the problems associated with this type
of research is that the event being observed is the product of a number of other
factors or conditions. As a consequence, the researcher may not be able to
identify the actual causes or the relative contributions of a set of causal
factors for that outcome. Since the analysis of particular events is of such
interest to political scientists, it is important to develop methods that allow
researchers to draw the correct conclusions about how such events came to occur.
The research team proposes to develop a statistical method to overcome the
problems associated with events data analysis. The method has the potential to
improve our understanding of how important types of events come to occur, making
it of great interest to scholars across a range of social sciences. The research
project will also provide a significant educational component as the team
proposes to involve undergraduate students in the research experience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The PI's note that much of
the events data collected in the social sciences is the product of a structural
data generation process that generally remains unanalyzed. As a result the
observed events are correlated with a number of covariates. Statistical analyses
of such data may lead to biased inferences if not appropriately addressed. These
problems are of particular concern for small-n, or area-based research. The PI's
propose to develop a theoretically-informed, statistical approach to how data is
selected structurally. The project consists of three components. First, they
develop an estimation procedure for repeated observations at higher levels of
analysis with structural data. Second, they will produce work that bridges
different periods of time-based aggregation across levels. Third, they extend
the structural selection frame to move beyond two-level structures. Successfully
developing the procedure will help to improve the collection and analysis of
data, thereby helping to reduce the trade-off between thick descriptive
approaches focusing on a few cases and thinly-informative operationalizations of
variables in large-n studies. The work will have applications beyond political
science, appealing to scholars in a number of social scientific disciplines. The
project will provide important pedagogical benefits as the PI's will involve
undergraduate students in the research.