* 1728309
* Scalable Nanofabrication of Two-Dimensional Semiconductor Heterojunction Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,11/30/2021
* Saiful Khondaker, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 11/30/2021
* USD 407,909.00

Semiconductor heterostructures with tailored electronic and optoelectronic
properties are a key in fabricating new generation of electronic devices for
applications in high-frequency electronics, sensors, detectors, terahertz
sources, low power tunnel field effect transistors, and computing memories.
Despite some progress being made at different research levels, a versatile
strategy to fabricate semiconductor heterostructures with well-defined nanoscale
junctions on a large wafer-scale is still lacking, impeding their widespread
commercial applications. Recently discovered two-dimensional transition metal
dichalcogenide semiconductors are promising in this respect owing to their
intrinsically small sizes and layered structures coupled with facile material
growth. This award investigates the scalable and cost-effective nanofabrication
of various semiconductor heterojunction devices by rationally integrating
multiple two-dimensional materials of dissimilar components and functionalities
with near atom thickness. Accordingly, the award advances nano-electronics
industries and communities by delivering a new form of semiconductors and
manufacturing strategies, expediting the development of high-performance
information storage and logic devices that operate at higher speed and dissipate
less energy than current technologies. The award also offers multidisciplinary
training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students including
minority and underrepresented groups in physics, chemistry, materials science,
electrical engineering, and nanotechnology. The outcomes from the award are
implemented for curriculum development. Educational modules are developed for
outreach to local mid and high schools and communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project explores viable stratgies to
fabricate heterogenously-integrated multiple two-dimensional semiconducting
transition metal dichalcogenides with desired dimensions, geometries,
compositions and tailored band-offset, all essential for high-quality nanoscale
heterojunctions. Morphology controlled two-dimensional materials are grown by
various deposition processes including chemical vapor deposition, low
temperature physical vapor deposition, and atomic layer deposition, which
ensures uniform electrical properties, wafer-level scalability and atomic-level
control in the nanoscale heterojunctions. The effect of material growth
parameters on nanoscale structural variations are evaluated by in-situ/ex-situ
transmission electron microscopy and electron transport measurements. Once the
optimized growth conditions and the underlying structure-property relationships
are established, a variety of heterojunction electronic devices are fabricated
by growing one layer of the two-dimensional material on top of the other, which
includes p-n junction, double heterojunction, and superlattices. The device
fabrication employs a series of metal depositions for contacts and chemical or
atomic layer depositions, accompanied by a scalalabe optical lithography
process. Carrier transport and the electrical performances of the heterojunction
devices are evaluated and are corroborated with the structural characterizations
by transmission electron microscopy.