* 1728407
* Models of the Nuclear Pore Biomechanics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Mohammad Mofrad, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

Cells in the body use many physical processes to sustain life. Many of them
depend on moving large molecules into and out of the nucleus. Such
transportation is done through small and complicated pathways, called nuclear
pore complexes. Despite the vital importance of the nuclear pore complex in cell
biology, little is known about the mechanics and dynamics of the transport of
the molecules through them. This project includes fundamental research towards
understanding the biomechanics of the nuclear pore complex and transport.
Understanding how molecules are actively transported through these pore will
ultimately inform creation of new cell-based therapeutic approaches and
potentially also create industrial applications of biomimetic artificial pores.
This project crosses several disciplinary boundaries including those between
biology, chemistry, mechanics, and bioengineering. The multi-disciplinary
approach, along with outreach targeted to underrepresented students and student
teachers, will help broaden participation of underrepresented groups in research
and positively impact science, technology, engineering and mathematics
education. The research team will partner with the Berkeley NSF-supported BERET
program to introduce the power of computational modeling to high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The complex, yet delicate, geometry of the
nuclear pore and the fine spatiotemporal resolution at which nucleocytoplasmic
transport takes place have hindered the direct, experimental investigations of
this mysterious nanopore. Given the limitations of experimental techniques,
computational approaches spanning multiple scales can break through to
understanding by simulating its activity mechanistically. Computational models
offer a strong platform for capturing the nanosecond-scale interactions between
transported macromolecular cargos and the nuclear pore at nanometer spatial
resolutions to examine the details of nucleocytoplasmic transport phenomena.
Using a combination of bioinformatics, computational biology and biophysics
modeling approaches, ranging from all-atom molecular dynamics and coarse-grained
Brownian dynamics to new agent-based modeling methods, this research will shed
light on the structure and function of the nuclear pore complex and the dynamics
of nucleocytoplasmic traffic.