* 1728145
* Collaborative Research: Structural Constraints on Microcontinent Formation, Gulf of California
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Seulgi Moon, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 08/31/2023
* USD 329,083.00

When a continent rifts apart to form a new ocean basin, sometimes it breaks into
two big pieces and a few smaller pieces called microcontinents. Microcontinents
form early in the history of rifting, and afterwards they stay on one side of
the rift, sink below sea level, and are buried by younger oceanic sedimentation.
It is important to understand the development of microcontinent boundaries
because these boundaries may host mineral deposits and hydrocarbons. We will do
a field geology study of a young microcontinent that is above sea level, still
actively forming, and bordered on two sides by active faults. We will test
different models for the fault patterns and the timing of the uplift that caused
its development. The field data we need to collect include: geological mapping
of active faults; detailed study of elevations and ages of terraces that are
offset by the faults; and mapping and sampling of nearby volcanic rocks to see
if the volcanism was related to the rifting in terms of age or composition. Our
study will help scientists to understand other, older microcontinents that are
important in resource exploration, but are now buried by sediments and
accessible only by drilling. Our team of investigators includes two female
professors from the USA with their students, and collaborators from a Mexican
research institute. During this study, we will train two graduate students in
state-of-the art geological techniques including structure-from-motion,
luminescence and/or cosmogenic radionuclide dating. This project will strengthen
the international collaboration among the three institutions and train the
graduate students in international field work. Research results will be
incorporated into outreach activities including Spanish-language TV news
interviews, annual teacher training workshops, an informational public display
at Caltech, and public outreach events at UCLA. This award is cofunded by the
Office of International Science and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiple models have
been proposed to explain microcontinent isolation in strike-slip settings. To
test these models, we will examine the structures of a newly isolated, subaerial
microcontinent of Isla Angel de la Guarda (IAG) in the northern Gulf of
California. The IAG lies along the Pacific-North America plate boundary, and its
southern tip contains a dense array of young continental faults. These cut a set
of marine terraces within 20 km of a well-developed transform fault, along
strike from a nascent spreading center. We will evaluate how the faults on IAG
may be geometrically connected to the currently active plate boundary faults in
the Ballenas Transform system as well as to former plate boundary faults in the
Tiburon Basin to the SE of the island. We will constrain the timing and
kinematics of the IAG faults through detailed geologic and structural mapping,
topographic analysis using high resolution digital elevation mapping, and dating
of geomorphic surfaces. During yearly field trips we will map bedrock types,
fault geometry and structures, and geomorphic surface deformation, and collect
samples for dating of bedrock, marine terraces, alluvial fans, and fault zones.
Geological field work and image processing will be conducted jointly by
researchers and students from Caltech, UCLA, and CICESE (Ensenada, Mexico).
Samples collected in years 1 and 2 for dating geomorphic surfaces will be
processed at UCLA using luminescence and/or cosmogenic radionuclide dating
techniques. Bedrock samples will be geochemically analyzed at Caltech and dated
by CICESE. The results of this study can transform our understanding of the
early development of microcontinents, and our approach can be applicable to
other microcontinents in the Atlantic, Indian, and Arctic oceans that have been
targeted for resource exploration. This award is cofunded by the Office of
International Science and Engineering.