* 1728861
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Factors Contributing to the Efficacy of Mortgage-Based Homeownership Initiatives
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Stephan Palmie, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 25,200.00

Since the post-war period, scholars and policy makers have understood
homeownership to be a key factor in breaking the cycle of poverty. Indeed, the
idea that owning a house confers enormous benefits on poor families, and that
mortgages are the best way to do this, has become a central assumption in
poverty-reduction strategies the world over. And yet, the 2007-2008 financial
crisis in the United States crucially questioned whether homeownership was
reliably a worthwhile goal for low-income families, who disproportionately
suffered and lost in the crisis. This project, which trains a student in the
methods of empirical, scientific data collection and analysis, explores the
extent to which homeownership is effective in breaking the cycle of poverty, and
in what exact terms, is fundamental to the construction of effective policies
that truly promote socioeconomic wellbeing. In addition to providing funding for
the training of a graduate student in anthropology, findings will be
disseminated to organizations and individuals exploring what factors promote or
hinder families' ability to harness homeownership to break the cycle of
poverty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inés Escobar Gonzalez, under the supervision of
Dr. Stephan Palmié of the University of Chicago, explores what socioeconomic and
cultural factors contribute to the success or failure of mortgage-based
homeownership initiatives. The research will be conducted in Tlajomulco de
Zúñiga, a municipality in the metropolitan area of Guadalajara in western
Mexico. This is a particularly apt research setting because, since 2001, it has
been the site of a government program that dramatically expanded mortgage-based
homeownership rates amongst a diverse pool of lower-income families, resulting
in various levels of case-based success. Therefore, the research setting will
allow for a precise comparative study into the exact ways mortgages and
mortgage-based homeownership are impacting the lives of different kinds of
lower-income families, all while assessing the crucial explanatory variables
that define people's ability to make and maintain assets. Based on a strategic
comparative sample, the investigators will construct 36 case studies that
comprise contrasting household structures, employment profiles, and income and
asset histories, thus elucidating how different families are processually
enabled and constrained by mortgage-based homeownership. The project will
contribute to anthropological discussions about neoliberalism, economic
anthropological debates about value and moral economies, and cross-disciplinary
research on the relationship between debt, sociality, and property.