* 1728457
* Simulations of Competing Phases and Quantum Criticality in Strongly Correlated Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Mark Jarrell, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2022
* USD 345,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research
funds this award that supports research and education on the development of new
formalisms, algorithms and codes, and on their use in the study of complex
behavior of constituent electrons in materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the
most fascinating areas of materials science is the study of how electrons
organize in materials, giving rise to different quantum phases, such as metals,
insulators, semiconductors or superconductors, which are characterized by
different and technologically important properties. Quantum criticality occurs
when multiple such phases coexist and compete in a material. At the boundaries
between these phases, it is possible that no well-established phase exists; as a
result, completely new states of matter may emerge. These new phases and their
competition is not only fascinating from a fundamental standpoint, but may also
hold the promise of new applications and functionalities since at a tenuous
balance between phases, the application of an electric or magnetic field, or
pressure, or changes in the chemical composition of the material may
dramatically change its properties. New functionalities may then emerge as the
system "switches" between the different states. The project entails developing
relevant methodology, and will use supercomputers to study these quantum
critical states of matter, the competition between different phases, and their
response to different external fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be
carried out in collaboration with researchers in India, furthering an
established international collaboration involving several present and former
students. The project will also involve a number of outreach efforts developed
to increase student interest and achievement in the sciences, and to encourage
students to consider STEM careers. The researchers funded by the award will
participate in a Beowulf Bootcamp each summer where high-school students will
construct and use a small
supercomputer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research funds this award
that supports research and education on complex behaviors in correlated
electronic materials, including competing phases in cuprate superconductors,
heavy-Fermion systems, and disordered interacting electronic systems and
superconductors. Special emphasis will be placed on identifying and studying new
quantum critical points and competing phases, and the Anderson disorder-driven
quantum phase transition and its competition with
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to continue the
development of new formalisms, algorithms and codes, and to use them in the
study complex behavior in correlated electronic materials. The research team
will focus on simulations of quantum criticality and disordered interacting
models near localization. Quantum criticality is of great fundamental interest,
since the associated transitions are driven by quantum rather than thermal
fluctuations. The PI and his group will develop a better understanding of the
competing phases in correlated and strongly disordered systems that could lead
to new functionalities, including the Anderson metal-insulator transition, and
other quantum phase transitions. A more complete understanding of quantum
criticality may in turn lead to a better understanding of high-temperature
superconductors and other technologically important
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will employ an array of
theoretical/computational tools including multiscale approaches, quantum Monte
Carlo, and fast approximate cluster solvers, and novel methods to treat
disordered interacting systems near an Anderson localization transition
including the recently developed typical-medium dynamical cluster approximation
used to study the Anderson localization quantum phase
transition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out in
collaboration with researchers in India, furthering an established international
collaboration involving several present and former students. The project will
also involve a number of outreach efforts developed to increase student interest
and achievement in the sciences, and to encourage students to consider STEM
careers. The researchers funded by the award will participate in a Beowulf
Bootcamp each summer where high-school students will construct and use a small
supercomputer.