* 1728082
* Performance of Pressure Sensitive Adhesives on Soft and Slippery Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Joelle Frechette, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2021
* USD 324,587.00

Pressure sensitive adhesives are a class of materials that bind to a substrate
after a light external pressure has been applied. They are used extensively in
daily life for adhesion to dry and rigid surfaces. These materials have not been
extended to other important application areas ranging from healthcare to
construction where the surfaces are soft, wet, and slippery, such as skin,
tissue, or wounds. These materials are often soft and can deform under pressure.
The mechanical properties of these soft materials, not just their surface, can
affect the ability to adhere to that surface. This research will determine the
fundamental relationships between the properties of a substrate and the
performance and failure of adhesives. A better understanding of performance and
failure mechanisms for adhesives on soft and wet surfaces could have important
impact in industries as diverse as health or flexible wearable electronics where
new innovative adhesives could open new technological applications. This work
will also engage high school and undergraduates in an intensive exposure to
research and materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The viscoelastic nature of pressure
sensitive adhesives makes understanding their mechanical response challenging,
especially in the limit of large strains. The project aims to provide the needed
knowledge for the performance of pressure sensitive adhesives on compliant and
wet surfaces by testing two scientific hypotheses. First, increasing the
substrate compliance should increase the size of the dissipation zone at a crack
tip, and affect the performance &amp; mode of failure of adhesives. Second, the
importance of surface energy over bulk dissipation should increase for adhesion
on wet surfaces. To test these hypothesis a better fundamental understanding of
stress concentration within an adhesive in stratified systems as well as of the
change in their surface energy upon exposure to water will be acquired. This
research systematic experimental approach is divided into three aims. (1)
Develop an advanced toolkit to study the performance of pressure sensitive
adhesives on soft, wet, and slippery surfaces, (2) Understand peeling adhesion
of pressure sensitive adhesives from soft and wet surfaces, and (3) Characterize
tack on soft and wet substrates. The outreach and educational components include
a partnership with local high schools to engage students in the research
experience with a focus on underrepresented students.