* 1728277
* Control of Micro Aerial Vehicles under Aerodynamic and Physical Contact Interactions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Sheryl Grace, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2022
* USD 428,074.00

The goal of this project is to make quadrotors and other similar small-scale
flying rotorcraft safer and easier to fly. Both recreational and commercial use
of these vehicles has recently surged in popularity. However, safety concerns
about potentially damaging collisions limit their deployment near people or in
close formation, and the current state of the art in vehicle control is
insufficient for potential applications involving flight inside of complicated
structures such as industrial plants, forests and caves. Specifically, this
project will lead to the following innovations: better understanding of the
aerodynamic interactions between the environment and the flying vehicle through
novel models; creation of a "smart cage" that encloses the vehicle and acts as
both a shock-absorber and as a novel type of "touch" sensor; and the derivation
of new control strategies to take advantage of the new features to improve
performances and ease of maneuvering. Together, these innovations will make
small-scale vehicles less likely to cause unintended damage, suitable for use in
extreme environments such as caves, and more easily piloted. This will allow in
turn the use of these vehicles in new industrial monitoring and search-and-
rescue applications, thus bringing the benefits of these platforms to larger
segments of society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goals of this project
will build on new models of quadrotor aerodynamic, constructed through a
combination of simulation and experimental evaluation. These models predict
forces and torques due to the aerodynamic interactions of each rotor with the
other rotors, as well as with nearby surfaces, such as ground, walls, and
ceilings. A "smart cage" surrounds the vehicle, composed of a rigid outer shell
to prevent the quadrotor from contacting objects in the environment, and a base,
which is rigidly attached to the quadrotor. The cage and the base connect
together through a system of springs that are used to absorb impacts. The base
includes sensors to measure the relative displacement of the outer shell, thus
allowing a partial reconstruction of any impact dynamics. New control strategies
are formulated, based on a novel application of contraction theory to Riemannian
manifolds. These strategies produce geometric controllers that do not suffer
from singularities, that have global exponential convergence guarantees, and
that can be automatically tuned to obtain optimal performance. The results will
be validated in both simulations and experiments.