* 1728649
* Highly Parallel Three-Dimensional Microfluidic Systems for Manufacturing Catalytic Nanoparticles
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Richard Brutchey, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 09/30/2021
* USD 350,000.00

The unique biological, optical, and chemical properties of metal nanoparticles
have driven several decades of research into their many potential applications.
If these applications are to be realized at a level that will make a significant
societal impact, cost-effective techniques for producing industrially relevant
quantities of nanoparticles must be developed. Today, chemical manufacturing
techniques for high quality nanoparticle fabrication remain at small production
scales, with a cost that reflects the limited throughput and labor intensity of
a by-hand process. This is because only small-scale chemical reactions can
achieve uniform mixing conditions and uniform temperatures throughout the
reaction vessel, which are essential conditions for producing uniform, high-
quality nanoparticles. Standard, large-volume industrial chemical reactors lack
uniform mixing and temperature distribution tend to produce low-quality
particles and are therefore an inappropriate route to the scale-up of high-
quality nanoparticle manufacturing, for example, for catalysis. This award
investigates continuous-flow chemical micron scale reactors as a means to
maintain the small-scale conditions necessary to make high-quality nanoparticles
while allowing for continuous processing that can be automated and operated
around the clock. Further, to scale these microreactors to industrially relevant
conditions, this research investigates massive parallelization, i.e., the
controlled operation of many microreactors at once to produce large quantities
of high-quality nanoparticles. This research effort is coordinated with an
outreach program that integrates community college students into research, and
makes science and engineering careers accessible to these students, especially
women and minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High quality nanoparticles for
commercial purposes are still prepared at the lab scale, essentially by hand.
The limit to scale-up is the fact that in solution-phase chemical techniques,
the size and monodispersity of the resulting nanoparticles are extremely
sensitive to the reaction temperature and reagent mixing conditions. It is
impossible to maintain the necessary uniformity in current industrial-scale
reactors even with stirring. Microfluidic reactors, however, have inherently
good thermal uniformity and droplet microfluidic systems allow for rapid mixing
and homogenization. This research approach relies on ionic liquid (IL)-based
nanoparticle synthesis in microfluidic reactors. In these reactors, droplets of
IL are separated in a fluorocarbon oil-based carrier stream. The microfluidic
system developed in this research will operate at remarkably high colloid
concentrations, nearly 50-100 mg nanoparticles/mL reaction solvent, compared to
nearly 2 mg/mL for traditional solution phase approaches. In the
nanomanufacturing system studied here, a microreactor system is scaled to
sixteen parallel channels. The funded work is a science-based investigation of
the key system parameters, such as, process monitoring and feedback control,
that must be addressed to scale such a parallel system to an arbitrarily large
capacity.