* 1728656
* Chemical Routes to the Growth of Crystalline Functional Oxides on Germanium
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* John Ekerdt, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2020
* USD 361,175.00

The semiconductor industry faces new challenges in the sub-10 nanometer era as
scaling will no longer dominate performance improvement for electronic devices.
New materials and combinations of materials provide an opportunity to improve
performance and function with minimal change to the device construction. For
example, using germanium as the substrate can provide both lower power
consumption and faster computing speeds. And using perovskite oxides that are
both magnetic and electronic as the functional layer can enable advanced memory
devices, integrated optical isolators and spintronic devices. The research will
explore how to grow these crystalline perovskite oxide films directly on
germanium. The research explores an all-chemical growth process that should be
scalable, is inherently less costly from a manufacturing cost of ownership, and
is based on current manufacturing equipment. The impact will be in processes to
enable future devices that exploit charge and spin. As well, the researcher
engages in an outreach program called "Alice in Wonderland" that is aimed at
attracting female high-school students to the physical sciences and engineering.
These students from local high schools will spend their summers at the
University of Texas at Austin participating in research within a supportive
environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching objectives of this research
are to understand and describe processes that lead to the formation of
crystalline multiferroic oxides on Ge(001) with the requisite ferroelectric and
ferromagnetic properties in a chemical deposition process that is scalable and
manufacturable. The research explores iron-doped barium titantate, with iron
levels up to 20 percent, and bismuth ferrite crystalline oxides grown directly
on Ge. The research uses molecular beam epitaxy to prepare well-defined surfaces
and atomic layer deposition to grow the epitaxial structures; in situ electron
and photon spectroscopies are used to characterize the films and interfaces; and
ex situ transmission electron microscopy, and x-ray scattering, magnetic and
electrical measurements establish structure-property relations. The research
benefits from the infrastructure, adjacency of related research and expertise
the principal investigator brings in atomically controlled growth, materials
characterization, surface chemistry, and electrical property measurement.
Specific focus areas for the fundamental studies include: 1) elucidating the
reactions and structural changes at the Ge(001) oxide interface that seed
crystalline oxide formation; 2) understanding the evolution of structure in the
perovskite layer leading to a crystalline film and how the structure depends on
process conditions; and 3) establishing the structure-property-function
relationships in the context of a multiferroic oxide that features ferroelectric
and ferro-/antiferromagnetic properties within a temperature window that is
technologically relevant.