* 1728224
* GOALI/Collaborative Research:   Immiscible Phase Interface-Driven Processing of Ultrafine-Laminated Structures for Lightweight and Strong Magnesium-Based Sheets
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Irene Beyerlein, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2021
* USD 284,928.00

Magnesium (Mg) is the lightest non-hazardous structural metal, and its alloys
have tremendous potential for achieving energy efficiency in the aerospace and
automotive industries. Magnesium alloys often lack strength and formability,
however, and traditional pathways for overcoming these drawbacks are
insufficient and costly. Two-phase laminated materials, consisting of an Mg
alloy phase and another distinctly dissimilar metal phase, have the potential to
overcome these challenges. This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) award supports fundamental scientific research needed to
achieve the processing breakthrough of making the first two-phase, finely
laminated structures of Mg alloys, by first understanding the mechanisms by
which these materials deform under applied load. One key element that fuels this
project is the use of a new Mg alloy, called Mg500, which does not contain rare
earth elements, and has very low aluminum content, making it an excellent
candidate for many applications. The extraordinarily high density of
Mg500/Niobium interfaces will permit multiple functions not possible in Mg-based
materials to date. Understanding the deformation of these materials systems will
make a critical contribution to the next generation of lightweight structural
materials for automotive and aerospace applications. In addition, this research
program will provide excellent educational opportunities for students, and
training for the next generation of scientists and engineers in both academic
and industrial settings. The new knowledge derived from this work will be
disseminated broadly though software, tutorials and cloud-based Apps for data
distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific goals of this research program
are to advance understanding on how hexagonal close-packed (HCP)/body-centered
cubic (BCC) interfaces can control slip and twinning in novel ultra-fine
laminated metallic composites and, as a result, radically enhance strength and
formability. It is a cooperative program that joins the University of California
at Santa Barbara, the University of New Hampshire, and the industrial partner,
nanoMAG, LLC. The research activities are driven by hypotheses that HCP/BCC
interfaces can thwart macroscopic instabilities and promote uniform deformation
and formability. Together this university-industry team will carry out an
integrated experimental and modeling strategy to understand how Mg500/Nb
(HCP/BCC) interfaces can control plasticity processes, enabling homogeneous
deformation of high-strength (&gt;1 GPa) Mg-based sheets to moderate strains
(&gt; 5%). This understanding will be integrated into a predictive multi-scale,
interface-sensitive model for linking microstructural evolution during
processing with mechanical performance.