* 1728419
* Mechanics and Kinetics of Void Swelling in Irradiated Nanoporous Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Anter El-Azab, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 08/31/2022
* USD 591,030.00

There is a significant demand for the discovery of advanced materials that can
survive high temperature and high-dose radiations for next generation nuclear
reactors. Under these operating conditions, a large number of metallic materials
develop voids that result in embrittlement and consequent failure. Void swelling
occurs as radiation induces atomic defects that migrate elsewhere leaving
clusters of vacant positions behind. These vacancy clusters form voids and grow
continuously. The principal investigators' initial study shows just the opposite
phenomenon, however: that is, voids in metals with existing nanoscale pores
shrink rather than expand during radiation. This research will investigate this
phenomenon and may add radically to the understanding of fundamental mechanisms
of radiation damage mitigation. A positive outcome will enhance the design of
radiation tolerant nanoporous materials for advanced nuclear energy systems. In
this project, special effort will be made to recruit female and other minority
students. Additionally, collaborations with scientists at Argonne National
Laboratories and Los Alamos National Laboratory will offer graduate students
summer research experience at premier national labs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to understand, via a combination of modeling and
experiments, the fundamental mechanisms through which deliberately introduced
nanovoids in nanoporous metallic materials can absorb and eliminate radiation
induced point defects, and ultimately curtail void swelling significantly and
alleviate radiation embrittlement. The innovative concepts put forward here are
the possibility of utilizing nanovoids and their stress field to trap, store and
annihilate various defect species associated with radiation damage, and restore
the capability to absorb defects continuously. Furthermore, nanoporous metals
may have enhanced plasticity in comparison to radiation embrittlement frequently
observed in bulk fully-dense counterparts. This study integrates in situ
radiation experiments with phase field modeling to investigate the kinetics of
void swelling, and combine in situ nanomechanical testing with dislocation
dynamics modeling to explore mechanics and plasticity of irradiated nanoporous
metals.