* 1728481
* Fundamental Research on a Novel Double-Pulse Laser Micro Sintering Technology
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Benxin Wu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2022
* USD 359,576.00

Selective laser sintering (SLS) is an additive manufacturing process capable of
rapidly and flexibly producing complex metallic parts. An SLS process, which is
set up to manufacture micron sized components or components with micron scale
features, can be called 'laser micro sintering' (LMS). One challenge associated
with LMS is that fully dense metallic components are difficult to achieve.
Through this award a novel double-pulse laser micro sintering process (DP-LMS)
will be investigated. This new process has the potential to enhance the
densification (reduce internal voids), and hence improve the mechanical
properties of parts produced by LMS. The research focuses on understanding the
material's transient responses during the DP-LMS process, and subsequently
establishing the relevant process-structure-property relationships. The
knowledge gained is also potentially relevant to other material processing and
synthesis processes involving metal powder sintering. Successful implementation
of the DP-LMS process has great potential to positively impact applications that
may benefit from rapid and flexible fabrication of complex components with
micron scale aspects such as MEMS, or micro medical devices. It is expected that
both graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in the research, and
that process principles and/or new findings will be incorporated directly into a
current manufacturing classes and a video that will be made available to the
public. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The specific research objectives are: (1) to test
the hypothesis that during DP-LMS, suitably sending the two pulses can
effectively help material densification with little increase of its surface
roughness; (2) fundamentally understand the heat transfer, phase change, melt
flow, and densification process in the target material during DP-LMS; and (3)
establish the process-structure-property relationships for the DP-LMS process.
The research tasks include: (1) in-situ study of the DP-LMS process using fast
pyrometry, fast imaging, and emission spectroscopy to measure target
temperatures, surface morphology variations, and plasma properties. (2)
Development of a continuum-mechanics based model to understand the thermal and
fluid transport and phase changes in the target material during the DP-LMS
process. The model will be validated by the experimental measurements in task 1.
And (3), characterization of the sintered material microstructures and
mechanical properties through optical and electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction
and hardness testing.