* 1728096
* Collaborative Research: Engineering Fully Biobased Foams for the Building Industry
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Nandika D'Souza, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 06/30/2022
* USD 326,285.00

Buildings meet a wide array of personal and societal needs but present large
environmental challenges. They consume roughly 40 percent of US energy resources
annually and 40 percent of carbon dioxide emissions. While certain materials are
reused or recycled after their removal from service, most are landfilled as
construction and demolition waste. Wood, plastics, and drywall make up a
significant portion of construction and demolition waste. These materials are
often used for short durations, are resistant to degradation in landfills, and
are energy intensive to separate and recycle. Many can potentially be replaced
by rapidly renewable and biodegradable (when out of service) materials. The aim
of this project is to engineer a new class of fully recyclable rigid insulating
material for buildings that contribute to energy-efficient building operations,
improved indoor sound and potentially air quality, and have a high likelihood of
adoption by the construction industry. Through the collaboration between
University of North Texas and Stanford, a diverse cohort of undergraduate and
graduate students will be educated. This research will be incorporated into
relevant courses and online publically accessible learning modules. Furthermore,
this project presents a curious topic to engage young minds in K-12 outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this collaborative research
project is to engineer a fully bio-resourced composite foam to achieve tunable
concurrent thermal, acoustic and mechanical performance for building
applications. The technical approach will combine the expertise of materials,
chemical and structural engineers to (1) use renewable particulates to
investigate the impact of particle size, shape and porosity on cellular
formation of biocomposite foams, (2) explore interfacial chemistry of the
particulates to impact particle-foam dispersion and cellular architecture, and
(3) identify methods of using different polymers, blends and foaming conditions
to achieve closed-cell and mixed open and closed-cell foams through a novel
supercritical carbon dioxide batch processing method that is conducive to the
fabrication of building-scale panels. The impact of moisture on thermal,
acoustic and mechanical properties will also be investigated to understand in-
service behavior. Performance metrics will initially target those of existing
rigid insulating foams used in residential construction and will be extended to
the evaluation of new material assemblies for building components. This research
will (1) lead to new understanding of filler-polymer interactions, cell
nucleation, bubble growth and their consequences on transport such as moisture,
thermal and acoustic phenomena, (2) advance understanding of fully bio-based
materials in cellular structures that are vital to all areas of lightweight and
functional materials, and (3) offer renewable alternatives to fields where
cellular structures find multiple uses ranging from biomedical to transportation
as well as building science.