* 1728921
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: HybriD3: Discovery, Design, Dissemination of Organic-Inorganic Hybrid Semiconductor Materials for Optoelectronic Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Wei You, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2022
* USD 562,500.00

Non-technical Description: This project, called "HybriD3", aims to accelerate
the Design, Discovery, and Dissemination of new crystalline organic-inorganic
hybrid semiconductors. The materials to be considered generally consist of a
suitable inorganic semiconductor that forms a connected framework, into which
targeted organic components integrate. While organic materials have unique
attributes, including light weight, mechanical flexibility and possible strong
light emission, inorganic systems offer their own unique strengths related to
excellent semiconducting and optical characteristics. Notably, while traditional
semiconductors (e.g., silicon) are strictly inorganic, organic-inorganic hybrids
open up the full arsenal of synthetic organic chemistry for tuning and refining
the resulting materials and associated properties. Specifically, the current
project targets the paradigm of so-called organic-inorganic (or hybrid)
perovskites, aiming to identify new materials opportunities for light-emitting
diodes, with better suitability for addressing the important target of energy-
efficient lighting and cost-effective manufacturing techniques. However, the
materials space to be explored is general, versatile, not yet nearly
exhaustively charted, and will likely expose materials with very different,
unprecedented and tunable functionality, as the research focuses on
understanding previously unexplored interactions between the organic and
inorganic hybrid components. A key deliverable for dissemination will be a
comprehensive, easily-browsable database of existing, predicted and newly
synthesized organic-inorganic hybrids to ensure accelerated development of this
materials space among the wider community of researchers now converging around
this materials class.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: HybriD3 is an
integrated, multi-pronged effort, leveraging theory and computation, synthesis,
spectroscopy and optoelectronic device prototyping. The activity will create and
leverage techniques for more effective computational predictions of organic-
inorganic hybrid materials, their carrier properties and excitations, for
targeted synthesis and characterization of identified materials prospects. The
project will also target proof-of-concept device (primarily light emission)
demonstration for the developed hybrid materials. It will thus enable better
understanding of key physical processes such as carrier transport, charge/energy
transfer between the organic and inorganic sub-components, carrier
recombination, and how these properties can be manipulated by refining
structure, synthesis and/or deposition of the thin-films or bulk crystals. The
planned database will play a long-term role as a go-to resource for an entire
community. The PIs will also promote the HybriD3 data for inclusion in broader
community databases such as the Materials Project, aflowlib, or the NoMaD Data
Repository. Finally, sustainable data dissemination will be ensured by a
collaboration with industry leader Springer Materials, to include the HybriD3
data in their product. The PIs also plan to release the HybriD3-developed
software and database as open source and build a user community around the
project by ensuring that interested researchers are able to contribute to the
HybriD3-developed codebase. This will allow a wider growth of the project. This
aspect is of special interest to the software cluster in the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure, which has provided co-funding for this award.