* 1728168
* Developmental and interpersonal antecedents of parenting orientations and behavior: A life history perspective
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Jeffry Simpson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 330,000.00

Few events in life rival the importance of raising children. Compared to most
species, humans invest heavily in their children, but some parents are
neglectful, indifferent, or even hostile toward their children. This project
examines why certain parents tend to invest more versus less time, effort,
attention, support, and resources in their children. Little is currently known
about: (a) what kinds of early-life events/experiences lead individuals to
become more versus less investing parents in adulthood and (b) how parental
investment is affected by the quality of the relationship with one's partner. In
addition, the role that fathers play in parenting has been under studied, and
relatively little is known about how partners co-parent their children as a
function of their early-life experiences or the quality of their relationship.
This research addresses these issues and is aimed at filling these critical gaps
in knowledge and understanding of parenting practices and
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two studies will address these aims. In Study 1,
new codings and analyses will be conducted on a unique longitudinal sample that
has lifespan data on parenting outcomes (the Minnesota Longitudinal Study of
Risk and Adaptation; MLSRA). Participants in this sample have been continuously
followed from before birth into middle adulthood. The MLSRA has excellent
measures of how individuals were treated as children, what happened to them
across development, and how they are parenting their own children years later in
adulthood. This study will examine how certain early life experiences (e.g., the
amount of life stress, the occurrence of maltreatment) prospectively predict
parents' views about investing time, effort, and resources in their children and
how they actually behave (based on video-recordings) when interacting with their
children. Study 2 is a new laboratory study of parenting behavior involving
mothers, fathers, and their first-born toddlers. This study, which involves
video-recording mothers, fathers, and their toddler engaging in parenting tasks,
will: (a) examine whether certain types of perceived early-life stress are
associated with parenting attitudes and behavior in a family context, (b)
investigate whether the quality of the partners' relationship buffers exposure
to early-life stress, (c) identify whether certain types of perceived early-life
stress are associated with fathers' and mothers' implicit (vs. explicit)
parenting attitudes, and (d) determine whether implicit parenting attitudes
mediate the relation between early-life stress and parenting attitudes and
behavior.