* 1728360
* GOALI: Enabling Ultra-Low Viscosity Lubricants Through Fundamental Understanding of Additive Interactions and Tribofilm Growth Mechanisms: An In-Situ Study
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Robert Carpick, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2021
* USD 383,819.00

Automobile engine oils typically include several different performance
additives, each of which serves a crucial role in improving fuel efficiency and
engine reliability. One of the additive types that are routinely added to such
lubricants are anti-wear additives, which are required to reduce wear and
failure when metal-on-metal contact occurs between the various parts within
automobile engines. One such additive, a molecule based on a combination of
zinc, sulfur, phosphorous, oxygen, and hydrocarbons, is so effective at reducing
wear while being inexpensive to produce that it is used in nearly every
automotive engine oil. This molecule works by forming surface films at certain
contact points within the engine. These films serve as a protective cushion for
the underlying metal parts, protecting them from wear. Despite its widespread
use, it remains unclear how this molecule generates these protective films.
Increasingly, automotive lubricants are being formulated with lower viscosities
which help improve fuel economy and reduce undesirable emissions. Unfortunately,
the molecules used to formulate these lower viscosity oils can interfere with
the anti-wear molecule?s ability to generate protective films and provide
adequate wear protection. This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) research aims to contribute to solving this problem by using
novel nanotechnology methods to improve our understanding of how the anti-wear
protective films are formed and how their formation is affected by interactions
with other types of additives. Findings of this research will inform the design
of next-generation automotive lubricants and will thus have a direct impact on
the U.S. economy through improved energy saving, reductions in maintenance-
related costs, and reduction of undesirable emissions.

In this research, a quantitative kinetic and thermodynamic understanding of
anti-wear tribofilm formation mechanisms will be formulated using novel in-situ
atomic force microscopy methods, recently developed at UPenn. In-situ atomic
force microscopy enables the direct probe of nanoscale mechanochemistry of zinc
dialkyldithiophosphate additives (known as ZDDP-based additives) which drives
formation of tribofilms, as well as their interactions with novel basestock and
co-additives including molybdenum-based friction modifiers and dispersants.
Synergism or antagonism between anti-wear additives and co-additive chemistries
will be identified and understood through measurement and interpretation of
tribofilm growth kinetics. Together with ex-situ chemical and structural
characterization techniques at UPenn, as well as lubricant expertise and
component-scale testing at ExxonMobil, this research will help enable predictive
design, development, and implementation of advanced formulations for next-
generation lubricants. By identifying how co-additives affect the fundamental
mechanisms of tribofilm growth, this research will in the longer-term help
identify sulfur and phosphorous-free anti-wear additives. Sulfur and phosphorous
are known to have deleterious impacts on automotive emissions, and thus
developing alternatives to ZDDP additives is crucial for further reducing
automotive emissions.