* 1728554
* Reducing Chemical Wear of Single Crystal Diamond Tools Cutting Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Glenn Boreman, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 09/30/2023
* USD 338,615.00

Next-generation freeform optical components are often made from metal molds
which themselves are cut on high quality machines using synthetic single crystal
diamonds (SCD). Despite being the hardest known tool material, diamond wears
surprisingly quickly when cutting some metals due to chemical interactions. This
research will investigate aspects of those interactions, such as temperatures in
cutting which are extremely difficult to measure at the length scale of the
diamond/workpiece interaction. The temperatures can be predicted, using models
with some embedded assumptions; methods developed for microsystems manufacturing
will be used to deposit temperature sensors on the diamond tool surfaces and
measure temperature distributions. These measurements will be used to validate
the models. Chemical wear rate as a function of diamond orientation will be
measured using specially manufactured tools and as a function of oxygen
concentration by machining in a controlled-atmosphere chamber. Quantitative
prediction of diamond wear rates could enable cost effective production of
longer life optical molds in alloys not currently considered "diamond
machinable". Such molds will enable manufacturing of next generation structured
and freeform optical surfaces for applications ranging from energy efficient
illumination to compact imaging systems for virtual reality, heads-up displays,
and night vision. Improvements in the scientific understanding of diamond
machining can positively impact a number of manufacturing sectors, including
automotive, aerospace, consumer electronics and defense. Technology
dissemination will be through publications, professional societies, industry
consortia such as the NSF I/UCRC Center for Freeform Optics, and through
educational activities. UNC Charlotte is a minority serving institution, and
therefore outreach to underrepresented minorities for undergraduate and graduate
research opportunities should be fruitful. Results will be integrated into
graduate and undergraduate courses. In sophomore manufacturing, "cool"
applications such as heads-up displays and future generations of virtual reality
spark interest, while the example that the hardest material cannot cut one of
the softest metals (cerium) helps keep the students engaged.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will seek an improved fundamental
understanding of the thermal, chemical and mechanical conditions leading to
single crystal diamond tool wear during metal alloy machining, with the goal of
allowing process improvement. Diamond tool tip temperatures are a significant
factor in chemical tool wear, but they are notoriously difficult to measure
during cutting. Validated thermal models are required. Validated temperatures
will be used to determine activation energies for the chemical wear reaction
using the Arrhenius equation, providing predictive understanding of tool wear
under different conditions. The high thermal conductivity of diamond
significantly affects modelled temperature distributions and should therefore
affect the reaction rates. Synthetic diamonds are now being produced with
thermal conductivities around 30% higher than previously available. Wear of
tools made from diamonds with measured, different thermal conductivities will be
tested by using diamonds sourced from different suppliers and produced through
different means. The crystallographic orientation of a diamond affects
mechanical wear and diamond etching rates by some molten metals. To determine
the effect of diamond orientation on chemical wear, the wear rates for SCD tools
of varying orientation when cutting reactive alloys will be tested. An
environmental chamber enclosing a turning operation with a diamond tool will
address the importance of oxygen on diamond wear. Freeform optics are the next
revolution in optical capabilities. Their use in illumination improves energy
efficiency and reduces light pollution. More compact, higher performance imaging
systems enable smaller, lighter systems ranging from multispectral military
systems to CubeSat missions. The scientific understanding of the manufacturing
process developed here will enable an ever broadening range of cost effective
applications. The results will be disseminated through industry interactions and
publications/presentations at the Optical Society of America, SPIE (the
international society for optics and photonics), the American Society for
precision Engineering, and CIRP (The International Academy for Production
Engineering). UNC Charlotte is dedicated to recruitment and retention of under-
represented groups who will encounter the results of this research in
undergraduate (Manufacturing Systems (core ME) and Metrology and Precision
Engineering (elective)) and graduate classes (Introduction to Optical
Fabrication and Testing, Advanced Surface Finish).