* 1728307
* A Fundamental Framework for the Robust Stabilization of Gas Turbine  Combustion Instability
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Hosam Fathy, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 07/31/2021
* USD 350,000.00

This project addresses the challenge of actively controlling unstable pressure
oscillations occurring in combustion systems. While the research focuses on gas
turbines applications it can have impact on other combustion devices like
industrial process furnaces and boilers. For all of these systems, there is a
strong societal push to improve combustion efficiency, reduce harmful emissions
such as nitrogen oxides, and accommodate variations in consumer power demand.
The work of this project will drive improvements in combustion system stability,
reliability, durability, and emissions. These improvements will be especially
valuable for the stationary gas turbines providing reserve generation capacity
to the power grid. Achieving these goals of high efficiency and low emissions
often involves operating closer to combustion instability. Unstable combustion
can be disruptive and physically damaging, and is triggered when the dynamics of
heat release, fluid mechanics, and acoustic wave propagation are mutually
reinforcing. There is a rich existing literature that provides insights into the
physics behind combustion instability, and also shows that active control can
mitigate this instability. However, many of the control strategies over-simplify
the modeled dynamics and do not take advantage of advanced control strategies
and consequently prevent active combustion stability control from having a
practical/industrial impact commensurate with previous laboratory research
successes. This project will lead to novel formulations for mathematically
describing the combustion phenomena and innovative ways to control instabilities
occurring during the combustion process with experimental validation. The
research plan includes the participation of both undergraduate and graduate
students through a unique multi-disciplinary training opportunity. An
undergraduate-level laboratory experiment will be developed from this work,
providing a large number of undergraduate engineering students with the
opportunity to apply nonlinear control theory to critical power
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will furnish a novel fundamental
framework for robust, multivariable, combined passive/active combustion
stabilization during both steady-state and transient operation, and validate it
using a flexible laboratory combustion rig. The framework will utilize nonlinear
model reduction to develop control-oriented, reduced models of combustion
instability that include more accurate physics, validated using experiments.
Further, it will analyze the degree to which combustion modeling and
parameterization uncertainties can penalize the performance, stability, and
robustness of model-based combustion control. The framework utilizes robust,
multivariable control theory to design combustion control algorithms capable of
exploiting multiple sensors and actuators. Nonlinear model predictive control
will stabilize combustion dynamics not just around a particular operating
condition, but also during transient switching between operating conditions.
Finally, the research will exploit combined design/control optimization to
develop passive combustor designs inherently conducive to active stabilization.
The broader impacts of this work will reach the technical community, industry,
and students at both the graduate and undergraduate level. The technical
progress made in this work will demonstrate the use of robust, multivariable
control theory for both instability control and design of better combustor
systems. The potential for improving combustor design can be translated to
industrial use and gas turbine combustor design.