* 1728358
* Generic Corrosion Damage Modeling Frameworks for Traditional and Alternative Cementitous Matrices
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Burkan Isgor, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 06/30/2022
* USD 398,897.00

Corrosion of steel reinforcement is one of the most prevalent deterioration
mechanisms in concrete structures, and the annual cost of corrosion of civil
infrastructure in the United States is estimated to be around $25 billion.
Therefore, development of innovative, inexpensive, and ubiquitously effective
corrosion mitigation strategies in the form of new corrosion-resistant steels,
corrosion inhibitors, and alternative cements, is important. Although the
development of these materials have been gaining attention, their widespread
adoption has been limited due to uncertainties associated with their long-term
durability and performance concerns. Trial-and-error procedures to produce new
and affordable materials to resist steel corrosion in concrete have been, to a
large degree, ineffective. In this work, the PIs will establish a computer-
modeling framework that will evaluate these uncertainties and intelligently
predict the corrosion behavior of new materials. This research will have far-
reaching social and economic impacts by enabling researchers and material
developers with a modeling framework to design, optimize, and assess new
materials to mitigate issues associated with steel corrosion in reinforced
concrete structures in a cost effective way. The PI will continue outreach
through the university's Summer Experience in Science and Engineering for Youth
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to establish a
fully coupled generic reaction-transport-corrosion-damage modeling framework for
simulating corrosion-induced deterioration of reinforced concrete structural
components. The unique feature of the study is the coupling of thermodynamic
calculations to model reactions that can take place in concrete with transport,
corrosion and damage phenomena. The formation of corrosion products and their
distribution within the porous microstructure will be simulated in concrete with
and without corrosion induced cracks. The generic nature of thermodynamic
calculations to model reactions allows the simulation of corrosion-induced
damage in structural components produced with traditional and alternative
binders. These models are also important for existing structural systems since
they help early identification of damage due to steel corrosion so that pre-
emptive mitigation actions can be pursued and necessary repairs can be
prioritized. This research requires a multi-disciplinary approach to make the
modeling framework public so that researchers from these different backgrounds
in the general engineering community can use, expand or apply it in related
fields of investigation.