* 1728975
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Measuring Legal Quality on the U.S. Supreme Court
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Elizabeth Lane, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2019
* USD 31,000.00

The U.S. Supreme Court decides cases by way of an adversarial system of justice.
In particular, lawyers from opposing sides of each case write legal briefs that
attempt to persuade the justices that their view of the law is the most correct.
To make their case, lawyers base their legal arguments in existing court
decisions, known as precedent. Because some precedent is more relevant and
influential than others, there will be differences in the overall strength of
the lawyer's arguments. Consequently, this project will generate an empirical
measure of legal quality that identifies the strength (or weakness) of each
side's legal arguments in a case.

To generate this measure of legal quality, this project will draw extensively
from the archival materials of retired Supreme Court justices. To do so, the
project will examine bench memoranda, which are documents prepared by each
justice's law clerks. The project will digitally photograph, content analyze,
and make publicly available over 6,000 bench memoranda spanning nearly a dozen
retired justices, from 1946-1994. These bench memoranda offer an evaluation of
each side's legal arguments, based on the information provided in the legal
briefs submitted by the parties, as well as that provided in the amicus curiae
briefs, in each case. This project will use the information from the bench
memoranda to evaluate and then create a measure of legal quality based on
multiple aspects of legal doctrine. This resulting empirical measure, when
combined with existing available data, will enable assessment of the impact of
law on the Supreme Court's decision making process.