* 1728612
* Evaluation of Liquefaction Potential of Saturated Granular Soils under Partial Drainage Conditions
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Usama El Shamy, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 07/31/2022
* USD 322,643.00

The U.S. and other seismically active areas around the world have sustained
considerable damage resulting from earthquake-induced site liquefaction that was
associated with very costly damage to port facilities, bridges, dams, buried
pipes, and buildings of all types. The Earthquake Engineering Research Institute
reports that the direct cost of losses in the built environment and the indirect
economic cost of a major earthquake that strikes a major urban area could easily
exceed 100 billion dollars. Such losses could be significantly reduced if the
performance of soil systems could be reliably predicted and current design and
remediation measures improved. This project addresses a critical gap in
engineering knowledge related to the evaluation of the liquefaction potential of
soil deposits under realistic drainage conditions. This undertaking will help in
reducing the uncertainty and large costs associated with site liquefaction
hazards. The research and education activities fall within the national
interest. They have the potential to achieve increased economic competitiveness
through better assessment of liquefaction potential. The knowledge gained from
this research would prevent future loss of lives and contribute to the welfare
of the American public. The research will contribute to the progress of
earthquake engineering and science. The activities would also lead to a globally
competitive American STEM workforce equipped with the latest development in
high-performance computational modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liquefaction is a
result of water pressure build-up due to squeezing of pore space during rapid
earthquake loading that, in turn, reduces soil strength. The mechanism of pore-
pressure development during cyclic loading has been mainly explained based on
the analogy between cyclic contraction of fully drained sands and pore pressure
generation in undrained conditions. However, depending on several factors such
as external loading rate, soil permeability and in-situ pore-pressure boundary
conditions, different drainage conditions are expected in the field. These
conditions may lead to a partial drainage situation in which simultaneous change
in pore volume and in pore water pressure may occur during shearing. Under these
conditions, soils originally believed to be non-liquefiable such as dense sand,
may actually experience instability. This project aims at providing accurate
characterization of pore fluid migration during seismic loading of a soil
deposit and assessing liquefaction potential under realistic drainage
conditions. The high-performance computing (HPC) resources of the
cyberinfrastructure component of the NSF-supported NHERI enable the development
of a universal predictive tool capable of seamless modeling of soil systems at
an unprecedented resolution. High-fidelity fully-coupled micromechanical
computational simulations utilizing parallel computing are planned in this
effort to provide much-needed answers to questions related to understanding the
mechanical processes that control the evolution of pore pressure during seismic
loading.