* 1728928
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Diversity and Judicial Legitimacy in State Courts
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2018
* Chris Bonneau, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Brian Bornstein
* 06/30/2018
* USD 19,160.00

The National Center for State Courts recognizes that the lack of racial and
gender diversity on the bench continues to be a problem in many states. The
current project is meant to answer the following research questions: What are
citizens? representation expectations of state court judges? What are the
consequences of the underrepresentation of women and racial minorities in state
courts? How does the lack of diversity on state benches affect public attitudes
toward judicial decisions and the justice system more broadly? What is the
relative impact of descriptive and substantive representation on legitimacy and
how does this differ based on different individual expectations?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research tests hypotheses derived from legitimacy
theory, social identity theory, and expectancy theory. The research plan
involves an experimental design utilizing two experiments embedded in a survey
of a sample of US adults. Much of the underpinning of effective citizenship and
good governance relies on the legitimacy accorded to institutions of the state.
This is particularly so for courts, which often have counter-majoritarian
elements inherent in their institutional characteristics. This research tests on
the sources of variation in legitimacy among state courts.