* 1728451
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Dispute Resolution within Specialized Judiciary Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2019
* John Upton, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2019
* USD 10,205.00

Scholarly examinations of legal systems have established that their efficacy
depends on widespread conviction in their fairness, but have struggled to
understand what influence claims of indigenous rights and sovereignty have on
the judicial process. States have developed various strategies for the
resolution of legal conflicts, including the passage of special domestic laws
protecting indigenous peoples, adherence to international norms pertaining to
indigenous and community rights, and the establishment of special court bodies
to incorporate indigenous notions of justice. This research project, which
trains a student in the methods of empirical, scientific data collection and
analysis, explores the rule-making capacities of special tribunals designed to
resolve disputes between the state and indigenous communities. Specifically, by
concentrating on cross-cultural disputes, the project considers what these
tribunals do to establish an effectively functioning and trusted legal system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;J. Christopher Upton, under the supervision of Dr. Sara
Friedman of the Indiana University, will explore what strategies are used in
special tribunals, as boundary organizations mediating distinct social contexts,
to resolve legal disputes. This research will be conducted in Taiwan where
indigenous issues have recently emerged at the forefront of a national
conversation about multiculturalism and national sovereignty. Taiwan occupies an
anomalous place in the international system as a democratic self-ruling state
that does not enjoy formal recognition from most other countries. Indigenous
issues have unique salience in this context insofar as visible compliance with
international norms provides an opportunity for Taiwan to assert itself on the
world platform. As a result, Taiwan has recently created a special set of
indigenous courts. These ad hoc tribunals are integrated into the domestic court
system and are designed to resolve disputes involving indigenous litigants with
greater sensitivity to their cultural differences. Using ethnographic methods,
the investigators will study how these courts craft rules about indigenous
customary practices. The investigators will examine the interactions of judges,
lawyers, and indigenous litigants as they resolve disputes about indigenous
customary practices, exploring how judicial proceedings open a space for rule-
making to be a co-constitutive process, rather than simply as legal rights
granted in a top-down fashion by the state. The research will be focused on a
particular tribunal, collecting data over 12 months through participant
observation in judicial proceedings; interviewing judges, lawyers, and
indigenous litigants; working with local lawyers handling cases involving
contentious indigenous practices; and reviewing case decisions. In sum, this
research project considers the dynamic process of creating rules about
indigenous practices using a specialized judiciary and what these specialized
courts do to advance indigenous legal protections and secure a functioning and
trusted legal system.