* 1728764
* Using Stress and Warning to Improve Eyewitness Memory
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Ayanna Thomas, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 08/31/2020
* USD 366,968.00

Faulty eyewitness reports have contributed to approximately 70% of wrongful
convictions in the United States (Innocence Project, 2016). What gives rise to
such faulty reports? Research has revealed that eyewitness memory can be
contaminated by false or inaccurate information (misinformation). Exposure to
misinformation can occur through the course of interviews and questioning,
discussions with co-witnesses, or from information garnered from the media and
other external sources. Given that these are the circumstances routinely faced
by eyewitnesses, it is imperative that researchers understand how to mitigate
susceptibility to misinformation so that such memory errors can be avoided. This
project aims to identify a resource-minimal, evidence-based practice that can be
employed to protect the integrity of eyewitness memory reports. The research
will focus on the effects of warning eyewitnesses about the threat of
misinformation. Warnings have previously been incorporated into other areas of
legal practice with great success. For example, the Department of Justice (1999)
recommended that law officials warn eyewitnesses that a guilty suspect may not
be present prior to conducting a lineup -- a practice that significantly reduces
false identifications. By 2013, approximately 90% of surveyed police departments
adopted this practice. The current project uses a cognitive and neural approach
to test whether a similar practice can reduce faulty eyewitness reports. The
research team will disseminate the results through seminars with local legal
communities to assure the impact of this research on the public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research reveals that memory errors can be reduced when
eyewitnesses are warned that external sources can contaminate memory for an
event. For example, when warned about the veracity of information given to an
eyewitness after an event, participants were less likely to incorporate such
information into memory reports. However, providing a warning after exposure to
false or inaccurate information (misinformation) does not entirely eliminate
misinformation errors. Is there an optimal time to warn eyewitnesses? Experiment
One will reveal the most effective time to warn eyewitness about the threat of
misinformation. Such evidence will be especially useful to the legal community.
Despite a bulk of research on warning in the context of misinformation, no study
has used neuroscientific methods --thus, how warning modulates neural activity
to protect memory remains unknown. Accordingly, Experiment Two will employ
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to examine the manner in which
warning modulates neural activity to ultimately reduce eyewitness memory errors.
This experiment will directly enhance our understanding of the complex
mechanisms that support human memory processes in the context of the eyewitness.
Lastly, it is noteworthy that misinformation errors that are induced by repeated
interviewing have been observed even under optimal conditions for learning and
memory. Thus, the inherent stress experienced by eyewitnesses -- from the onset
of the witnessed event, during the retrieval of such events, and extending to
courtroom testimony -- may pose an even greater risk for memory errors. For this
reason, Experiment Three will assess whether warning can reduce eyewitness
susceptibility to misinformation under conditions of stress.