* 1728172
* Collaborative Research: Novel Measurement of Shear Strength Evolution in Liquefied Soil and Calibration of a Fluid Dynamics-based Constitutive Model for Flow Liquefaction
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Mandar Dewoolkar, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 385,339.00

Countless hydraulic fill and tailings dams, levees, and other slopes contain
loose soils with little or no internal cohesion. This state renders them
vulnerable to failures under seismic events in which the soil becomes
"liquefied." Although large flow failures of such earth structures are uncommon,
the catastrophic consequences of such failures dramatically elevate the
associated risk. Modeling this behavior requires reliable estimates of how the
strength of a liquefying soil evolves to its minimum as internal water pressures
are generated during an earthquake. Of equal importance is understanding how the
soil subsequently regains its strength as water pressures dissipate once shaking
ceases. To date, there are no full-scale field measurements of this strength
evolution to guide model development; therefore, engineers must rely on strength
estimates calculated after the fact from sparse, poorly documented flow failure
case histories. The uncertainty in selecting design values of residual strength
is exacerbated if the soil contains significant amount of fine particles, as
each empirical method suggests a different approach to account for fines. This
project will provide practicing engineers a better understanding of the large-
strain behavior of liquefiable soils, improved estimates of residual shear
strength, and new calibrated modeling tools that are required to make crucial
decisions on high-risk, high-consequence projects involving tens or even
hundreds of millions of dollars. The project's education and technology transfer
plan includes training and mentoring graduate and undergraduate students from
multiple disciplines (geotechnical, mechanical, and electrical engineering, as
well as fluid dynamics).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project
centers on developing a potentially transformative understanding of the shearing
resistance of liquefiable soils (including its evolution during pore pressure
generation, residual strength mobilization, and pore pressure dissipation) in an
environment with greater realism than available in conventional laboratory
tests. Specifically, novel centrifuge models will utilize a thin metal coupon
(plate) pulled through a liquefiable soil before, during, and after shaking to
directly measure the soil's residual strength and strength recovery. By
embedding a pressure transducer in the coupon, it will be possible for the first
time to measure pore pressures directly on the shearing surface in a liquefied
soil. The large number of measurements will allow the researchers to explore the
effects of fines content (soil compressibility), effective stress, and strain
rate on residual strength. Cone penetration resistance and shear wave velocity
will be measured in-situ in the centrifuge models, allowing the researchers to
validate or improve empirical residual strength correlations. In turn, the
physical measurements from the centrifuge testing program will enable the
researchers to calibrate a multi-disciplinary, fluid dynamics-based stress-
strain constitutive model for evaluating liquefaction problems such as flow
slides, debris flows and lateral spreading around pile foundations. This project
will utilize the NHERI Centrifuge facility at the University of California,
Davis.