* 1728061
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Stigma, Civil Society, and Well Being
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Marcia Inhorn, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2018
* USD 24,725.00

Burgeoning scholarship in a variety of international settings suggests causal
connections between social stigma and decreased personal wellbeing. This
decrease appears especially prominent in resource-poor settings where those of
lower socioeconomic status are at greater risk. These detrimental consequences
often affect not only individuals but also the wider communities in which they
live. Recently, studies have begun to examine links between public activism and
individual wellbeing, finding in some cases that participating in such
engagement can have a positive effect on wellbeing. It is therefore important to
study such civil society engagement through its specific links to social stigma.
Does engagement with public activism to fight social stigma increase individual
wellbeing? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out by Yale
University anthropology doctoral student Elizabeth Berk, with guidance from Dr.
Marcia C. Inhorn. The research will be conducted in Lebanon, a middle-income
country with unreliable infrastructure. Unlike other countries in the region,
Lebanon has had an active civil society sector for many decades, making it an
ideal site from which to study stigma, activism, and wellbeing. For this
project, she will be looking at the stigma associated with HIV/AIDS. She will
employ a variety of qualitative research methods, including semi-structured
interviews, participant observation, and textual analysis of a range of media
documents, organizational information, and other materials. She will work with
civil society organizations, and public and private service providers, such as
hospitals and public health organizations, focusing on paid and volunteer
individual service providers, those receiving services, and those outlining
policy for such services. The researcher will evaluate whether involvement with
these groups increases individual wellbeing, or if perhaps other factors, such
as improvement in socioeconomic status or family support, play bigger roles in
augmenting wellbeing. Findings from this research will provide urgently needed
insights into the factors that structure stigma, what efforts have been
successful in overcoming this stigma and improving individual wellbeing, and
what methods might require rethinking.