* 1728563
* Collaborative Research: Evaluating controls on orogenic structural style by constraining the spatio-temporal evolution of a retroarc thrust belt
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* David Pearson, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2022
* USD 172,331.00

Though all continental mountain belts form as continental crust is shortened in
regions of plate convergence, they exhibit major variations in width, elevation,
and types of rocks involved. Given that many of these mountain belts are
associated with some of Earth's most significant geological hazards and host
prolific petroleum and mineral deposits, there is considerable societal and
scientific interest in identifying the main factors responsible for their
differences. This research will test a hypothesis that major differences in
these mountain belts result from variations in the types and strengths of rocks
that are present prior to the beginning of mountain building. This contribution
is significant because it is expected to redefine the relative importance of
these variations in influencing not only the geometry of mountain belts, but
also the mechanisms through which they form. In addition to the scientific
contributions of the project, important societal outcomes include workforce
development through the education of graduate and undergraduate students in an
important science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) discipline. It
fosters scientific literacy of the public through outreach efforts aimed at K-12
students that will result in the training and attraction of students to STEM
careers. The project supports broadening of underrepresented groups in STEM. The
project contributes to STEM educator development for high school teachers in the
northern Rocky Mountain region through the implementation of a field-based
course for high school science teachers in the northern Rockies. Results of the
research will be disseminated through presentations at professional society
meetings and peer-reviewed scientific literature. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
principal investigators will construct a structural, sedimentary, and
thermochronologic record of the spatial and temporal transition in structural
style--"thin-skinned" deformation of primarily sedimentary units or "thick-
skinned" deformation of basement units--in east-central Idaho and southwestern
Montana and compare it to the timing of "Laramide" flat subduction beneath
Wyoming. The central hypothesis to be tested is that the transition in
structural style along the proposed transect, which is outside the classic
Laramide region, developed as a result of the pre-orogenic stratigraphic
architecture of the upper plate. This work will provide a critical test of
whether an intrinsic property of the upper plate, rather than a change in plate
boundary geodynamics such as flat-slab subduction, can be a dominant mechanism
for controlling orogenic structural style. The team will test the central
hypothesis using 1) structural and stratigraphic investigations in east-central
Idaho and southwestern Montana to constrain the spatial pattern of structural
styles and coeval depocenters and 2) thermochronometry of thrust sheets to
constrain the timing of exhumation related to thrusting and coeval foreland
sedimentation. The research design includes zircon and apatite uranium-lead and
(uranium-thorium)/helium dating, as well as apatite fission track
thermochronometry in the context of field-based structural and stratigraphic
investigations; these results will be used to build a regional kinematic model
to evaluate the hypothesized non-flat-slab control on the spatio-temporal
transition in structural style. Results from this work thus have the potential
to transform our knowledge of the causal relationship between thin- and thick-
skinned portions of continental fold-thrust belts and could warrant reevaluation
of the importance of the pre-orogenic upper crustal architecture in affecting
the first order geometries of modern and ancient continental mountain belts.