* 1728918
* Promoting Intergroup Friendships and Reducing Prejudice in Childhood
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Melanie Killen, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 617,725.00

Social exclusion from peer groups and the experience of negative treatment based
on one's group membership (e.g., race, ethnicity, gender, and wealth status) has
long-term negative consequences such as depression, anxiety, and social
withdrawal. Stereotypes and biases that often underlie social exclusion are
entrenched by the time individuals reach adulthood. Thus, the most effective
time for intervention is childhood. This project will implement an intervention
program designed to change children's attitudes and behaviors in ways that
produce greater inclusion and less bias. This intervention will utilize an
innovative web-based interactive application ("app") that will be used in the
classroom along with teacher led in-classroom discussions. Determining how to
promote children's inclusive attitudes towards others in group contexts will
have positive consequences for the classroom environment. The research findings
regarding prejudice reduction, social inclusion and exclusion, and intergroup
attitudes will be disseminated to developmental scientists, educators, teachers,
and parents. The findings from this study will provide a tool for changing
children's attitudes in elementary school classrooms to facilitate school
belonging and academic achievement. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;An experimental
randomized control intervention design will be implemented to evaluate a program
designed to reduce prejudice and promote intergroup friendships among 720
children enrolled in 36 third-, fourth-, and fifth-grade classrooms at 6
schools. The app that will be used to deliver the intervention features a series
of animated scenarios, with voice-over narration, depicting peer encounters in
which children are excluded from an activity by a majority group of peers.
Children are asked to make decisions about inclusion and exclusion and watch the
action unfold. Teacher-led classroom discussions occur immediately after
children are exposed to the app, to enhance an understanding about the
importance of inclusion and positive peer interactions. Pre-test and post-test
measures include assessments of intergroup attitudes and behaviors (e.g.,
perceptions of similarity, reports of peer playmates, social exclusion
evaluations, and stereotypic expectations) and socioemotional wellbeing (e.g.,
school belonging, ethnic identity, and perceived discrimination). Using mixed
modeling, analyses will test the effects of the treatment condition on
intergroup attitudes and socioemotional wellbeing. The investigators predict
that attitudes and behaviors of children in the intervention group will differ
from those in the control group. In addition, the investigators predict that the
greatest benefit of the intervention program for younger children will be a
reduction in negative intergroup attitudes, which start to form in middle
elementary school, and that the greatest benefit for older children will be
their increased sense of school belonging, which starts to diminish in late
elementary school. The goal of this empirical project is to determine how to
promote positive peer relationships in childhood, particularly relationships
with peers from different cultural, racial, and ethnic backgrounds. The
intervention program is expected to facilitate positive learning environments
for all children.