* 1728041
* On the Mechanics of Ripplocations: A New Defect in Layered Solids
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Michel Barsoum, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 412,835.00

Recent discoveries in layered materials have opened new dimensions for tailoring
better materials. Layered materials are ubiquitous in our surroundings; they
encompass graphite, mica, and two-dimensional solids (with an atomic-scale
thickness), among many others. It has long been understood that for solids to
deform, microscopic defects must be present. Up to quite recently these defects
were presumed to be line defects called dislocations, a well-known and studied
material defect. In 2016, however, research suggested that conventional wisdom
was incorrect, or incomplete, regarding the deformation of layered materials. A
potentially new micro-mechanism called a ripplocation, best described as an
atomic scale ripple, was suggested as the governing mechanism. At the
macroscale, a ripplocation would be a carpet ripple. Currently, little is known
about these defects, their mechanics or behavior, and how to leverage them to
create improved materials. This research investigates the mechanics of
ripplocation through an integrated suite of modeling and experimentation at two
length scales. The overall goal integrates fields of mechanics, materials
science, and scientific computing to build a platform to engineer more advanced
materials as well as provide fundamental knowledgebase to the technology sectors
where layers materials are relevant, such as geo-technology and
microelectronics. Also, as part of the research, outreach to high school
students will be made through summer programs, undergraduate and graduate
students from underrepresented groups will be hired to perform research, and
interactive learning modules will be added to the curriculum to educate the next
generation of diverse scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental
differences between ripplocation and dislocation behavior exist and motivate the
current project. According to dislocation theory, when the planes of layered
solid materials are loaded and unloaded edge-on they will either reversibly
deform, and return to their original form without dissipating any energy if it's
an elastic material or they will remain permanently indented. Ripplocation
behavior explains the third observed option, which is the material returning to
its original form, while dissipating considerable amounts of energy. The goal of
this work is to understand ripplocation mechanics at multiple levels, from the
atomic, through molecular modeling and theory, to the macroscopic where layered
solids will be indented. Results from molecular modeling to capture the
fundamental physics of ripplocations will be leveraged to create a new
ripplocation dynamics model. Indentation predictions, including both strength
and microstructural deformation, from the model will be directly compared to and
verified with results from atomistic modeling at the nanoscale and experimental
indentation studies at the microscale. The goal is to show that ripplocation
mechanics are scale invariant and provide a mechanics-based predictive framework
that can be extended to a myriad of other layered materials to enable improved
design strategies.