* 1728970
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Pronominals and Verb Agreement in Inuktitut
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2020
* David Pesetsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 12/31/2020
* USD 16,352.00

A central question in theoretical linguistics concerns the range of linguistic
variation (to what extent languages differ) and language universals (to what
extent languages are fundamentally the same at an abstract level, despite
surface variation). Answering this question requires both detailed investigation
of particular languages and broader cross-linguistic comparison. This project
will investigate sentence structure and word structure in an indigenous language
of North America. Many of the indigenous languages of the Americas are under-
documented; detailed research into the linguistic properties of individual
dialect groups is even more lacking for the dialects of the language targeted in
this study. Specifically, the project will provide a comprehensive description
and analysis of the structural properties of pronouns and pronoun-like verbal
agreement forms and will compare the findings with what is already known about
related and genetically unrelated languages. The documentation will form the
core material analyzed in a doctoral dissertation produced by the CoPI. Broader
impacts include a publicly available deposit of the recordings and
transcriptions at the Alaska Native Language Archive at the University of
Alaska, Fairbanks, as well as the linguistic training of indigenous community
members working on translation and language pedagogy. This, in turn, will aid
the facilitation of dialect-specific language learning materials and thus
contribute towards work in language sustainability.

The CoPI, a doctoral student at the Massachusetts Institute for Technology,
will document and analyze Eastern Canadian Inuktitut, one of a group of Inuit
languages spoken in the Canadian Arctic territory of Nunavut, and which are
related to Eskimo-Aleut languages spoken in Alaska. The work produced in this
project will therefore build a solid empirical foundation for future linguistic
research on Inuktitut and Inuit, as well as for the field of theoretical
linguistics more broadly. The main hypothesis of this project is that the verbal
agreement markers that encode transitive objects in Inuktitut are not canonical
agreement markers, but rather "doubled clitics," pronoun-like elements that co-
occur with objects. Historically, linguistic research on these elements has
focused on European languages; however, evidence for such an approach for
Inuktitut comes from striking distributional and structural parallels with these
better-studied languages. This project will investigate how these clitics
interact with the case system of Inuktitut as a whole, and show how their
absence in other Inuit languages yields a slightly different case system,
despite surface appearances. Variation in the distribution of case morphology
across the Inuit languages is therefore tightly linked to the underlying
structure of the verbal agreement forms. This project will also explore how this
novel approach may be extended to account for other pronoun-related phenomena in
Inuktitut, as well as case systems cross-linguistically.