* 1728056
* Rules based policies, and Intelligence in Strategic Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Aldo Rustichini, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 09/30/2023
* USD 438,270.00

Award Abstract: Rules based Policies, and Intelligence in Strategic Behavior
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies show that decision making, especially
in situations involving strategic interaction, varies with the level of
intelligence, preferences, and personality. However, there is no theoretical
framework to organize these differences. This research project will use
experimental methods to develop and test a cognitive theory of strategic
reasoning and behavior. This research will combine insights from several fields
of study to develop a rules-based theory that explains the role of intelligence
in strategic decision making. The resulting theory will be tested experimentally
to include fMRI data on brain functioning during strategic decision making.
Understanding how intelligence affects strategic and thus, social behavior is
essential input to policy guidance, especially in education. There is convincing
evidence that cognitive skills affect how individuals perform on the job, in
schools, but also more broadly how they behave in society, cooperate, decide to
follow norms, and look for cooperative behavior. Understanding how much of these
outcomes can be modified through appropriate educational policies will not only
improve individual performance but will also have a substantial and positive
effect on building a cohesive and sustainable society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will provide the foundation for a plausible, descriptive, cognitive
model of strategic reasoning and behavior, and test it experimentally. This
model is an essential first step to understanding how Intelligence affects
behavior of individuals in social interactions, particularly in repeated
interactions. The research will combine theory (derived from multiple
disciplines such as game theory, cognitive psychology, complexity theory and
neural networks) and experimental methods, using both behavioral and functional
imaging tools. From academic research point of view, the predictions of this
research will constitute an innovation compared to existing literature in Game
Theory, even with respect to more descriptively accurate models of reasoning
such as automata theories. The predictions will also be important innovations
with respect to specialized research in Cognitive Psychology on rules, for
example, because the rules currently studied are produced by the subject, rather
than assigned by the experimenter. Understanding how Intelligence affects
strategic and thus social behavior will offer guidance to policy, particularly
education policy. Understanding how much of the effect can be modified by
appropriate education policies will have a substantial and positive effect on
building a sustainable, cohesive society.