* 1728412
* Intelligent Soft Robot Mobility in the Real World
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Cagdas Onal, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 07/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

The goal of this project is the creation of soft, snake-like robots that can
navigate through real environments with confined spaces, fragile objects,
clutter, rough and/or granular surfaces. The project includes three research
thrusts, namely modular mechanical design of a segmented snake robot, low-level
algorithms for the robot to execute simple functional motion primitives, and
high-level planning algorithms to construct appropriate sequences of motion
primitives in order to meet mission objectives. Because they can deform in
response to their environment, soft robots can adapt to unexpected circumstances
more robustly than a rigid robot. Their high compliance gives soft robots the
potential to safely and effectively interact with obstacles, and even to use
surrounding objects as aids to locomotion. Robots that embrace touch instead of
avoiding it could transform applications through physical human-robot
partnership. Specifically, the direct use of assistive and intelligent third-
hand devices or soft supernumerary arms could seamlessly provide new
capabilities to workers or the disabled. Human-robot collaboration in industry
could improve efficiency, reduce cost, and increase the global competitiveness
of US manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
endow soft robots with intelligence in navigating real-world environments
autonomously using a hierarchical control approach from low-level functions and
motion primitives to high-level locomotion tasks. The tasks to be accomplished
towards this objective include a modular soft robot architecture with
distributed actuation, high-density deformation sensing, embedded module-level
control, and inter-module communication; control methods to achieve reliable and
repeatable dynamic module responses, to optimize performance over time based on
past iterations, and to provide high-level decision making by stochastic
abstraction and control of the system in its environment through data-driven
modeling; and motion planning and locomotion algorithms to find curvature
bounded trajectories through cluttered environments, exploit contact to achieve
obstacle aided locomotion, and 3-D motion primitives to operate on granular
surfaces.&amp;#8195;