* 1728133
* Reliable and Robust Infant Brain Responses During Face Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Lisa Scott, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2022
* USD 516,424.00

Understanding how to provide quality learning experiences for children is a
priority for parents, educators, clinicians, and policymakers. Significant
effort has been put into designing formal educational programs that promote and
support learning. However, there is surprisingly little known about learning
during the most rapid period of developmental change, the first year of life.
Long before infants speak, the words they hear contribute to detailed perceptual
and conceptual representations of the surrounding world, but we still know
little about how the brain changes in early infancy and how to best support
infants' learning. These gaps in our knowledge limit the extent to which we can
develop and optimize evidence-based early learning programs. The primary goal of
this project is to uncover critical environmental factors that promote
behavioral and brain development, as well as foundational learning skills during
infancy. Knowledge gained from this research will advance our understanding of
the building blocks of learning and how caregivers can best support development
in the first year of life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using both cross-sectional and
longitudinal designs and a constellation of EEG (electroencephalography)
methods, this research will determine the extent to which neural responses,
indicative of learning, change and specialize over time and with experience.
Specifically, the brain responses of 6-, 9-, and 12-month-old infants will be
measured before, during, and after a learning period. During the learning
period, infants will be shown faces or objects and hear names, labels, or
sounds. The first goal of this work is to examine the impact of label learning
on visual perception of faces and objects. The second goal is to better
characterize neural specialization and development across the first year of
life. Finally, the third goal is to identify the most robust and reliable EEG
markers of infant learning by examining differences both within and across
individual infants at different ages. The results of this project could
transform our understanding of the trajectory of infant learning and the link
between language development and perceptual development in the first year of
life. This knowledge is critical for providing infants with a supportive
learning environment that promotes behavioral and brain development as well as
key foundational skills important for later learning.