* 1728525
* Concurrent Stochastic Characterization of Mesoscale Material Heterogeneities and Macroscale Structural Complexities
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,03/31/2019
* Sonjoy Das, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 03/31/2019
* USD 92,261.00

Reliable prediction of structural behavior, particularly for complex and
flexible structural systems, using computer models is often next to impossible
due to missing or un-modeled features and their interactions at multiple length
scales. On one hand, a complex structural system may consist of numerous
subcomponents attached to a primary structural component (e.g., an aircraft wing
or the entire aircraft) that spans to tens of meters. On the other hand, at
finer scales of millimeters and below, presence and variations of micro-defects
(e.g., in the grains of metals and alloys) may need to be summarized and
incorporated into the material models of different structural components due to
their potential influence on their behavior. Existing computational algorithms,
hardware capacity, and memory requirements are not yet capable of precisely
replicating the entirety of complex structural system as described, which may
cause computational predictions to significantly deviate from the actual
behavior. This research investigates how a highly complex structural behavior
may be understood by introducing the concepts of mesoscale uncertainty and
macroscale uncertainty to incorporate the effects of unmodelled features, while
bypassing the extreme level of modeling fidelity which is simply not feasible in
practice. The outcome will facilitate in prescribing improved design guidelines
for new and aged complex structural systems in many applications including
aerospace, mechanical, civil, geotechnical, naval, and biomechanical
applications. As part of the project, the PI will also engage high-school,
undergraduate, graduate, and underrepresented students in various research and
educational activities, such as online self-evaluation testing, journal club
organization, and active learning incorporation in undergraduate teaching.

The objective of this research project is to devise a random matrix theory (RMT)
based predictive framework that can probabilistically characterize missing or
unmodelled features at the scale of a few hundreds of micrometers to tens or
hundreds of meters. The unmodelled features at the mesoscale refer to, for
instance, variations in shapes, orientations, and distribution of material
grains, and presence or absence of micro-cracks in structural materials such as
steel and alloys, while the unmodelled features at the system level allude to
the effects of faulty boundary conditions, imperfect interfaces/joints, and lack
of accurate information about geometrical and material properties of structural
subcomponents. The RMT based probabilistic models are employed here to
incorporate the effects of these features without relying on direct-
randomization of the conventional model parameters (e.g., Young?s modulus,
spring constants, etc.). The project?s approach provides an alternative modeling
approach to the traditional or parametric probabilistic approach, particularly,
for complex systems involving many conventional model parameters.