* 1728933
* DMREF: High Throughput Design of Metallic Glasses with Physically Motivated Descriptors
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Dan Thoma, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,298,636.00

Non-technical Description: Silica-based glasses are familiar to most of us from
our experiences with everything from windows to wineglasses. However, when
cooled quickly enough, some metal alloys can also form a glassy state. Metallic
glasses have attractive properties such as high elastic modulus, excellent
strength, good biocompatibility, and the ability to be processed like plastics.
Applications include packaging, arterial stents, water purification, and Micro-
Electro-Mechanical Systems gears and springs. The slowest cooling rate that
still forms a glass is called the critical cooling rate. Although many metals
can form a glass, only a rare set of alloys have slow enough critical cooling
rate that they can form a significant bulk volume of glassy material, and these
alloys are said to have good glass forming ability. Despite the importance of
these materials and years of research, there are still no rigorous, consistent,
and quantitative rules to predict the actual glass forming ability of a metallic
alloy system. To solve this problem, this project will develop an extensible
materials informatics framework for predicting the glass-forming ability of
metal alloys, and then apply that framework to develop aluminum- and magnesium-
based alloys with improved glass forming ability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: In order to discover new aluminum- and magnesium-based bulk
metallic glasses with superior glass-forming ability, the team will execute a
dual-loop iterative materials design approach. A rapid materials design loop
will provide high-throughput materials discovery by integrating experimental and
simulated data with machine learning methods. An unprecedented body of
experimental data on glass forming ability and basic mechanical properties will
be generated by combinatorial 3D printing synthesis, followed by rapid optical,
microscopy, thermal, and nanomechanical characterization. A similarly unique
database of liquid and glass thermodynamic, kinetic, and structural properties
will be determined by automated, high-throughput ab initio molecular dynamics.
Machine-learning methods, trained on the data and physically motivated
descriptors from existing experiments and the ab initio molecular dynamics
simulation, will search a space of up to hundreds of thousands of potential
alloys for the most promising candidates, which will then be synthesized,
characterized and used to refine the models. Slower descriptor design loop
studies will study select alloys in detail with fluctuation electron microscopy
and extensive simulations to develop improved descriptors, which will then be
incorporated into the rapid materials design loop and further validated by their
predictive ability. This work will produce the first set of large-scale
databases with both true measures of glass forming ability and extensive
thermophysical data from simulations, and integrate them to generate physical
descriptor driven machine-learning models for iterative new metallic glass
search and discovery. The PIs also plan to release the Materials Simulation
Toolkit - Machine Learning (MASTML) as open source and build a user community
around the language by ensuring that interested researchers are able to
contribute to the MASTML codebase. This will allow a wider growth of the
project. This aspect is of special interest to the software cluster in the
Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure, which has provided co-funding for this
award.