* 1728932
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Processes of State Administration in Caring for the Isolated Deceased
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2018
* Sofia Pinedo-Padoch, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2018
* USD 23,532.00

The research funded by this award will investigate a little studied aspect of
contemporary urban life: what happens when people die anonymously. Individuals
once died in multigenerational homes; deaths were mourned by extended family
networks and funerary rituals were observed by kin, friends, and neighbors.
Anthropologists have documented such funerary systems all over the world and
have found that their variability provides one lens through which to understand
the variability of the different societies and cultures. This project asks, how
is death treated differently now that families are smaller and geographically
dispersed? What happens to the dead when more people are living alone and in
cities? Do funerary rituals change and what do these changes tell us about
shifts in kinship and social relations? When the state intervenes in this highly
intimate sphere, caring for the body, property, and memory of the dead, does
this signal a simple extension of state authority or a major shift in the role
of the state bureaucracy? This research is important because it will contribute
to understanding the wide-ranging implications of the global trend to urban
living.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will document and analyze the role of
the state and its network of contractors in laying to rest the isolated dead in
an American city. Princeton University anthropology doctoral candidate Sofia
Pinedo-Padoch, under the supervision of Dr. Carol Greenhouse, will carry out the
research at the Public Administrator's office in New York City. The Public
Administrator is a city agency that intervenes when an individual dies without a
will, family, or other heirs. It is the agency's job to ensure a decedent's body
is laid to rest, and to attend to the distribution and liquidation of any
property and assets. Ms. Pinedo-Padoch will conduct participant observation
research at the Public Administrator's office, as well as within the network of
public and private contractors that assist the agency. She will also carry out
archival research and interviews to trace a sample of cases of individual deaths
from beginning to end, documenting the full process of state activity and the
individuals who become subject to it. The research will produce a comprehensive
portrait of the state's increasingly frequent work as caretaker for the dead,
illuminating what death looks like in a changed, contemporary urban world, and
what that reveals about social and cultural life today.