* 1728524
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Influence of Biomedicalized Addiction Treatment on Mothering Practices
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,11/30/2019
* Lee Hoffer, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2019
* USD 15,015.00

The practice of medicine is rapidly more biomedicalized: highly scientific and
technological, with enhanced access to increased amounts of new medications. The
changes are not strictly medical. Biomedicalized treatment has also created and
entrenched cultural messages focused on reducing risks and optimizing health.
Social science research has shown that this new style of medicine can
significantly influence behavior, both inside and outside the clinical setting.
Findings from research on biomedicalized treatment have led to new questions,
such as whether or not pharmaceutical use affects cultural practices. The
research supported by this award will explore such questions through the lens of
addiction treatment. This project, which trains a graduate in methods of
rigorous, empirically-grounded scientific fieldwork, examines whether addiction
treatment and addiction pharmaceutical use influences mothering practices and
identities. In addition to providing funding for the training of a graduate
student in anthropology, findings will be disseminated to organizations and
individuals involved in optimal health care delivery.

Kelley Kampman, under the supervision of Dr. Lee Hoffer of Case Western
University, will explore what influence biomedicalized addiction treatment has
on mothering practices. Scientific advances in addiction medicine have led to
the creation of new pharmaceuticals, such as Suboxone, and new methodologies
such as medication-assisted treatment (MAT). These new medications are framed as
a way to both treat their disease and improve their mothering practices. Despite
discourses that link the use of addiction medications and the enhancement of
mothering practices, there is little understanding of how mothers respond to
these messages. The objectives of the project are (1) to understand how pregnant
women seeking undergoing addiction treatment understand and respond to an
addiction treatment program, and (2) to examine if and how current addiction
treatment program practices influence mothering practices. Situated in Northeast
Ohio, at the center of the current opioid epidemic, the researcher will conduct
16 months of fieldwork among a purposive sample of program patients (n=40) in a
MAT program and program staff. Data will be collected using a mix of social
science methods including interviews with both patients and their healthcare
providers, surveys, case studies, and participant observation in the treatment
program and outside the program in the women's daily lives. Findings from this
research will improve our understanding of how people interact with
pharmaceuticals, how pharmaceuticals influence cultural behaviors and concepts
of self, and provide information on the lived experiences of pregnancy and
addiction which has largely been absent in research and public policy
discussions.