* 1728370
* SNM: Large-area Printing and Integration of Metal Nanowires and Organic Semiconductors for Stretchable Electronics and Sensors
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Yong Zhu, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,390,220.00

Stretchable electronics and sensors, such as electronic skin, have wide ranging
transformative applications in autonomous artificial intelligence (e.g. robots),
medical diagnostics, and prosthetic devices capable of providing at least the
same level of sensory perception as the biological equivalent. For example, for
electronic skin to meet these expectations, a large number of distributed
tactile sensors that are able to stretch and conform to curvilinear objects are
required. Moreover, electronics that is conformal to human skin and deform in
response to human motion requires stretchability. The functional requirements of
stretchable electronics and sensors can be met through nano-enabled
technologies, but their successful production requires innovation in scalable
manufacturing and integration of processing methods. This Scalable
NanoManufacturing (SNM) research project aims to investigate a scalable
nanomanufacturing approach to fabricate large-area, high-resolution, stretchable
electronics and sensor arrays by heterogeneous integration of metal nanowires
and organic semiconductors. The research conducted as part of this award is
integrated into interdisciplinary education for the involved students, course
curriculum, and K-12 outreach. The project strongly encourages underrepresented
students to participate in all aspects of the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advancing the scalable nanomanufacturing of
stretchable electronic skin requires: (1) stretchable functional materials
(conductors, semiconductors), (2) a manufacturing strategy to integrate
heterogeneous nanomaterials into a stretchable platform, and (3) optimal device
design and integrated operation capabilities in both electronic and mechanical
functionality. To meet these needs, the research investigates metal nanowires
and polymer semiconductor material platforms. Stretchable conductors are
achieved through forming nanowire-elastomer composites. Printing metal nanowires
in large scale with high resolution is challenging. Here nanowire processing
focuses on the fundamental understanding of the nanowire ink properties, ink-
substrate interactions, and exploration of methods such as gravure and
electrohydrodynamic printing. Approaches to achieve high-performance
intrinsically stretchable polymer semiconductors are investigated with a focus
on blending conjugated polymers with a secondary polymer matrix. Polymer
semiconductor processing focuses on a combination of solution casting and
advanced transfer printing methods. Device architecture and integrated
manufacturing strategies are optimized to achieve high performance electronic-
skin.