* 1728165
* A Theoretical Framework for Understanding Strategic Behavior in Systems Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Jitesh Panchal, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 07/31/2022
* USD 502,945.00

The objective of this project is to improve understanding about the impact of
strategic behaviors under incomplete information on systems engineering
projects. The complexity of modern engineering projects requires coordinating
the activities of thousands of individuals across multiple organizations.
Systems engineering tackles this complexity through well-documented processes
for hierarchically decomposing the problem, passing requirements down the
hierarchy, subcontracting, etc. However, such systems engineering processes
typically result in significant cost overruns and schedule slippages. These
represent significant losses to society and, oftentimes, taxpayers (one estimate
values such losses to the U.S. Department of Defense alone at over $200 million
per day). This research project will question assumptions underlying current
systems engineering processes and advance understanding needed to improve
systems engineering practice. To enable further research on this important
problem area, research tools and data produced as part of this project will be
made available freely via web-based repositories. A workshop will be organized
to address research and educational challenges in this area. Results of this
research can impact the development of large-scale engineered systems of any
kind, including aerospace, defense, transportation and energy
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, systems engineering processes
will be modeled as dynamic network games of incomplete information. This will be
accomplished in three modeling steps covering: interactions between engineers in
system and sub-system levels, hierarchical systems engineering processes, and
dynamic systems engineering processes. The overall expected outcomes of this
project are (i) a foundational theory of systems engineering that considers the
strategic decision making and distributed information, and (ii) a theoretical
evaluation of existing systems engineering processes according to various
criteria measuring their robustness to strategic behavior. The specific outcomes
include information systems and reward/penalty structures encountered in
established systems engineering processes, principal and agent utilities capable
of taking into account empirical behavioral characteristics, characterization of
agent design abilities and how they relate to the uncertainty of the process
outcome, network game representation of established hierarchical systems
engineering processes, characterization of hierarchical systems engineering
network game equilibria, multi-stage network game representation of dynamic
systems engineering processes, and characterization of dynamic systems
engineering processes equilibria according to various criteria, e.g., the
organizational utility at equilibrium, the total welfare of subsystem
engineering teams, incentive compatibility, and more. The results of this
project will be disseminated through publications, workshops, open source
software, and an online data repository.