* 1728685
* Collapse Simulation of Shear-Dominated Reinforced Masonry Wall Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* P. Benson Shing, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2020
* USD 499,916.00

Reinforced masonry (RM) wall structures subjected to severe seismic forces can
develop complicated nonlinear behavior involving interaction between steel and
masonry, which have distinctly different mechanical properties. Furthermore, in
a building system, the interaction of structural walls with other elements, such
as walls that are oriented in a different direction, columns carrying gravity
loads, beams, and floor slabs, could lead to nonlinear behavior and collapse
mechanisms that were not anticipated in design. The ability of analytical models
to capture these mechanisms and interactions is essential to have an accurate
assessment of a building's collapse potential. While advanced analytical models
have been developed to simulate the damage mechanisms and nonlinear behavior of
RM structures, their ability to capture the material and component interactions
in a structural system on the verge of collapse has not been validated due to
the lack of experimental data. This research will obtain necessary experimental
data to understand the behavior of RM wall structures up to the point of
collapse, and then will use the data to advance and validate analytical modeling
capabilities. The data acquired and analytical tools developed in this project
will help advance seismic performance assessment methods, resulting in safer and
more cost-efficient RM buildings, and will also benefit the design of reinforced
concrete wall systems, which have similar behavior. The project team, consisting
of the Principal Investigator, one doctoral student, and undergraduate research
assistants, will carry out model development, numerical simulation, large-scale
experimental testing, and data analysis to achieve the aforementioned goals, as
well as disseminate the research results and analytical tools for use in future
research, education, and engineering practice. Experimental data from this
project will be archived and made available in the NSF-supported NHERI Data
Depot (http://www.designsafe-ci.org). Finite element models from this project
will be shared with the NSF-supported NHERI Computational Modeling and
Simulation Center for implementation with their software. The project team will
also collaborate with the NSF-supported NHERI DesignSafe cyberinfrastructure
team to develop a simple user interface for the computational models developed
for a few archetype buildings that can be used by middle and high-school
students to study the influence of different design variables, such as the
amount of vertical and horizontal reinforcement, and the strengths of the
materials, on the seismic performance and the risk of collapse of RM
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main aim of this research is to advance
physics-based computational models to capture the nonlinear behavior of RM wall
systems up to the point of collapse, accounting for the influence of material
and component interactions on the system-level behavior, and to develop large-
scale simulations to assess the collapse margin ratios of RM wall systems. To
this end, large-scale laboratory testing will be conducted to acquire a better
understanding of the behavior of RM wall systems on the verge of collapse, and
to calibrate and validate analytical models. The experimental and numerical
studies will quantify: (1) the influence of wall flanges on the shear strength
and ductility of RM walls, (2) the influence of the coupling forces introduced
by horizontal diaphragms in a structural system on the strength and deformation
capability of the system, and (3) the influence of non-seismic load carrying
walls and columns on collapse resistance. In the experimental program, two to
three one-story, full-scale, RM wall systems will be tested to collapse using
the NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI)
outdoor shake table at the University of California, San Diego. These wall
systems will have different levels of complexity to identify the influence of
non-seismic load carrying elements on the collapse resistance of a wall system.
Once validated by experimental data, refined physics-based models will be used
in a parametric study to understand the influence of different design variables
and structural configurations on the collapse potential of RM buildings under
bi-directional earthquake ground motions. The variables will include wall
spacing and configurations, the strength and stiffness of horizontal diaphragms,
horizontal diaphragm-to-wall connections, and the presence or absence of gravity
columns. Moreover, the ability of simplified analytical models to assess the
collapse margin ratios of RM buildings with incremental dynamic analysis will be
assessed.