* 1728962
* Boston University Conference on Language Development 2017-2021
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Paul Hagstrom, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 07/31/2022
* USD 250,316.00

The Boston University Conference on Language Development (BUCLD) will be held at
Boston University each November from 2017 through 2021. BUCLD is an
internationally recognized meeting of researchers in language acquisition and
development, including first and second language acquisition, language
disorders, bilingualism, and literacy development. Now in its forty-second year,
BUCLD promotes the progress of science by providing a major venue for
dissemination of scholarly findings, for initiation and development of
collaborations, and for professional networking. The conference consists of
approximately 190 presentations selected through peer review, as well as invited
keynote and plenary speakers, two symposia on topics of current interest, a
research funding workshop, a professionalization workshop for students and
postdoctoral scholars, and a publisher exhibit. Attendees number over 500
researchers from around the world, from undergraduates up through senior
faculty. Full ASL interpreting coverage is provided throughout the conference,
and conference proceedings are published soon after the conference. Since 1976,
the faculty and students of Boston University have organized and run the
conference; Dr. Charles Chang, Dr. Sudha Arunachalam, and Dr. Paul Hagstrom lead
the team of organizers for the 2017 conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding
from the National Science Foundation will support education and enhance
accessibility, diversity, and inclusion at BUCLD by subsidizing student travel,
including that of underrepresented minorities, and the time of the student
organizers of the conference, graduate students in Linguistics and allied
fields. Support for student travel will allow student contributions, regularly
among the highest-rated abstract submissions, to be presented at the conference
without undue hardship and will increase the exposure of students to the top
research and researchers in the field in a friendly and interactive environment.
Furthermore, support for student organizers will allow BUCLD to continue to play
an important role in training students as future professionals, including
undergraduates and women.