* 1728044
* Collaborative Research: How Military Service Shapes STEM Trajectories
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Christina Steidl, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2020
* USD 54,308.00

The project will advance scientists' understanding of STEM career trajectories
by exploring the historical and contemporary role of the U.S. military as a
potential career pathway. Specifically, the project analyzes the impact of
educational benefits associated with military service (GI Bill), plus the role
of individual and workplace factors on people's educational and occupational
outcomes. Thus, the project addresses recurrent calls from the Federal
Government and National Academy of Sciences to increase the number of STEM
professionals, diversify the STEM workforce, and optimize the recruitment of
military personnel. Findings from this project will help social scientists
identify the long-term effects of policies and workplace dynamics on degrees and
occupations. Findings will promote national defense and our ability to train the
next generation of STEM scientists, because employers (from Departments of
Defense and Commerce, Veterans Administration, to private-sector) are interested
in hiring individuals with a military background, many of whom are poised to
work in technical/defense fields and classified environments. Findings also will
inform efforts to broaden STEM participation and identify potentially
unanticipated consequences of federal policies designed to broaden access to
higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses the following
questions central to scientific literatures on education and occupations: How
does military service and the educational benefits associated with it shape
individuals? subsequent training and employment in STEM fields? How have era of
service and changing GI Bill benefits affected STEM trajectories among veterans?
How do organizational factors associated with specific military branches
facilitate entry into STEM fields? How does using competing definitions of STEM
fields employed by federal agencies affect the form and magnitude of the above
patterns? To answer these questions, the project employs statistical analysis of
publically available secondary data from the American Community Survey (ACS) and
Department of Defense Demographic Reports. The result will be a newly merged
public-use data set available to researchers that combines Census data with
organizational data on the armed services. Analyses involve sophisticated
statistical models on large samples: For instance, analyses of occupational
trajectories include more than 5 million ACS respondents, including more than
700k veterans. ACS data also facilitate analysis of educational and occupational
patterns among active-duty military personnel, who potentially constitute a
prime target population for recruitment into STEM fields. The project also makes
a methodological contribution by examining how various, competing ways to
operationalize and measure "STEM" used by federal agencies shape conclusions
about the scope and extent of the much-discussed shortage of STEM workers.