* 1728889
* Collaborative Research: Forgiveness, Revenge, and Social Status in Groups
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Stephen Benard, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2019
* USD 104,898.00

Collaborative Research: Forgiveness, Revenge, and Social Status in
Groups&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the social factors that
encourage individuals to pursue either forgiveness or revenge. Vengeful behavior
harms relationships and careers, and invites retaliation or legal sanctions.
Forgiveness avoids these risks, but can instead make the forgiver vulnerable to
exploitation. Understanding why people pursue forgiveness or revenge is an
important scientific puzzle and a pressing practical concern. To answer this
question, the project investigates the conditions under which forgiveness or
revenge will be valued and rewarded in groups. The project contributes to
understanding society by developing an explanation for how forgiving and
vengeful behaviors shape individuals' social standing in groups, and testing
this explanation with rigorous methods. The research combines a nationally
representative survey on Americans' attitudes towards forgiveness and revenge
with laboratory experiments that examines how people behave when they observe
forgiving or vengeful behavior, as well as why people engage in these behaviors
themselves. Given the ubiquity of conflict, the costs of revenge, and the
challenges of forgiveness, the research may have a number of broader impacts.
Broadly, the project speaks to conflicts around issues such as contentious
politics, fan violence, and national identity. By explaining why some groups
will value revenge or forgiveness, the research could help us understand why
some conflicts are resolved quickly (when disputants choose forgiveness) while
others spiral out of control (when disputants choose revenge). By achieving
these goals, the research can help point us towards more effective conflict
resolution strategies. The research also contributes to the training of graduate
and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Past work in understanding
revenge and forgiveness focuses on micro- or macro-level factors, leading
sociologists to call for greater attention to meso-level factors, such as intra
and intergroup processes. Responding to this call, the project develops and
tests hypotheses centered on the idea that, under certain conditions, acts of
forgiveness or revenge produce group benefits, and as a result are viewed as
worthy of social status -- respect, prestige, and esteem -- from group members.
The project also investigates whether groups tend to view forgiveness versus
revenge as relatively more status-worthy, and how groups influence individuals
to engage in forgiving or vengeful behaviors. To answer these questions, the
project employs a survey experiment and two behavioral lab experiments. The
survey experiment (Study 1) uses a nationally representative sample of US adults
to examine the conditions under which Americans view revenge or forgiveness as
worthy of social status. It does so for three different social contexts:
politics, sports, and national identity. The lab experiments will complement the
survey experiment by using a behavioral measure of social status (Study 2) and
evaluating whether individuals engage in more vengeful or forgiving behavior
when their groups have a history of rewarding these behaviors with social status
(Study 3). By combining nationally-representative survey data (including three
conceptual replications with different social identities) with behavioral lab
experiments, the design strengthens both the external and internal validity of
our findings.