* 1728567
* Nanomanufacturing of Vertically Aligned Carbon Nanotube Arrays from Industrial Waste Gas Mixture
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Placidus Amama, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2022
* USD 337,566.00

Although significant progress has been made in the past two decades in scaling
up carbon nanotube manufacture via chemical vapor deposition, the process still
faces key challenges such as poor yield due to short catalyst lifetime, low
nanotube nucleation density, slow production rate, variations in nanotube
properties, resulting in high cost of the nanotubes. Chemical vapor deposition
is often plagued by complicated optimization procedures due to the high
sensitivity of the growth process to variations in the feedstock composition and
flow characteristics. For energy applications that exploit the intrinsic
electrical and thermal anisotropy of carbon nanotubes, such as thermal interface
materials and battery electrodes, organized nanotube architectures are required
to be grown directly on conductive substrates that hardly support growth. This
award paves the way for an industrial waste-gas mixture to be used as a
feedstock for scalable, low-cost, and continuous manufacture of high-quality
carbon nanotube arrays on nontraditional substrates. The use of this feedstock
for nanotube growth minimizes the amount of flue gases in oil refineries, thus
enhancing environmental protection. The study provides a platform for educating
students at many levels, including women and under-represented minorities, on
topics related to nanoscience, nanotechnology and
nanomanufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops the fundamental
understanding required to couple catalytic chemical vapor deposition to the
waste stream of Fischer-Tropsch synthesis (FTS) process for scalable and
controlled growth of carbon nanotube (CNT) arrays. The project research plan
combines reaction engineering through modification of gas-phase chemistry,
rational catalyst substrate modification, and advanced ex situ and in situ
characterization of catalysts and CNT arrays. The resulting understanding of the
roles of the waste-gas mixture and catalyst-substrate interactions in CNT growth
enhancement provides a rational basis for optimization and scale-up of CNT
growth on nontraditional substrates. Unlike conventional feedstocks that require
strict process control and growth rate, area density of CNTs and their quality
are generally less sensitive to the fraction of the waste gas during growth, and
thus allow for easy optimization and scale-up. The research is expected to
contribute in-depth understanding of catalyst-substrate interactions, catalyst
evolution under different reaction conditions, and gas-phase chemistries during
CNT growth. This study has the distinct possibility of having broad implications
in multiple applications, including energy storage and thermal management.