* 1728634
* Ultrasonic Assisted Cold Sintering:  Kinetics of Densification and Grain Growth Study in Binary Oxide Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Clive Randall, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 639,996.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: For over 25,000 years, human-kind has been using a
manufacturing process known as sintering that uses both high temperatures and
long processing times. It is believed that we are no longer confined to these
high energy, inefficient traditional strategies. Through the use of the
transient liquid phase, it has been found that ceramic materials can be sintered
at unprecedented low temperatures. Through accelerated stimulus with ultrasound,
it is hypothesized that even lower temperatures in greater efficiencies in the
sintering process can be gained for a broad variety of inorganic materials,
including the possible use in refractory materials, such as bricks. With such
energy reductions in the process, it is anticipated that future techniques would
be more efficient and lower cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The
kinetics of sintering in terms of densification and grain growth are considered
and quantified in simple binary materials under cold (at or under 300°C)
sintering conditions. Detailed structural studies are being correlated with the
various stages of sintering. Densification kinetics are being determined with a
dilatometer in a modified mechanical tester. Transmission electron microscopy
and impedance spectroscopy are being used to consider defect microstructure,
stoichiometry, and defect chemistry monitoring differences in the cold sintering
relative to process parameters. This base line data on model binary oxide
systems provides critical insights into the nature of the cold sintering
mechanisms. A complementary effort builds on those investigations and addresses
the question on if and how ultrasonic radiation can be utilized to enhance the
kinetics of cold sintering. There is literature pointing to ultrasonic radiation
and sonochemistry that can improve particle compaction, dissolution, and
precipitation, naturally leading to the conjecture that many mechanisms and
stages of the cold sintering will be positively impacted.