* 1728255
* Using Feedback Mechanism to Control Phase Transition of Vanadium Dioxide to Exploit its Full Operating Range
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Beibei Ren, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 09/30/2020
* USD 198,286.00

Vanadium dioxide (VO2) is a smart multifunctional material which has
characteristic transition between its metal and insulator phases, which have
abrupt and substantial changes (several orders of magnitude) in electrical,
optical, and mechanical properties. This has led to considerable attention in a
variety of applications including sensors, actuators, and high-speed switches.
However, the digital ON/OFF abruptness of the metal-insulator phase transition
of VO2 with a sharp and narrow temperature window limits its further development
for applications that demand analog operation mode with continuously tunable
properties. This project will try to exploit the mechanisms of feedback to
enable the use of full operational range of VO2 and thereby significantly
enhancing their wide-spread applicability like it did for operational amplifiers
several decades ago. The research will leverage inherent complex dynamic
behavior of VO2 in transition phase to achieve reconfiguration capability using
advances in feedback control theory. The potential impact is significant as the
outcomes of this research will enable more powerful and capable devices for
analog applications in several fields. For example, VO2 with reconfigurable
phase transition optical property will facilitate advances in terahertz optical
devices with applications in imaging and spectroscopy for medical diagnostics
and biology, broadband communications, security, defense, and nondestructive
testing. The research results will be incorporated into both undergraduate and
graduate education and will be disseminated to public through educational and
outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate the
feasibility of empowering VO2 with reconfigurable phase transition via
introducing the fundamental feedback mechanisms in control theory to achieve its
full operational range. The project will develop new knowledge on modeling and
control of systems with uncertainties and hysteresis to achieve both precise
continuous VO2 phase transition and high modulation depth simultaneously. The
new knowledge will constitute a fundamental contribution that will benefit
several other applications where control of dynamic nonlinearities such as
hysteresis under uncertainties is required. Both reconfigurable VO2 hardware-in-
the-loop and experimental test beds will be built to validate the methodologies
by leveraging the available facilities and resources at Texas Tech University?s
Nano Tech Center. The research also has a nice blend of theoretical,
experimental, and computational work. The project has novel outreach activities
such as infusion of research elements into novel hands-on experiments for K-12
students and underrepresented groups.