* 1728313
* GOALI: Manufacturing USA: Determining the Role of Nanoscale Physics in the Microscale Selective Laser Sintering Process using a Multiscale Computational Modeling Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Chee Foong, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2021
* USD 391,354.00

Flexible electronic devices are of great interest due to the rapid expansion of
wearable devices for health monitoring and the rise of the Internet-of-Things.
One key factor limiting their development is the integration of diverse high-
quality, silicon-based electrical components with flexible substrates. This
integration is difficult because the small electrical connections needed to
interface the silicon chips with flexible substrates cannot be fabricated using
existing manufacturing processes. A new process called microscale selective
laser sintering (microscale-SLS) has been developed which offers the potential
to overcome this manufacturing limitation by successfully sintering (fusing)
nanoscale particles to create complex, three-dimensional, metal parts with
micron-scale resolution on almost any substrate. Currently the commercial
viability of the process is limited by a lack of understanding of the underlying
physics governing the sintering process, and an inability to accurately model
the process outcomes. This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) research project will overcome this limitation by developing
fundamental science regarding the impact of nanoscale physics on the mass and
energy transfer within the microscale-SLS process, and ultimately the final part
integrity. As this project is an industry-university collaborative effort
between NXP USA and the University of Texas Austin (UTA), it will provide both
educational experiences and industrial traineeships for graduate and
undergraduate students. A particular focus on providing opportunities and
training to students from underrepresented backgrounds in engineering will be
pursued through senior design projects and the Nanomanufacturing Systems for
Mobile Computing and Mobile Energy Technologies (NASCENT) Center's High School
Fellows program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of the project is
to understand the fundamental science regarding mechanisms by which thin layers
of nanoparticles (NPs) are selectively laser sintered to realize 3D structures
with resolutions of around one micron. The central hypothesis is that nanoscale
effects such as surface diffusion, near-field radiation, and light scattering
dominate the part-formation process in microscale-SLS, and therefore must be
considered to accurately model microscale-SLS part formation. The specific aims
of this project are to determine the mechanisms for (1) NP reshaping during the
microscale-SLS process, (2) light penetration/absorption in the NP powder bed,
and (3) heat transfer within the NP powder bed, and (4) to determine the
relationship between NP-level mechanisms and continuum-level parameters for
modeling part formation. A multiscale computational modeling approach for the
macroscale selective laser sintering process (MCM-SLS) will be leveraged to
construct a model of the microscale-SLS part formation process. It is expected
that the development of accurate models of the microscale-SLS process will have
a positive impact on the manufacturing of three-dimensional microscale
interconnect structures by (1) reducing the time required to determine the
optimal process parameters for microscale-SLS parts, (2) improving the
scientific understanding of how part design affects part quality/yield, and (3)
allowing designers to estimate part quality (strength, shape, conductivity,
etc.) before fabrication. The computational models will be validated in
collaboration with NXP USA using a prototype microscale-SLS system at their
facilities.