* 1728060
* EAGER: Quantification of Ocean Water Column Contributions to Bottom Pressure offshore Cascadia using Current and Pressure Recording Inverted Echo Sounders
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Meng Wei, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 08/31/2019
* USD 99,989.00

Large earthquakes occur at subduction zones where one tectonic plate plunges
underneath another. Some of these earthquakes generate large tsunamis. Our
ability to understand which earthquakes produce tsunamis is limited by the lack
of information about how the seafloor is moving offshore. To address this,
continuously recording bottom pressure recorders have been deployed over the
subduction zone off the coast of Oregon to estimate long-term vertical
deformation. Seafloor pressure measurements combine both seafloor movement and a
contribution from the overlying ocean water column. Present efforts to estimate
water-column contributions to the measurement use a regional oceanographic
model. This model, however, has difficulty estimating pressure variations from
eddies and currents near the seafloor, which may be significant. During the
project, special instruments will be placed near to the ocean bottom pressure
recorders. These instruments will be able to measure the changing pressures from
the overlying water column, allowing for a more accurate measure of the tectonic
deformation that is occurring offshore. The project supports an early career
faculty member from an under-represented group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will quantify the water-column contributions to the signal from ocean
bottom pressure recorders using in situ observations. Specifically, four Current
and Pressure Recording Inverted Echo Sounder (CPIES) will be deployed offshore
Oregon near existing ocean bottom pressure recorder benchmarks. CPIES are unique
because they simultaneously measure bottom pressure, current, and round-trip
acoustic travel time from the sea floor to the sea surface and back. By
combining these measurements, the water signal can be separated from the
measured bottom pressure signal. These measurements complement existing
measurements and provide critical information to distinguish water column signal
from tectonic signal for both long-term and transient signals. Methodology
developed from previous physical oceanographic process studies will be applied
and this effort will demonstrate the application for geophysical studies.