* 1728332
* RR: Collaborative Research: Tracking Scientific Progress in Social Psychology
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Alexa Tullett, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/2021
* USD 324,458.00

A basic principle of the scientific method is that scientists are expected to
update their theories in light of new evidence. Indeed, public investment in
science is assumed to produce theoretical advances that lead to real-world
changes such as better health care, more efficient technology, and a deeper
understanding of human behavior. Recent findings, however, raise concerns about
the robustness and reliability of scientific research. Some published findings
cannot be replicated by other researchers, and thus fail to meet basic standards
of scientific value. To address these concerns, the scientific community needs
to (1) collect new evidence, testing and re-testing existing theories, and (2)
update theories in response to this evidence. Psychological science has been a
leader in initiating the first step, with multiple large-scale replication
projects underway to test the robustness of existing theories. The current
project complements these efforts by providing a real-world test of the second
step, examining whether scientists adjust their theories in response to new
evidence. Documenting how scientists respond to new evidence is fundamental to
establishing the value of research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research tracks
psychological scientists' beliefs in psychological theories before and after the
release of results from two large-scale replication projects: Many Labs 5 (ML5)
and Registered Replication Reports (RRRs). These projects offer evidence that
reaches the highest standards of scientific rigor: researchers commit to
methodology and data analysis strategy ahead of time, data are made available to
the public, and results are published regardless of outcome. If psychological
science is progressing as it should, this high-quality evidence should lead
researchers to update their theories. If such updating is not happening, this
project will help to determine why this might be the case and whether some
researchers might be better than others in updating their theories. By
identifying factors that promote scientific progress, and those that stand in
the way, this project should contribute broadly to improving the robustness and
reliability of research across all fields of science.