* 1728209
* Towards a Resilient Electric Power Grid: An Investment Prioritization Decision Framework Integrating Risks of Severe Weather-Induced Outages
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Wallace Tyner, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 08/31/2020
* USD 468,851.00

Severe weather-induced outages in the US electric power system result in
devastating, multi-billion dollar damages affecting hundreds of millions of
people each year. However, current risk and reliability metrics and standards
for both electricity transmission and distribution networks undervalue the
impact of extreme events on electric power service, and thus on broader economic
and societal costs. In the light of addressing this gap, this research intends
to develop new risk assessment methods to deal with the complexities associated
with linking outage to societal costs under the uncertainty of weather-related
extreme events. This work is expected to inform regulatory decision-making
processes for more effectively managing risks and overall security of the
electric power system, and to provide a framework for achieving similar
innovations in other utility sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is expected
to result in (1) novel algorithm-based probabilistic risk analysis models for
estimating risk of major power outages under severe weather events; (2) advanced
economic models to estimate the compounding economic losses due to failure of
interdependent infrastructure due to such power outages; and (3) optimization
techniques to determine best strategies for addressing deep uncertainties. The
research outcomes will be disseminated through peer-reviewed journal
publications, with continued engagement of graduate and undergraduate students
through coursework and research.