* 1728659
* Control of Molecular Fiber Bundle Mechanics and Dynamics by Bundle Architecture
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Ernst-Ludwig Florin, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 08/31/2023
* USD 355,472.00

Biological fiber bundles are widely spread in nature. They are necessary for our
senses of hearing and balance, facilitate wound healing, and enable cells to
divide and migrate, to name just a few examples. Nature utilizes fiber bundles
for their fast assembly and disassembly and rapid control over mechanical
properties through changes in molecular interactions. The understanding of
biological fiber bundles and their rich mechanical and dynamical properties is
crucial to biomechanics and mechanical biology. This understanding, however, has
been hampered by a lack of suitable microscopic techniques for simultaneously
observing bundle architecture and dynamics. The research addresses this problem
by combining high-precision position measurements, optical response measurements
and manipulation of a prototype fiber bundle structure that is widely used in
nature. The overall goal of this research is to determine the link between the
molecular architecture of biological fiber bundles and their macroscopic
mechanical properties. This understanding is essential for biomedical research
and for the design of novel smart materials that self-assemble and exhibit
predictable properties. Students will be exposed to a rich interdisciplinary
environment that includes theoretical physics, physical chemistry, molecular
biology and material science, thereby training them to develop an
interdisciplinary approach towards research. Students will participate in an
international collaboration, and the development of state of the art
instrumentation will enhance the intentional competitiveness of the research.
Female high school students will also participate in the research as part of the
Alice in Wonderland outreach project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
advance our fundamental understanding of the link between biological fiber
bundle architecture and macroscopic mechanics and dynamics. The findings could
potentially have wide spread applications to other biological fiber bundle
systems and manmade systems. Microtubules will be used as a model system. These
particular fiber bundles consist of parallel protofilaments that arrange
themselves to form closed tubes and other bundle structures. They are ideal for
comprehensive study of bundle mechanics and dynamics because the weak
interactions between protofilaments allow them to easily adapt various
structures. The mechanical and dynamical properties or microtubules will be
measured using their naturally occurring thermal shape fluctuations with a novel
high-bandwidth position detection scheme. The architecture will be determined
from optical scattering signals. The experiments test the hypothesis that bundle
mechanics and dynamics can be described by the recently developed wormlike
bundle model over a wide range of parameters such as filament number, strength
of crosslinking, and the molecular state of the subunits. The wormlike bundle
model provides a direct link between molecular and macroscopic properties and,
if confirmed, will aid the rational design and assembly of smart fiber bundle-
based materials for technical applications and biomedical research.