* 1728227
* Ductile strain in the footwall of a metamorphic core complex: A field example to test models for dynamics, timescales, and controls of mid-crustal flow.
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* James Vogl, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2022
* USD 110,633.00

As is the case of many mountain belts, the western North American Cordillera
underwent horizontal stretching that thinned the Earth?s crust. In the Pacific
Northwest thinning began around 50 to 55 million years ago immediately following
the end of mountain building, and was highly localized along faults and shear
zones that commonly record tens of kilometers of extension. The manner in which
the deeper levels of the crust respond to this localized stretching and thinning
is presently debated. A currently popular model is that the deep crust is weak
enough that it flows from unextended areas into the region of localized thinning
due to the lessened gravitational stresses in the areas of thinning. This study
will test this model and address the controls that determine whether or not this
type of weak gravitationally induced flow occurs. The research conducted during
this study will contribute to important societal outcomes by providing support
for the training of graduate and undergraduate students in an important STEM
(science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) discipline, thus
contributing to development of a globally competitive workforce. The project
will provide opportunity for undergraduate students to be involved in the
research, including the completion of theses based on their research. The
project also contains important outreach and educational activities through the
University of Florida's "Florida Future Scientists" summer program for high
school students, the graduate student will gain mentoring experience by
assisting these "future scientists" in the universities analytical laboratories.
Thus, the project contributes to increased scientific literacy and public
engament with STEM. This project will use new and existing NSF-funded analytical
facilities at the University of Florida. Funding for the project will therefore
insure that these facilities are actively used for geological research and fully
calibrated and operational for future NSF projects, including collaborations
outside of the University of Florida. Continuous research and educational use of
these instruments is critical for maintaining research infrastructure. Technical
results of the research obtained during this study will be widely disseminated
through presentations at professional geoscience meetings and the peer-reviewed
scientific literature.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The highly localized extension that
characterizes metamorphic core complexes is thought to lead to lateral flow of
the weak lower crust into the extending region in response to topographically
induced pressure gradients brought about by localized exhumation. While there is
significant support from indirect observations for this isostatically induced
flow, direct field examples of this process in core complex footwalls are few.
In the examples where this process has been inferred, the geochronology does not
typically unambiguously demonstrate synchroneity of strain at the different
levels. Furthermore, some of the often cited examples lack evidence for
convergent flow, which is predicted from inflow. Numerical models of
isostatically induced flow predict specific convergent structures that strongly
resemble a small number of field examples. However, it is likely that there are
controls in natural settings that are not able to be adequately addressed in
numerical models. These differing characteristics likely lead to a spectrum of
structures, the full range of which is yet to be identified in the field. In the
Pioneer core complex (Idaho), we have identified a well-exposed abrupt vertical
transition in lineation directions that may be interpreted as a zone of
decoupled isostatically induced flow. Importantly, extensive suites of both
deformed and undeformed dikes are exposed above and below the lineation
transition. Uranium-lead geochronology applied to these dikes offers a rare
opportunity to test whether these fabrics formed synchronously or sequentially.
This geochronology integrated with detailed kinematic analysis, metamorphic
Pressure-Temperature-time analysis, all tied to detailed mapping offers a unique
opportunity to not only test the idea of isostatically induced flow, but to
fully characterize the detailed geometries of the resulting structures, as well
as the timescales and controls on flow.