* 1728049
* Bio-nanomanufacturing of Protein Therapeutics Using Membrane Microfluidics
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Matthew DeLisa, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2021
* USD 402,425.00

The market for therapeutic proteins is valued near $140 billion annually. Many
of these therapeutics are glycoproteins, which require the addition of specific
sugars, called 'glycans' at an exact position on the protein through a process
called protein glycosylation. The glycan affects protein folding and function
and ensures it retains its therapeutic potency. In nature, glycoproteins are
produced through a series of sequential reactions inside a cell. Making
therapeutic glycoproteins within cells is challenging for a variety of reasons,
and extensive and costly purification steps are required to harvest the
therapeutic material. With this award, a cell-free glycosylation network will be
constructed in a microfluidic device that separates reactions in space and time,
giving supreme flexibility in optimizing individual reactions and constructing
glycans with high specificity. The benefits of this manufacturing paradigm to
society are reducing the cost of these drugs and providing scientists an avenue
to design and develop synthetic drug compounds that may or may not exist in
nature to treat disease. The related education plan creates a hands-on bio-
nanomanufacturing activity for a high school girls organized by the PIs and
their student trainees, so that young women will understand the power of
biotechnology and be inspired to pursue these career paths.

Cell-free protein synthesis holds great promise for producing high-value,
biotherapeutic nanomaterials without cell culture and benefitting from chemical
manufacturing know-how. Here, raw materials and biological enzymes are mixed to
produce biological products. Shortcomings of this approach are competing
reactions, side products, and low yields. Cells avoid these shortcomings by
localizing reactions within subcellular compartments and orchestrating the
reaction sequences. The biocatalysts that give the final molecule its essential
posttranslational features are compartmentalized in membranes. Handling enzymes
outside of their native lipid environment can drastically reduce their activity.
Thus, in vitro, sequential, bio-enzymatic reactions have never been achieved in
a cell-free manner. The research objective is to mimic the elegant
compartmentalization strategies used by cells in a microfluidic biomembrane
device that organizes biological reactions in proper spatial and temporal
sequence. These devices will generate authentically glycosylated proteins.
Through assessment of nanostructure product architectures, this work will
advance understanding of nanoscale phenomena and processes for nanomaterials
manufacture and discovery. This cell-free device concept will enable facile
optimization of glycosylated protein production, and provide a framework for
understanding how experimental conditions affect product yield and quality that
is broadly applicable to the bio-nanomanufacturing of virtually any
posttranslationally-modified protein.