* 1728652
* GOALI: Understanding the Mechanisms of Ultrasonic Bonding at Atomic Scale
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Calvin Tszeng, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 08/31/2023
* USD 383,975.00

Ultrasonic vibration is essential for various solid-state bonding techniques,
such as ultrasonic wedge and ball bonding, flip-chip bonding, battery welding,
and ultrasonic additive manufacturing. These processes are essential in the
consumer electronics, defense, automotive and aerospace industries. Although the
essential role of ultrasonic vibration in bond formation is well recognized, the
underlying mechanisms are still largely unknown. Development of a fundamental
understanding of bond formation mechanisms would result in an improved ability
to tailor and optimize bonding processes for new materials and improved
properties. This would specifically address the goal of improved current-
carrying capabilities in battery and automotive power applications, thereby
improving efficiency and reducing energy demand. Given this important focus, and
the partnership with the electronics industry, this Grant Opportunities for
Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project has significant industry impact
while simultaneously offering a rich environment for graduate student training
and exposure of undergraduates to engineering research. The multi-level
complexity of the project enables involvement of students at different levels,
including undergraduate and graduate students. The close collaboration between
the PIs and the industrial partner provides a unique learning environment for
the students, preparing them with very relevant experience closely aligned with
the needs of local Silicon Valley's microelectronic industry. Based on the
combination of modeling results and experimental analysis, the PIs will
establish a new workshop for university outreach activities targeting promotion
of STEM field among K-12 and underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this GOALI project is to provide fundamental understanding on the
atomic-scale mechanisms that govern bond formation during ultrasonic bonding.
The research focuses on the central hypothesis that bonding occurs through
growth of the microwelds that form by an atomic avalanche between clean, oxide-
free surfaces. Two specific objectives are followed:&lt;br/&gt;1) Investigating
the nature of oxide film breakage during ultrasonic vibration through a
combination of experimental, analytical and finite element
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;2) Investigating mechanism of atomic movement that leads to
microwelds formation and growth through a combination of molecular dynamics and
experimental analysis.&lt;br/&gt;Employing a combination of computational
modeling and experimental approaches enables analysis of the phenomena during a
very short period of bonding time. The successful completion of the research
will lead to new insights into the fundamental atomic interactions that govern
bond formation mechanisms during ultrasonic bonding. The application of the
newly developed theoretical and experimental techniques to these problems
enhances the understanding of the role of surface forces in the formation of
micro-contacts and the fundamental issues pertaining to interfacial adhesion.