* 1728239
* RUI: Probing the Mechanotransduction of Disturbed Flow in Brain Vasculature
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Peter Galie, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2021
* USD 354,881.00

Aneurysms in blood vessels of the head pose a substantial health risk to the
general population. The vast majority of brain aneurysms form at branch points
and junctions of arteries, where blood flow is 'disturbed' by sudden changes in
its flow path. Disturbed blood flow alters the mechanical force exerted on cells
lining cerebral arteries, though the contribution of these forces to aneurysm
formation is not fully known. Determining the effect of flow-induced forces on
cells inside a living brain is difficult, necessitating the development of model
vascular systems that reproduce what happens in life. This model must mimic the
unique the 'blood-brain barrier' that changes how the brain vasculature works
compared to vessels in the rest of the body. The research will use such a model
to determine the effect of disturbed flow on cellular processes associated with
aneurysm formation. The project will yield a better understanding of the effects
of disturbed blood flow in the brain, and suggest molecular targets that may
prevent aneurysm formation in at-risk patients. The research will train
undergraduates and graduate students to perform laboratory work. High school
students from Camden, NJ will be recruited to work in the laboratory. The grant
will add to Rowan University's effort to build a research program in southern
New Jersey. The overall goal of this project is to determine the biological
response of cerebral endothelial cells to disturbed fluid flow and to
investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying this response. The spatial
correlation between saccular aneurysms and arterial bifurcations is striking,
lending credence to the accepted view that disturbed flow at the sites of
bifurcation contributes to the formation and progression of aneurysms. These
studies rely on a three-dimensional, in vitro model of a cerebral artery
bifurcation. Microparticle image velocimetry is used in combination with
computational fluid dynamics to characterize the shear stress profiles exerted
on the endothelium within this model. Gene and protein expression of matrix
remodeling markers by endothelial cells will be measured in response to the
applied fluid flow regimes. Studies will test the hypothesis that cd44 and its
downstream effectors function as a mechanosensor of disturbed flow in cerebral
vasculature. The central hypothesis is that disturbed flow-mediated activation
of CD44 results in tight junction disruption and matrix metalloproteinase
activation through RhoA GTPase. Identification of the mechanism responsible for
transducing disturbed flow not only advances the fundamental understanding of
how cells respond to mechanical forces, but also clarifies why intracranial
aneurysms form in proximity to arterial bifurcations.