* 1728007
* The Role of Microstructure on Crack Growth in Carburized Steels
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Steven Thompson, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 12/31/2021
* USD 406,208.00

Carburization is used extensively in the transportation and heavy equipment
industries to harden the surfaces of steel parts such as gears and bearings. The
process results in a gradient of residual stress in the part that provides
enhanced resistance to wear and damage. Understanding the underlying phenomena
that control this enhanced resistance can lead to new technologies for
carburized steel parts. This award supports fundamental scientific research to
uncover the mechanisms that link processing and structure to properties and
performance in these materials. The new knowledge will allow the development of
heat treatment strategies to refine the surface structure produced through
carburization to improve performance, and to build models to predict materials
performance based on processing and surface structure. This new knowledge has
numerous applications including gear boxes, which see higher loads as vehicle
lightweighting improves. Student trainees will engage in valuable educational
opportunities through participation in this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of this work are to characterize the interaction of fatigue cracks
with carburized steel microstructures that contain combinations of retained
austenite and plate martensite, particularly focusing on processing strategies
to refine the microstructure, and to utilize the observations to inform
physically-based fatigue life prediction models in these complex
microstructures. The work will be accomplished by designing variations in
carburizing processing routes, including novel heat treatment processes intended
to refine the carburized steel microstructure. Then, fatigue crack growth
studies will be performed with in-situ and interrupted test analysis of the
crack interaction with the microstructure. Multi-scale characterization will be
utilized to quantify microstructural evolution in the vicinity of the fatigue
crack, particularly with respect to retained austenite stability against
transformation and microscale residual stresses present due to the
transformation. Finally, the fatigue crack growth data and characterization will
inform models that predict the influence of microstructure on fatigue crack
growth rates based on the effective driving force for crack growth.