* 1728938
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Extra-Legal Information Transfer during Eyewitness Identification
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Margaret Bull Kovera, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Reggie Sheehan
* 07/31/2019
* USD 20,000.00

Eyewitness misidentification remains the chief contributing factor to wrongful
convictions that have been overturned with DNA evidence. To improve
identifications, eyewitness researchers recommend that all lineups be conducted
using administrators who do not know which lineup member is the suspect (i.e.,
double-blind). The concern is that if lineup administrators know the suspect's
identity, they may unconsciously influence witnesses to pick the suspect,
increasing the risk of an innocent suspect being identified and convicted.
Psychologists have shown that this influence does occur and have hypothesized
that it is the result of subtle "informational cues" --that is, administrator
behaviors that indicate to the witness which person they should select. However,
the direct transfer of information from administrator to witness has never been
empirically demonstrated. If this information transfer occurs, the behavioral
cues are extra-legal information that bias witnesses' decisions; yet the legal
system assumes that witnesses base their decision on their memory and that this
selection is not contaminated by information provided by the investigators.
Moreover, as the double-blind recommendation comes under scrutiny, scientists
will need to conduct research that examines the underlying procedural fairness
of using lineup administrators who know which lineup member is the suspect. The
goal of this research is to address these issues by identifying the underlying
informational mechanisms of lineup administrator influence. Classic dual-process
models in psychology provide one possible framework for understanding when
information transfer will occur in that they propose individuals process
information only if they are motivated and able to do so. Therefore, motivation
and ability should affect whether information transfer occurs during lineups if
it is the mechanism by which single-blind administrators influence lineup
decisions. First, administrators should be more likely to send information when
they are motivated and able. Study 1 tests this hypothesis in a standard
eyewitness paradigm by manipulating administrator knowledge (ability), rewards
for suspect identifications (financial motivation), and case realism
(psychological motivation). Second, witnesses should be more likely to process
and use informational cues when they are motivated and able. Study 2 tests this
hypothesis by manipulating administrator steering (cue presence), the witnesses
executive functioning (cognitive ability), and reward for selecting the suspect
(finical motivation). In both studies -- and only if information transfer is
happening -- witnesses will be more likely to identify the suspect following
manipulations that increase the ability and motivation to process extra-legal
information.