* 1728635
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Factors Influencing the Property Claims and the Reorganization of Urban Space
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Byron Gray, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2019
* USD 25,884.00

What role do religious and ethnic community play in shaping social life in
modern urban environments? This research project, which trains a student in the
methods of empirical, scientific data collection and analysis, asks in what ways
these identities are reshaped by the changing nature of cities themselves. Since
the late nineteenth century, many researchers have assumed that urban
environments are the antithesis of traditional life, dense worlds of money,
markets, and diversity where individuals are atomized and rebuilt into crowds
and class-based political movements. Left aside in these accounts is the
continued role of urban religious infrastructures in shaping city life. With the
UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs projecting that urban environments
will be home to over two-thirds of the global population by 2050, there is an
urgent need for social scientists to reconsider how religious and ethnic forms
of community are woven into urban environments, and what role they play in
shaping where and how people live, socialize, and experience the
city.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Byron Gray, under the supervision of Dr. Thomas
Hansen of Stanford University, will explore what role community identities have
in structuring property markets, intra-urban migration, and perceptions of urban
space. This research project focuses on the 500-year-old Catholic community of
Mumbai, India as a window into these dynamics. Predating the city's development
from a Portuguese settlement into India's premier global city, the Mumbai
Catholic community presents an ideal case study for examining the nexus between
religion and the transformation of urban environments. Indeed, over the past 30
years, many members of this 600,000-strong population have abandoned their
traditional neighborhoods in the south of the city for its expanding northern
wards, a process that has reshaped Catholics' longstanding relationship with the
city and one another. Using a combination of interviews, participant
observation, archival work, and demographic mapping, this project will map out
the legal and social means through which communities assert control over
properties and neighborhoods in Mumbai, and the ritual and social practices
through which such neighborhoods are made into meaningful community spaces. In
addition to testing the hypothesis that religious and ethnic forms of community
often act as key forces shaping property markets and the lived experience of
urban residents, the project also aims to understand how community identities
are themselves transformed when unsettled from existing spatial arrangements.
The findings of this study will not only improve understandings of the social
and political dynamics of the world's largest democracy, but also more broadly
to urban planners and policymakers interested in the complicated nexus between
community and changing urban environments.