* 1728149
* Chemomechanics of Thin Film Detachment in Liquid-Assisted Transfer Printing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Baoxing Xu, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 340,509.00

Transfer printing is a technique of assembling layered structures in which a
thin film or layers of thin films processed on a source substrate are picked and
released onto a target substrate. This operation is performed successively until
the desired layered structure is formed. This process is widely used in the
fabrication of micro- to nano-scale thin film based devices, especially in the
production of flexible electronics. In current practice, the technique relies
heavily on trial and error, which results in low yields. This is particularly
true for the transfer of thin films with multiple layers or discrete structures,
where damage and residual contamination are quite common. This award will focus
on the fundamental study of detachment mechanics of thin film-substrate systems
in a liquid environment. The outcome of this research will impact the design and
execution of transfer printing process through development of simple steps and
relationships for high, yet efficient, throughput. This research is an
interdisciplinary study involving chemo-mechanics, materials science and
manufacturing. Graduate and undergraduate students will be exposed to and
trained on a broad scope of education and skills, respectively. Undergraduate
students form underrepresented groups will be actively recruited and a
university program will be leveraged to perform K-12 outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transfer printing is emerging as a competitive technique
in the delivery and assembly of thin films in manufacturing. Its working
efficiency is inherently underpinned by the detachment mechanics of thin films
from substrates. The liquid-assisted transfer printing technique could promote
both yield and quality of the detachment of thin films and involves a
synergistic interplay of external mechanical loading and chemical reactions at
the solid-liquid interface. The project will conduct a comprehensive study of
liquid-assisted interfacial detachment in film-substrate systems, where the
presence of liquid water will react with interfacial materials, leading to a
controllable and selective detachment of thin film layers. The outcome of this
study will be two-fold: 1) a comprehensive chemomechanics theory of liquid-
driven detachment mechanics, and 2) a hybrid computational modeling framework
that bridges solid-liquid atomistic interactions (mechanism) and continuum
phenomena of film detachment (structural function) with validation from
experimental testing and theory. The research will impact the transfer printing
fabrication technique by providing scientific and technological means to
achieving efficient, quantitative throughput.