* 1728850
* SHF:Medium:Collaborative Research:A comprehensive methodology to pursue reproducible accuracy in ensemble scientific simulations on multi- and many-core platforms
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Michela Becchi, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2020
* USD 370,233.00

Ensemble simulations of scientific phenomena typically run for weeks or even
months on high-performance computing clusters. The already high level of
concurrency of these computing environments is expected to significantly
increase in the near future, causing simulations to suffer not only from
numerical errors due to limited arithmetic precision but also from the non-
determinism in the execution associated with multithreading. Ultimately this
trend can compromise the simulation results and break the scientific community's
trust in ensemble simulations. This project tackles this problem and defines a
methodology to enable the reproducible accuracy of large ensemble simulations on
exascale platforms that include multi- and many-core processors. This project
moves along two major fronts. First, the investigators identify common sources
of accuracy errors and study their accumulation, propagation, and runtime
effects in a controlled environment. This phase includes three research
activities: (i) generating code motifs that model those computations that may
lead to accuracy errors; (ii) providing multiple implementations of these
motifs, called code inspectors, targeting different parallel platforms; and
(iii) evaluating the accuracy and runtime of these implementations using a
variety of datasets and stress conditions. Second, by installing these code
inspectors in real scientific code bases, the investigators study their behavior
in uncertain environments. This phase includes two research activities: (i)
prioritizing code segments based on quantitative impact scores and matching
segments to inspector motifs; and (ii) finding the optimal code inspector
implementations and patching the code with them so as to optimize the overall
result variance. The applications targeted in this project are deterministic
chaotic applications including n-body atomic system simulations and
astrophysical simulations.