* 1728042
* Continuous, Roll-to-Roll Manufacturing and Assembly of Yeast-derived Carbon Nanotube-based Lithium-Sulphur Batteries
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Xiaodong Li, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2021
* USD 320,000.00

Batteries for electrical energy storage have become ubiquitous in a world of
portable and mobile electronics. However, current lithium-ion battery technology
suffers from several key limitations, such as, high cost, limited energy storage
density, poor durability, and severe environmental impact. These shortcomings
limit the viability of many important emerging technologies, such as electric
vehicles and off-peak storage for renewable energy generation systems. Batteries
based on a lithium-sulphur (Li-S) chemistry can theoretically achieve energy
densities six times greater than conventional lithium-ion (Li-ion) batteries but
have typical lifetimes of only 100 recharge cycles. This award studies new
approaches to the manufacture of electrodes for lithium-sulphur batteries that
have long lifespan and are affordable. Preliminary results have demonstrated
that a battery cathode can be manufactured by high temperature carbonization of
wheat dough creating a porous carbon network. The resulting carbon foam
structure is covered with carbon nanotubes, which enables a dense loading of
sulphur nanoparticles to increase energy capacity. The porous carbon/carbon
nanotube scaffold structure prevents the degradation of the active sulphur
material, extending the durability of the battery to over 4000 cycles. The
battery components are assembled through a scalable, continuous, and high-
throughput process from low-cost precursors, which also contributes to improved
environmental sustainability. This research develops new paradigms for design
and nanomanufacturing of energy storage devices. These research advances are
disseminated to K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students, as well as the
general public through targeted courses, seminars, and publications.

The research objective of the project is to address key technological and
engineering barriers to achieving high-throughput manufacturing of batteries
with exceptionally high energy and power densities and ultra-long lifespan. The
approach is to derive electrode materials from a readily available, low cost,
environmentally-benign material, specifically, wheat dough. The project
addresses research gaps such as severe capacity degradation, incomplete sulfur
utilization, and the severe 'shuttle effect' of dissolvable intermediates during
the electrochemical reaction process. Research activities feature a systems-
level focus spanning (1) synthesis of the mesoporous activated carbon/carbon
nanotube scaffolds, (2) roll-to-roll manufacturing of the developed cathode into
Li-S batteries, and (3) structural and mechanical characterization of electrode
materials to evaluate the role of structure on battery degradation. The primary
contributions of this work are to improve the effective conductivity of the
sulphur cathode by embedding sulphur nanoparticles within a highly-conductive
activated carbon/carbon nanotube scaffold and to study how the structure impedes
electrode degradation by inhibiting the 'shuttle effect' and limiting reaction
volume changes. The fundamental mechanism of the one-step synthesis of carbon
nanotubes on carbonized yeast from wheat dough is determined. A prototype
automated roll-to-roll manufacturing process is devised to produce high-
performance Li-S batteries.