* 1728186
* Collaborative Research: A New Nonlinear Modal Updating Framework for Soft, Hydrated Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Mehmet Kurt, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2021
* USD 238,202.00

The mechanical properties of soft, hydrated materials have long been of interest
to the scientific community. Using soft materials in mechanical designs is
becoming increasingly prominent due to their obvious advantages such as
flexibility in design and intentional exploitation of nonlinearity. Especially,
the high-rate response of soft materials has received attention due to their
many applications in robotics, materials and the biomedical sciences. Most soft
and hydrated materials (e.g., biomaterials) exhibit complex mechanical behavior
that is challenging to quantify due to measurement uncertainties, mechanical
anisotropy and inhomogeneity. In this project, a new nonlinear dynamics-based
system identification and model updating methodology will be formulated to
characterize and model soft, hydrated materials. The findings of this research
have the potential to drastically enhance the accuracy, cost-efficiency and
accessibility of broadband soft material characterization, and, as such, it can
be transformative in diverse interdisciplinary areas, such as soft robotic
design, mechanical indentation measurements and soft tissue feedback during
surgery. The resulting model updating approach for soft materials will be
transformative in predictive engineering designs since it will enable the better
utilization and integration of soft materials in diverse applications. This
approach can be used for both exploiting the nonlinearities in soft mechanical
designs, as well as for their health monitoring. This project will also provide
training and mentoring opportunities for a diverse group of K12, undergraduate
and graduate students, with a special emphasis on underrepresented groups.
Interactive demonstrations of the developed methodology are planned to be
displayed in local science festivals to engage the interest of the public in
this scientific issue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this project
is to introduce a new nonlinear dynamics-based system identification and model
updating methodology to characterize soft, hydrated materials. It is based on
direct analysis of measured response time series, and construction of
appropriately defined transitions in appropriately defined frequency-energy
plots (FEPs) of a soft-tissue tester and sample system. The dynamics of an
underlying conservative system (i.e., the corresponding system with no
dissipative effects) modeling the tester is then correlated with the measured
response by computing nonlinear normal modes (NNMs). In the conservative system
model, soft tissues are modeled as highly flexible elements with stiffness and
damping nonlinearities. Then, the reconciliation of the measured and simulated
responses in the FEPs is utilized to estimate the broadband dissipative
properties of the soft tissues. The experimental validation will be done by
testing soft materials such as tendons, hydrated PDMS and brain tissue. The
physics-based nonlinear approach in this study for model updating is
unprecedented since it is based exclusively on direct time series analysis, and
the framework is sufficiently general to be applicable to other engineering
applications, such as the reconciliation of nonlinear finite element models with
experimental measurements, and the accurate model reduction of mechanical and
aerospace components. Moreover, this research will drastically increase our
understanding of complicated dynamical transitions and modal interactions in
systems with nonlinear viscoelastic properties. It will also enable predictive
engineering design of such systems and will provide new insights into the
broadband response of soft materials by developing and applying a uniquely new
nonlinear-dynamics based model updating framework.