* 1728784
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Sociocultural Dimensions of New Biometric Security Infrastructures
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Matthew Hull, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2018
* USD 14,455.00

What is the impact of the expanding role of technology in our social and
political lives today? The increasing ubiquity of certain technological objects,
specifically in the form of proliferating interfaces, is immediately observable.
However, identification and security technologies such as biometrics and even
mundane forms like electronic databases are more opaque to us. This project,
which trains a graduate student in how to conduct rigorous, empirically grounded
scientific fieldwork, will use scientific fieldwork-based methods to examine one
of the most salient features of modern life today: large-scale, networked
databases. Given heightening security concerns, in relation to the United States
and its global affairs, it is crucial to investigate how databased
identification technologies intersect with security and governance practices.
This project will develop an empirical understanding of security
infrastructures; it asks how they percolate into social domains such as kinship,
migration, commerce, and dwelling practices, shaping aspects of ordinary life
seemingly far outside the purview of security. It will enhance understandings of
the social and political implications of security practices as they bear upon
public policy, social and geopolitical relations. Thus, it will facilitate the
development of programs and policies in order to produce secure yet equitable
social environments. In addition to providing funding for the training of a
graduate student in anthropology, findings will be disseminated to organizations
and individuals that explore and manage the causes, consequences, and
complexities of security practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Zehra Hashmi, under the
supervision of Dr. Matthew Hull of the University of Michigan, will explore the
relationship between new security infrastructures, kinship, and social
organization. This research focuses on one of the pioneers in national biometric
identification: Pakistan's National Database and Registration Authority (NADRA),
and manner and means in which it shapes domains of everyday social life. NADRA's
significance lies in its ubiquity: the card is used for banking, paying bills,
school admissions, acquiring a cell phone chip, property transactions and
voting. Key actors involved in NADRA operations are algorithms that integrate
and verify data, particularly familial relations creating kin units. This
research will analyze how NADRA reconstitutes kin ties by studying its effects
on Pashtun migrants in Islamabad, for whom the identity card is a central
preoccupation. Through multi-sited ethnographic fieldwork in Pashtun
neighborhoods and NADRA's institutional sites, this research asks how NADRA's
identification processes shape conceptions of security in a more generalizable
manner. This study will collect data on how NADRA informs claims and experiences
of urban space, especially for the ethnically marginalized. Further, it will
investigate how NADRA itself is shaped by citizens, and what this reveals about
governance and security practices. Thus, this study will illuminate connections
between databases, security practices, and the status of ethnic minorities as
they crystalize into a single, state-organized information infrastructure. This
holds broad comparative implications and generalizable insights for the growing
role of biometric, information and surveillance technologies for governance
elsewhere on the globe, particularly the United States.