* 1728263
* Collaborative research:   A histological and CT study of midfacial growth trajectories in subadult primates
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2016,09/30/2018
* Valerie DeLeon, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 09/30/2018
* USD 90,847.00

Primates are distinguished from most other mammals by a trend toward midfacial
reduction, most notably seen in the reduced 'snout' of monkeys, apes, and
humans. This study uses a novel developmental approach to test whether midfacial
reduction of the skull in primates is a byproduct of growth of neighboring
structures (e.g., eyes and teeth). For example, does selection for a precocious
visual nervous system fundamentally affect midfacial patterns of growth? Do
proportionately large deciduous maxillary teeth and their successors have
transient or lasting effects on development of paranasal spaces of the maxilla?
To answer these questions, cadaveric samples from over seventy specimens
(including 20 species of primates) will be studied. Specimens of different
postnatal ages will be studied using an innovative combination of high-
resolution computed tomography (CT) and microscopic study of decalcified
samples. The result is a novel approach for mapping regions of bone deposition
and resorption in three dimensions. The project will create unique three-
dimensional 'growth maps' of primate skulls in relation to functional units of
the head (eyes, nasal airways, teeth). Three-dimensional skull form and growth
maps will then be compared among primates that differ in the extent to which the
eyes are convergent (forward-facing). Indirect influences on neural and dental
development, such as gestation length and diet, will also be used as
variables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader implications of the study include a
web-based atlas and digital archive of histological and CT images from the
specimens. The interactive online atlas will be developed as a resource for
anatomists, who will benefit from animal models for aspects of human
development, and primatologists, who will benefit from the resource on
development of primates. In addition, animations which highlight the importance
of growth mechanisms for evolutionary adaptation will be created and made
available to advanced K-12 students and their teachers as online educational
tools.