* 1728013
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Translation and Accretion of the Yakutat Microplate and Prince William Terrane, Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* John Garver, Union College
* Continuing Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 08/31/2023
* USD 230,668.00

The North American Cordillera was assembled through the formation, accretion,
and translation of a number of terranes and much of this assembly has occurred
since the Cretaceous. Since this time, most of the terrane translation was
northward due to the relative motion of Pacific plates with North America.
Despite decades of investigations on terrane movement and translation much
remains unknown about where these terranes originated and how far they traveled
before becoming part of the amalgamation of terranes in Alaska. This project
brings new analytical techniques to bear on this problem focusing on the Yakutat
terrane, which is now colliding with southern Alaska driving the uplift of the
Chugach Range. This research tests the idea that the Yakutat terrane originated
far to the south in the Pacific Northwest and moved parallel to the continental
margin before colliding with southern Alaska. The project would advance desired
societal outcomes by participation of students from underrepresented minorities
in STEM, increased public scientific literacy and public engagement with STEM
through development of brochures for the National Parks and National Forests and
development of a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce through active
participation of undergraduate students in research at primarily undergraduate
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development and translation history of
the collage of terranes that make up most of Alaska are debated, including the
Chugach and Prince William terranes, and Yakutat terrane. Some scenarios
envision a setting for the Chugach and Prince William terranes that was more or
less in place, while other scenarios (originally based on paleomagentic data)
suggest long transport (&gt;3000 km). The difference in these ideas is profound,
but large-scale translation of terranes on strike-slip faults may be a
fundamental and underappreciated process in the Cordillera. High-precision and
high-volume U/Pb and fission track dating of detrital zircon has focused the
lens with which the problem can be examined, and rigorous predictions can be
made by making geological comparisons of units along the Cordilleran margin to
better understand translation history and total offset. Preliminary data show a
number of assumptions about the Chugach-Prince William terrane and Yakutat
terrane collision zone need to be revised, including: (1) turbidites of the
Yakutat terrane may not be part of the Chugach and Prince William terranes as
previously assumed; and (2) the basaltic basement of the Yakutat terrane may
have formed in a transtensional environment along the North American margin. The
hypothesis tested here is that transport of the Yakutat terrane to Alaska
resulted in a truncated margin in the Pacific Northwest, and slip on the Queen
Charlotte-Fairweather fault system may have partly accommodated the 1800 km of
dextral translation, which may be one of the longest offsets shown by geological
relationships on faults in the Cordillera. The analytical approach of this
research involves the analysis of detrital zircon using several techniques, some
of which are new and innovative. These approaches include: (a) U/Pb of detrital
zircon to determine maximum depositional age and provenance, including targeting
Precambrian sources; (b) fission track on detrital zircons to provide cooling
ages directly related to exhumation, including double dating grains (fission
track and U/Pb); (c) Raman spectroscopy on detrital to provide radiation damage
dates; (d) Hf isotopes in detrital zircon to provide crustal signature; and (e)
core-rim dating to date igneous and metamorphic rims. Determining radiation
damage ages on detrital zircon is a new approach that promises to provide deeper
insight into detrital studies. Although zircon is central to this effort,
student projects that use geochemistry and petrology will focus on better
understanding the development of the igneous rocks associated with these
terranes.