* 1728792
* Collaborative Research: Mass Media and Representative Democracy
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Stuart Soroka, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 05/31/2022
* USD 151,051.00

General Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project examines the role of mass media in the
functioning of representative democratic government. It focuses on the
frequency, accuracy, and clarity of policy cues in media content. It also
explores how the public uses these cues to inform their preferences for policy
in the US. The investigators begin with three important propositions. First, a
responsive democratic public requires only basic levels of knowledge about
policy and policy change. Second,the necessary information is (in some domains)
readily available in media content. Third, citizens pick up on these cues and
adjust their policy preferences accordingly. This project tests these
propositions, leveraging differences in media coverage across policy areas
drawing upon multiple news outlets in different regions of the country to
understand variation in the opinion-policy link. The investigators hypothesize
that there are areas where media coverage provides a reasonably accurate view of
policy, and others in which media content is lacking. The accuracy of public
perceptions of, and preferences for, policy should benefit or suffer
accordingly. This project provides a unique, "big" data-driven investigation
into how (and when, and why) representative democracy works.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The centerpiece of this
project is an automated content-analytic dataset comprised millions of news
stories and television news transcripts on US public policy, across a range of
spending areas, over the past 35 years. News content is drawn from full-text
databases (primarily Lexis-Nexis) and analyzed using both dictionary and
machine-learning approaches. The reliability and validity of the method is
tested through human coding. These content-analytic data are examined alongside
existing budgetary time series and opinion polling. Analyses offer the first
large-scale exploration into the kinds of policy information that do, and do
not, appear in media coverage. This will allow the team to assess how the policy
preferences of individuals might change depending on the policy-relevant media
content they consume. As part of the assessment of this influence, the team will
provide a direct comparison of media coverage of policy and actual policy across
eight policy areas. Results provide a new and unique view into the role that
media play in representative democracy, particularly in public responsiveness to
policy, across issue areas and over time.