* 1728338
* Collaborative Research: Personalized Modeling, Monitoring and Control for Advancing Ventricular Assist Device Therapy in End-stage Heart Failure
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Dongping Du, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 07/31/2022
* USD 337,381.00

Annually, about 5.7 million adults in U.S. have heart failure, and the
associated cost of health care services to treat heart failure is approximately
$30.7 billion. An estimated 150,000 new patients are diagnosed with end-stage
heart failure annually. Left Ventricular Assist Device (known as "pacemaker")
implantation, as the destination therapy, becomes an important treatment option
for end-stage heart failure. However, the implantation has unacceptably high
mortality rate. For instance, the 1-year mortality rate is as high as 69%. The
risk of implantation varies among patients, and the outcome highly depends on
preoperative treatment design and postoperative care. Current therapies are
guideline-based and greatly rely on the stage of the disease inferred from
patients' symptoms. Individual factors associated to disease etiology and
prognosis are often neglected. This project develops a personalized
preoperative-assessment and postoperative-control system for: (1) efficient risk
evaluation of individual patient; (2) personalized modeling and estimation of a
patient's heart function; (3) robust and adaptive control of implanted Left
Ventricular Assist Devices. The outcomes from this work can lead to technologies
that can revolutionize the end-stage heart failure therapy and benefit the
overall population of heart failure patients, which will ultimately advance the
health and life quality of the whole society. Broader impact on education
includes new curriculum modules, science outreach activities, and active
recruitment and involvement of underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will bring statistical inference,
personalized cardiac modeling, and adaptive control theory into a unified
framework for efficient modeling and analysis of heart condition, as well as a
practical infrastructure for effective monitoring and control of LVAD. It will
leverage modeling, monitoring, control, and optimization methodologies in
personalized diagnosis and therapeutic design of LVAD implantation. In
particular, this project will: (1) integrate the probabilistic risk analysis
with elastic net regularization to predict implantation risk and survival time;
(2) develop a spectral approximation-based surrogate model to efficiently
quantify parametric uncertainties and accurately estimate model parameters for
personalized cardiac modeling; (3) adaptively tune the LVAD controller through a
quadratic optimization procedure to maintain the cardiac output and pressure
perfusion within acceptable physiological ranges concerning different
physiological activities. The accomplishment of this project will give rise to a
new paradigm of personalized risk stratification, treatment planning, and
postoperative care for end-stage heart failure patients, as opposed to
traditional guideline-based solutions. The methodologies are transformative to
various fields that involve risk assessment, image segmentation, computational
modeling, and adaptive control. These applications include neural systems,
advanced manufacturing and civil infrastructure.