* 1728910
* International conference support: Biological modifications of the seabed and sediment-water interactions
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Josephine Aller, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 05/31/2018
* USD 10,000.00

This award would provide partial support for an international workshop, entitled
"Biological modification of the seabed: biogeochemical and ecological processes
in a changing world," to be held in August 2017 at Stonybrook University. This
would be the fifth in a series of conferences on seafloor processes, held every
three years, and the first to be held in North America. The primary purpose of
the conference is to communicate and promote cutting edge research on the
uppermost layers of ocean sediments, and how animals that live there affect
physical, chemical, and biological processes. NSF funding would support travel
costs for invited speakers and the participation of ten early career
researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bioturbation of the seabed plays a central
role in aquatic elemental cycling and as a determinant of biological
productivity, particularly in coastal regions where sedimentary deposits are in
close proximity to the photic zone. Bioturbation processes are critical for
dealing with practical coastal management issues and making quantitative
prediction of the impacts of ocean acidification, dredge spoil disposal, and
dynamics of harmful algal blooms in coastal regions. The conference will provide
a venue where established investigators at the forefront of their research
areas, early career researchers, and advanced students can interact both
formally and informally. A subset of contributions from the conference will be
published in The Journal of Marine Research following external review and will
be posted on publicly accessible websites. Abstracts of all presentations will
be publicly available on the conference website.