* 1728090
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Legal and Moral Sources of Trust in the Social Lives of Displaced People
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Kerem Ussakli, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2019
* USD 21,974.00

The research supported by this award investigates the local-level legal and
moral relationships through which displaced people are incorporated into new
social environments. Massive global population displacement has produced what
some label the greatest humanitarian crisis since the founding of the United
Nations. But explaining the full ramifications of displacement remains a
challenging problem for social scientists. Those who ascribe to rational choice
models may see the decision to move as a reasoned choice given situational
factors. Others point to structural factors, such as political and economic
inequalities, to explain dislocation. But these explanations do not account for
the legal and ethical relationships, grounded in trust, that make it possible
for displaced people to be re-emplaced after relocation. This research will
investigate the micro-processes through which trust is cultivated by and for
displaced people. Understanding these processes, critical to comprehending what
is needed to end the crisis, is important for advancing social science theory
about displacement and for U. S. policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
be carried out by Stanford University anthropology doctoral student, Kerem Can
Ussakli, as part of advanced training in how to conduct empirically grounded
scientific fieldwork, under the supervision of Dr. Thomas Blom Hansen. The
research will be conducted in the Kurdistan Regional Government of Iraq. This is
an appropriate site because after gaining autonomy, the region has become known
for its resilience, social cohesion, and hospitality for the internally
displaced populations. The researcher will look at sponsorship relations between
Iraqi internally displaced people and their Kurdish hosts, to examine how
individuals create cultural networks and moral mechanisms of trust even in
conditions of prolonged violence. He will work with local non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), humanitarian workers, lawyers, displaced people, and local
residents to document the varying legal statuses and claims raised by each
actor. Data will be collected through a mixed-methods approach including
participant observation, interviews and life-histories and archival research.
Findings from this research will be useful to policymakers who seek better-
informed policies in the fields of state-building, refugee settlement,
government, and international law.