* 1728549
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Situating the Effects of Public US Environmental Policy Making
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Chandra Middleton, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Brian Bornstein
* 01/31/2019
* USD 25,200.00

Government regulations that shape our lives are often influenced by a legal
procedure known as "informal rulemaking," or "notice and comment." This
procedure allows members of the public to submit comments critiquing policies
before they become law. Its effectiveness in terms of participation in
governance hinges on what happens to comments once they are submitted. This
research project investigates the way bureaucratic actors construct and respond
to perceptions of "the public" in rule-creation and rule-implementation,
specifically around environmental governance. How do government officials
interpret commenters' ideas of what the environment is and how it is valued? And
how do government officials, who have their own experiences and beliefs, create
the details of this legal process through behaviors and social practices carried
out in their day-to-day work lives? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan
involves 13 months on site in the Environmental Protection Agency, including
agency approved participant observation and interviews with its employees. In
addition, the researcher will conduct interviews with commenters and analyze
their submissions to learn how they experience and value the environment and
participation in informal rulemaking. This research will contribute to
understanding of both how government officials' everyday work justifies policy
decisions about how to implement public participation mechanisms and the effects
on state-making of officials' notions of citizenship, governance, and public
participation.