* 1728015
* A Transatlantic Institute for Volumetric Powder Bed Fusion
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* John Pearce, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2022
* USD 399,847.00

Although the additive manufacturing (AM) industry is projected to grow at an
increasing rate, one of the most significant barriers to additional growth is
the slow build speed of most AM technologies. The transatlantic institute for
volumetric powder bed fusion (PBF) is focused on removing that barrier. PBF is
an AM technology that fabricates parts by selectively fusing powdered material
with a heat source (typically, a laser) in a layer-by-layer process. It is one
of the most widely used AM technologies for building functional end-use parts,
but it can be quite slow, requiring hours or days to build a large part. The
objective of this project is to build the research foundation for a volumetric
PBF process that has the potential to increase production rates by more than an
order-of-magnitude by sintering the parts volumetrically rather than layer-by-
layer. This project is a collaboration between leading AM researchers at The
University of Texas at Austin and the University of Nottingham, with matching
funds pledged from the UK ESPRC, so it is expected to build a new framework for
US-UK collaboration to overcome the limitations of current AM technologies.
Opportunities for international student and faculty exchanges, virtual
institutes, and undergraduate research projects will enhance the collaboration
and provide opportunities for international networking and mentoring. This award
is co-funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research moves beyond the current layer-based approach
to rapidly create 3D objects in a volumetric fashion. The research path for
volumetric PBF is to deposit powdered material with a patterned dopant in a
layer-wise fashion. The dopant will be engineered to selectively absorb
microwave/RF energy. Once the layers are formed, the volume will be subjected to
microwave/RF fields that sinter only where the dopant is present, eliminating
the need for layer-by-layer heating and increasing build speeds. To realize this
volumetric PBF capability, fundamental research tasks are planned to build our
knowledge of how dopants affect selective heating of polymer powder beds induced
by RF/microwave radiation. Computational and physical experiments will determine
appropriate dopants and concentrations and processing conditions for maximizing
part accuracy and mechanical properties and minimizing processing time. Physical
experiments will also determine the best material jetting routes to deposit the
dopants accurately and uniformly over the selective area and evaporate the
solvent carriers quickly.