* 1728902
* Collaborative Research: High-Performance Computational Standards For Redistricting
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Bruce Cain, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 242,170.00

General Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project develops computational tools that
objectively evaluate redistricting plans, and automate the creation of
redistricting plans to satisfy particular criteria selected by users. The tool
will provide a mechanism for decision-makers to use when negotiating
redistricting plans, eliminating the inherent bias that arises when the data and
the ability to propose plans are available to only a few political interests.
The project will entail multiple elements, namely: formulate the redistricting
problem as a discrete optimization problem, introduce quantitative measurements
to score maps on a wide set of criteria, create novel optimization algorithms
customized for the redistricting problem to identify maps that score well on
given criteria, and create a computational tool that allows states, individuals,
and political parties to negotiate redistricting plans. In addition to the
development of the computational tool, this project will engage in a detailed
study of how to use computational models to shed new substantive insight and aid
in the creation of fairness standards in the American redistricting process.
Such standards have been elusive despite decades of effort. The broader impact
of the work seeks to transform the upcoming future redistricting rounds by
opening it up to participation to a broader and more diverse group of
stakeholders. Likewise the tool will provide greater flexibility and enhanced
capabilities for developing redistricting plans than ever before. In the
research realm, the algorithm development will also be applicable to large-scale
optimization problems that utilize massively parallel computing architecture.
The project also contributes to graduate education, providing instruction about
the application of computational approaches to an array of social scientific
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The contributions
of this work span a variety of disciplines including political science, law,
computer science, math, operations research, and supercomputing. In the computer
science and supercomputing realm, the research will tune and enable a parallel
genetic algorithm library to scale to hundreds of thousands of processors. The
algorithm advances operations research heuristics for large combinatorial
optimization problems. The implementation is a hybrid metaheuristic that
combines the search capabilities of evolutionary algorithms with refinements for
diversification and intensification to empower a more efficient and effective
search process. The mathematical approach yields new quantitative measures of
political phenomenon. In political science and law, the project will create a
new ability to synthesize and analyze massive amounts of data that will yield
new substantive insights about fairness standards for redistricting as well as
the effect and impact of redistricting on the democratic process.