* 1728853
* Best Experienced Payoff Dynamics and Cooperative Play in Extensive Form Games
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,08/31/2020
* William Sandholm, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 195,262.00

This award funds research in game theory. The investigator seeks to develop and
analyze new models of population dynamics in situations where individuals
interact with others in strategic situations over time. The first part of the
project considers a situation in which individuals respond rationally to the
outcomes they experience when randomly matched with a partner. The goal here is
to demonstrate how the resulting dynamics lead to cooperative behavior even when
the individuals involved know that they will only interact with the same person
for a set time. The possibility of maintaining cooperative behavior in repeated
relationships with a set end date is a basic question in game theory, one with
direct relevance to many social sciences and many policy applications. The
dynamics studied in this project can provide one explanation for the persistence
of cooperative behavior and may help us develop policies and institutions that
support cooperation. The PI will also develop new public domain software, and
will demonstrate how to use that software to model game dynamics via an online
textbook/course. The software, online book, and course will enable students and
researchers in a wide variety of disciplines to experiment with evolutionary
game dynamics, without requiring that these students have extensive backgrounds
in game theory or mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first component of the
project studies best experienced payoff dynamics, under which revising agents
select a set of strategies to test, play each strategy against fixed numbers of
randomly chosen opponents, and switch to the strategy with the highest realized
payoff. Analysis based on backward induction predict fully uncooperative
behavior, while experimental evidence points to higher levels of cooperation.
The basic idea is that the dynamics possess an almost globally attractive rest
point exhibiting high levels of cooperation. This rest point is quite robust to
variations of the model. Because the dynamics take the form of polynomial
equations with rational coefficients, techniques from computational algebra are
useful to prove results and in describing the classes of games in which
cooperative play can be sustained. The second project considers evolutionary
game dynamics which incorporate intrinsic relations among different strategies.
These relations may reflect similarities in what playing the strategies entails,
perceptions that certain strategies are of a similar nature, or the contexts in
which the game is played. Nested replicator dynamics arise when imitating agents
evaluate strategies by comparing their payoffs not only to an exogenous
standard, but also to the average payoff earned by similar strategies. These
dynamics retail all basic convergence and stability properties of the replicator
dynamic, and can be lined to models from discrete choice theory via models of
reinforcement learning.