* 1728629
* Collaborative Research:   Selecting Sensors and Actuators for Topologically Evolving Networked Dynamical Systems: Battling Contamination in Water Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Nikolaos Gatsis, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 299,974.00

The objective of this project is the dynamic management of sensors and actuators
in networked systems with applications to minimizing contamination in drinking
water networks. A defining feature of modern infrastructures is the prevalence
and abundance of real-time sensing and actuation devices. The increased
integration of smart communities through Internet-enabled devices will achieve
superior system-level infrastructure performance and reliability. Power grids,
water systems, and transportation networks share billions of sensors and
actuators amongst them. Although the exponential increase in the number of
sensing and actuating devices offers an abundance of societal merits, the real-
time management of these devices becomes a daunting task for system
stakeholders. The dynamic deployment of sensors and actuators, actuators
implementing optimal actions, and sensors selectively reporting time- and space-
critical data, will lead to significant socio-economic gains. The specific
themes addressed by this project are curbing contamination levels in water
distribution networks and reducing energy consumption in power grids.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this project is to create fundamental
scientific methods that guide networked systems stakeholders in the adaptive
selection of the most reliable sensors and actuators--amid the inevitable
topologically evolution and uncertainty in these systems. The low- or high-
frequency topological evolution is a natural consequence of the physical changes
in networked systems. For example, the addition of nodes and links in networks
causes a change in topology. Related prior work focused on problems of
scheduling or one-time placement of sensors and actuators for mostly linear
systems. In contrast, this research investigates methods for adaptively
selecting sensing and actuating devices as network conditions change, in
addition to considering a wide range of control-theoretic metrics. Such an
approach significantly enhances the resilience of networked systems and
infrastructures to changes in topology, in addition to ensuring robustness
against uncertainty. The investigated research also has important impacts on
quality control of contamination-free water distribution networks that leverage
high-end mobile water sensors traversing pipes and tanks, while acquiring data
through wireless communications every few seconds. Exploiting the slow time-
scales of water networks, optimal and sub-optimal online algorithms are
developed based on semidefinite and mixed-integer programming. These algorithms
capitalize on the inherent sparsity of networked systems to obtain the optimal
timing and location of decontaminant injections, acting as actuators, while
simultaneously sampling data from mobile water sensors. This can ultimately
guarantee a minimal level of contamination in drink water networks.