* 1728743
* A Bio-Cultural Investigation of Intergenerational Epigenetic Mechanisms
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Bilinda Straight, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2023
* USD 470,956.00

The new science of epigenetics holds a promising pathway for understanding how
maternal experiences, including nutrition, environmental crises, and traumatic
events, affect fetal development and infant outcomes. The biocultural research
supported by this award is focusing on one epigenetic mechanism, DNA
methylation, because it is dynamically responsive to environmental conditions,
including climate, diet, toxins, and traumatic events. The research team will
investigate the intergenerational, biological effects of drought and food
shortages on mothers and their infants in a rural population. This research is
relevant to all human populations, and critically important because the impacts
on the fetus can be lifelong, including altered growth trajectories, obesity
risk, impaired immune response, and risk for psychological illness. Knowing how
extreme environmental events impact mechanisms for gene expression will aid in
developing needed tools for resilience in the United States and elsewhere. The
project will train university students, including those from groups
underrepresented in STEM fields, and foster international collaborations and
science education. Project findings will be shared with parents and the research
community, in addition to dissemination through academic publications and
presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be undertaken by
anthropologist Dr. Bilinda Straight (Western Michigan University) and her
interdisciplinary team. They will focus on the effects of climate extremes in a
context of rural poverty and persistent conflict, to clarify the connections
between exposures and developmental outcomes. The research site is in northern
Kenya, where an extreme drought in 2008-2009 devastated rural populations. This
is an ideal setting for the study because the lead researcher has worked in the
target communities since 1992, so essential baseline data and research
infrastructure are already in place. This makes possible a degree of
longitudinal depth that is rarely available and it also makes the project cost-
effective. The team will focus on the Samburu, livestock herders who keep
cattle, goats, and sheep, as well as camels in some communities. A 2008-2009
drought, which killed over half of Samburu cattle, resulted in widespread
hunger, and may have escalated the violent conflicts between Samburu and ethnic
neighbors. The study will employ a sibling-pair design, comparing children whose
mothers were in their first trimester of pregnancy during the drought to their
same-sex siblings conceived and born after full recovery from the drought. Data
collection from mothers and other caregivers will include interviews about their
experiences during the disaster, stress and trauma questionnaires focused on
mothers' recollections of stress and trauma during the drought, and caregiver
perceptions of child wellbeing. Data collection from children will include
activity observations; birth weight, height, weight, dietary, and illness data;
and saliva samples for the DNA methylation analysis.