* 1728051
* Studies of Ion-Exchange Process for Selective Placement of High-Density Carbon Nanotubes for Digital Logic Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Davood Shahrjerdi, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2021
* USD 291,971.00

Nanomaterials offer tremendous prospects to revolutionize future electronic and
photonic technologies. Despite enormous research efforts, assembling individual
nanoscale building blocks into high-level functional assemblies and ultimately
into systems remains a challenge. The hierarchical integration of nanomaterials
is particularly important for applications that require precise placement of
nanoscale building blocks with exceedingly high density. An important example of
such hierarchical integration includes assembling carbon nanotubes on a large
scale due to their tremendous potential for realizing next-generation computing
systems that are high-speed and power-efficient. However, assembling nanotubes
with high density in precise locations has been a major roadblock for enabling a
viable nanotube-based technology. This award aims at bridging the scientific and
technological gap by uncovering the fundamental surface science of a chemical
assembly process that is used for selective placement of nanotubes. The project
creates new research and educational opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students, specifically engaging students from underserved groups.
The scientific and technological aspects of the project, along with the
workforce training, will boost the efforts of the nation in maintaining global
technological leadership. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research
project is to study the fundamental surface science of selective placement of
carbon nanotubes (CNTs) based on ion-exchange chemistry for device applications.
This chemical assembly process involves electrostatic charge interactions at the
nanoscale. Specifically, the charge interactions occur between negatively
charged surfactant-wrapped CNTs dispersed in a solution and positively charged
self-assembled molecules in nanoscale hafnium oxide (HfO2) trenches. Currently,
the optimization of this ion-exchange chemistry is based on a series of trial
and error experiments in which the CNT density is used as the only measurable
metric. To understand the nature of these interactions, a new methodology that
quantifies the Coulombic interactions at nanoscale is studied. To this end, a
two-dimensional array of embedded 4-terminal silicon field-effect sensors with
nanoscale silicon channels that allow quantifying small electronic charges are
developed. The HfO2 trenches are then formed above these sensors to monitor the
effect of different processing parameters on the kinetics of the chemical
assembly. The project establishes a quantitative understanding of the kinetics
of the ion-exchange process for selective placement of high-density CNTs. It
also develops a new electrochemical camera based on a 2D array of the silicon
sensors for recording the dynamics of the ion-exchange chemistry with high
spatiotemporal resolution. This research paves the way for high-density
integration of CNTs on silicon substrates for high-speed and power-efficient
digital logic applications.