* 1728858
* DMREF: Computationally Driven-Genetically Engineered Materials (CD-GEM)
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2017,03/31/2023
* Richard Bonneau, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Eugenia Kharlampieva
* 03/31/2023
* USD 1,785,544.00

Non-technical Description: The development of materials capable of targeted
therapy and diagnosis or "theranosis" allows for simultaneously interfacing and
treating diseased cells while visualizing what is happening through imaging.
Powerful computational and experimental tools will be employed to develop
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)-traceable protein fibers capable of delivering
drugs. The resulting biomaterials will have broad societal impact in the field
of drug delivery and tissue engineering. Lessons learned from these studies can
be employed for delivery of other chemical agents with applications extending to
non-medical industries including personal care, cosmetics and environmental
remediation. This research will train the next generation of scientists and
engineers to employ cutting edge technologies in computational biology, protein
engineering and materials science to create, rapidly screen and characterize new
functional biomaterials. The project will also engage girls (predominantly women
of color) from the Urban Assembly Institute for Math and Science for Young Women
who are traditionally underrepresented in STEM on biomaterials in alignment with
the Next Generation Science Standards. In collaboration with the start-ups,
InSchoolApps, and the MakerSpace, the girls will participate in biomaterials
chemistry, computer programming, rendering of proteins in three dimensions and
visualization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: The fabrication of
multifunctional materials that can self-assemble into defined structures bears
tremendous potential for a number of application including drug delivery and
tissue engineering. One challenge is to deliver an appropriate chemical agent
and non-invasively monitor the surrounding area amidst a complex biological
milieu or extracellular matrix (ECM). The ECM is comprised of protein fibers
(from the nano to microscale) organized into a mesoscopic three-dimensional
network. The development of a material capable of targeted therapy and diagnosis
or "theranosis" would enable one to simultaneously interface with specific cells
while providing both detailed functional and molecular information through
visualization. We intend to drive design of protein fibers through computation
and assess through experimental analysis, their physicochemical properties with
the objective to predictably: 1) control self-assembly into fibers on the
mesoscale with functional capabilities of small molecule recognition; 2)
integrate non-canonical amino acids that encode thermostability and traceability
using our developed algorithms for fluorinated amino acids, beyond the limits of
biological diversity; and 3) biomineralize and order iron oxide nanoparticles on
the organized protein fiber substrates leading to image-ready bio-nanocomposites
with magnetic properties. The intellectual merit of this proposal relies on
developing a new paradigm for coiled-coil protein materials design that cycles
between computation and experimentation. This will enable the rapid iteration
for controlling fiber assembly and the identification of rules for coiled-coil
fiber and nanocomposite design. In addition to employing state-of-the-art open
source programs, we will also use synthetic biology to produce the proteins
enabling synthesis for high-throughput screening. This work is well aligned with
the Materials Genome Initiative, as we will apply the computational tools
already built for protein design with the aim of fabricating novel biomaterials,
in this case fibers and inorganic-organic hybrid composites. The versatility of
the proposed materials will not only prove useful for applications in
biomedicine, but also will lead to fundamental insight into computational
methods for modeling and designing protein fibers and nanocomposites.