* 1728882
* Cultural Recognition and Effective Democratic Transition
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Mike McGovern, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 181,903.00

Governance is frequently defined by a delicate balance between citizens' desires
to be provided services by a central government and their demands for autonomy,
to be left alone by that same government. Functioning democracies depend on the
effective management of this balance. This proves even more challenging in
multiethnic nation-states, where cultural, ethnic, or religious difference can
come to play central roles in the state's willingness or unwillingness to
provide protection and assistance. Such difference can also become the basis for
cultural minorities claiming the right to self-determination. In multiethnic
democracies, there often results a tension between demands for recognition, the
right to be counted, to vote, to be treated as an equal; and demands to exit the
polity, to take on the risks and potential rewards that accompany independence.
This project investigates whether strategies that invoke cultural rather than
territorial claims are effective for obtaining state services and recognition in
the context of democratic transition. Project findings will also be presented to
organizations involved in development pathways for effective governance,
conflict resolution standards, and sustainable transition to
democracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Michael McGovern of the University of
Michigan at Ann Arbor will explore the strategic deployment of culture as a
peaceful means of making claims on the central governing apparatus. The research
takes place in a context undergoing democratic transition, among the Danu people
in southern Shan State, Myanmar, which is selected as a site for investigating
this question because it contrasts with claims-making practices of most other
ethnic minority groups in Myanmar, defined by territorial claims and a history
of armed resistance to the state. Research will take place in three adjacent
townships in Shan State, located 1. in a semi-autonomous self-administered zone
(SAZ) of the Danu, a hybrid Shan-Burmese population, 2. in an SAZ governed by
the Pa-O National Organization, a former separatist group that fought the ethnic
Burman-dominated central government (as well as the locally dominant Shan) until
1994, and 3. in an ethnic Shan township that is not part of an SAZ, but that
sits between the two SAZs. Village-based participant observation, semi-
structured interviews with local elites and representatives of the central
state, and life histories with both villagers and local elites will allow the
researcher to investigate the ways in which instrumental use of culture and
alternation between armed resistance and cultural struggle do or do not lead to
different forms of everyday governance, cultural practice, and political
sentiment among ordinary civilian villagers and the local elites who speak on
their behalf. The research will contribute to understanding the ways both states
and minority groups utilize cultural claims, and to understanding the relations
among culture-making, territorial claims and violence.