* 1728734
* RAPID:  Collaborative Research:  Investigation of the transmission, infectivity and differential host specificity of a coral disease outbreak on Florida reefs
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Claudia Hase, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 05/31/2018
* USD 61,705.00

Corals are threatened by diseases globally, and understanding coral disease is
key to protecting reefs. Diseases are a major cause of coral mortality, yet
there is surprisingly little information on the causes and progression of
diseases in corals. Currently there is a widespread coral disease outbreak
occurring on the reefs of Florida that has already resulted in massive die-offs
in multiple coral species. At least 13 species of corals have been affected with
heavily impacted species being reduced to less than 3% of their initial
populations. This unprecedented outbreak in multiple species of corals provides
a unique but time-sensitive (outbreaks are ephemeral) opportunity to address
critical questions about diseases in corals. This project will directly examine
disease transmission, explore potential pathogens and examine coral defense
mechanisms of affected and resistant species. The combined efforts of multiple
researchers and agencies, addressing different components of the disease
outbreak, will provide much needed answers to questions concerning marine
diseases, which will likely be applicable not only to the Florida coral reefs
but to coral diseases world-wide. This research will be beneficial to those who
rely on coral reefs as a source for food, recreation, and coastal protection.
Furthermore, this project is designed to give the next generation of marine
scientists the training and tools to combat coral diseases in the future.

Disease is a complex process emerging under specific host-pathogen-environmental
conditions, and outbreaks can often be traced to a disturbance in the balance
among the three components. The impact of coral diseases will likely increase in
both intensity and geographic extent in the future; however, our ability to
understand or manage diseases in coral reef ecosystems has been hampered by the
lack of a systematic approach to understanding the pathology and pathogenesis of
diseases in corals using multiple epidemiological tools. There is surprisingly
little information on whether particular diseases are transmissible to
neighboring conspecifics, or whether some diseases are infectious across species
boundaries. An outbreak of tissue loss disease in multiple species of corals
across the Florida reef tract provides a unique but time-sensitive opportunity
to address critical questions about disease pathogenesis in corals. The proposed
research will directly test the transmission and infectivity, microbiome changes
and host specificity of this disease outbreak and use methods previously
utilized by members of the team to isolate and identify the causative agent. The
research team will work closely with managers in Florida agencies, attend
monthly conference calls and provide regular updates about this work. A
postdoctoral researcher and an undergraduate student intern will be engaged in
this research and trained in many areas of microbiology research. Researchers
will present lectures to the public at venues such as science museums and
environmental education facilities throughout the Florida Keys and Florida east
coast.