* 1729021
* Ambiguous Random Variables and Menu Effects
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Faruk Gul, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 386,370.00

This award funds research in the economic theory of how people make decisions.
The first part of the project will focus on how people make decisions in dynamic
situations characterized by ambiguity. These situations arise when people have
so little information that they cannot formulate ideas of how likely different
outcomes are. The second project seeks to develop a model that will predict what
psychologists and behavior economists call menu effects. These occur when the
choices available to an individual (the so-called 'menu') affects his/her
decision in ways that are not consistent with standard economic theory. This
project contributes to national interest because understanding individual
decision making in these economic contexts will help other researchers develop
new insights for management practice and public policy that will benefit the
U.S. public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focuses on ambiguity and on menu
effects. The first part offers a new theory of conditional probability and
conditional expectation (called evaluation) suitable for the analysis of dynamic
choice problems under ambiguity. It develops a new foundation for belief
revision under ambiguity and will characterize this updating rule by imposing
restrictions on the evaluation operator. Existing dynamic ambiguity models tend
to restrict the set of conditioning events, and this limits applicability to
problems that involve costly information acquisition. The new model permits
information to arrive in every possible order and identifies a new parameter
allows decision makers with identical behavior in static situations to behave
differently when facing dynamic problems. The second project provides a
framework for analyzing menu effects, in particular attraction, compromise, and
endowment effects. The goal is a model demonstrating that a variety of observed
deviations from standard consumer theory can be derived from a common underlying
source: the agent's inability to tailor his or her choice behavior to the
specific problem. The analysis reveals common features (causes) of each of the
three menu effects.