* 1729060
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Influence of Differential Conceptions of Dignity on Transitional Justice Efforts
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2018
* Vincent Crapanzano, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2018
* USD 24,968.00

Transitional justice has increasingly relied on the promise of dignity in post-
conflict resolution efforts. But researchers are discovering that how dignity is
pursued and achieved varies across different sociocultural contexts. Several
existing studies have documented that many people inhabit conditions that
preclude the possibility of a life with dignity. This project, which trains a
student in the methods of empirical, scientific data collection and analysis,
asks what factors foreclose the pursuit of dignity, and by extension, drive
those individuals away from peaceful resolution of past differences.
Understanding the causal relation between the pursuit of dignity and the turn to
extreme or militant alternatives to attain it is critical for developing
policies that can curtail the rise of such phenomena. In addition to providing
funding for the training of a graduate student in anthropology, the project
would enhance scientific understanding by broadly disseminating its findings to
organizations interested in issues of human rights and post-conflict
reconciliation.

Douaa Sheet, under the supervision of Dr. Vincent Crapanzano of the City
University of New York, will explore how multiple moral frameworks influence
human behavior in the context of transitional justice efforts. This research
will be conducted in Tunisia, which is selected as a research site because it is
currently witnessing a resurgence of protests across the country reiterating the
2011 Arab Spring demand for "dignity, freedom, and employment," making it a
particularly apt time to conduct this study. The research will focus on the
Truth and Dignity Commission (TDC), a mechanism of international human rights
where a locally elected commission is mandated to investigate the human rights
abuses of the fallen regime and recommend reparations for its victims. While the
TDC is mandated to recommend forms of redress for these victims, many of them
are boycotting the TDC and turning to alternative ways of recovering their
dignity. The investigator will visit the sites of renewed protests to collect
testimonies of the experiences of humiliation re-fueling the demand for dignity,
the moral traditions and theological concepts that victims mobilize to explain
their reasons for boycotting the TDC, and the appeal of alternatives such as
suicide and militant Islam or what they call jihad an-nafs (the struggle of the
self). Through the lens of the TDC and the heated controversies that have
surrounded its work, the investigator will explore the multiple moral traditions
informing the notion of dignity. The investigator will interview civil society
stakeholders, human rights lawyers, jurists, international rights experts, and
the victims involved in the process to identify what sources might contribute to
frustration with the TDC, when and how its mechanism are experienced as a form
of humiliation, and the extent to which the aspiration for a future with dignity
might inform the way Ben Ali's victims are responding to the TDC and refiguring
the strategies through which they deal with their past abuses. Findings from
this research will provide insight into the reasons dignity is such a valued
aspiration, the social and economic costs of not conforming to the dictates of
this moral tradition, and the reasons non-radical persons are turning to radical
alternatives to reassert their dignity.