* 1729787
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Transforming Electrocatalysis using Rational Design of Two Dimensional Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Rohan Mishra, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2023
* USD 361,177.00

The project will employ an integrated theoretical and experimental approach to
rapidly discover highly efficient catalysts, based on two-dimensional (2D)
materials in contact with an ionic liquid, for a variety of electrochemical
reactions of importance for sustainable energy generation, chemicals
manufacturing, environmental remediation, and energy storage. Electrocatalysis -
as employed in energy storage and conversion devices such as advanced batteries,
fuel cells, photovoltaics, and chemical electrolyzers - is becoming an
increasingly important alternative to conventional thermal catalysis, but needs
further improvements in efficiency, cost reduction, and chemical selectivity for
wide-scale commercial implementation. The project will address those needs by
combining first-principles density functional theory calculations, including
solvent interaction effects and theory-guided machine learning, to identify new
ionic-liquid electrolytes and low-cost 2D materials capable of displacing
existing thermal processes with electrocatalytic processes utilizing renewable
and/or sustainable resources. Educational and outreach components of the project
will focus on preparing both graduate and undergraduate students for the
workforce needed to realize advanced energy technologies. Emphasis at both
universities will be placed on the recruitment of minority and underrepresented
student populations through existing programs including the Minority Engineering
Recruitment and Retention Program (MERRP) at the University of Illinois-Chicago,
and the Office of Undergraduate Research at Washington University. The
theoretical and experimental dataset on 2D materials generated in the study,
along with relevant computational codes, will be disseminated to the broader
research community through on-line repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two-
dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) in contact with ionic
liquid (IL) electrolytes will be used as the starting materials offering a new
paradigm for electrocatalysis based on materials with low work function,
significant overlap of the d-band partial density of states with the Fermi
energy, and an electrolyte 'solvent' that protects rather than poisons the
catalytic sites. Novel material combinations and structures will be predicted
using computational tools and then synthesized using chemical vapor deposition,
chemical vapor transport and colloidal chemistry. Atomic and electronic
structure will be characterized using in-situ aberration-corrected scanning
transmission electron microscopy (STEM). The information obtained from high-
resolution STEM, including high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) and annular
bright-field (ABF) imaging, as well as electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS)
and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (XEDS), will be used to confirm
successful synthesis of the desired structures and to create starting
configurations for the first-principles modeling efforts. Both ex-situ and in-
situ electrochemical experiments will be conducted to measure the activity and
selectivity of the synthesized materials. In particular, the study will utilize
a novel graphene liquid cell, developed by one of the investigators, that
enables atomic-resolution imaging and spectroscopy in a liquid environment.
Mechanistic studies of the electrocatalytic reactions and transport measurements
will be made utilizing in-situ differential electrochemical mass spectrometry
(DEMS) together with a traditional silicon nitride based electrochemical stage
for STEM characterization under operando conditions. Taken together, the
advanced synthesis, characterization, and evaluation techniques, coupled with
efficient computational search methods, will accelerate the discovery of 2D
material-based-catalysts with superior activity and selectivity for various
electrochemical reactions including the oxygen reduction reaction (important in
fuel cell technology), and the hydrogen evolution reaction (important in water
electrolysis).