* 1729336
* DMREF: Adaptive Control of Microstructure from the Microscale to the Macroscale
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* John Wen, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,524,300.00

The control of processing conditions, including the temperature and load
sequences during manufacturing of materials and parts, is critical to optimize
strength and performance. These properties depend in turn upon the detailed
internal structure, or microstructure, of the material. Historically, the
optimum processing conditions have been determined largely through experience
and trial-and-error, requiring long lead times to manufacture and to market.
This Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) award
supports research focused on establishing the methodologies necessary to
substantially shorten these development cycles. This will be achieved by
developing new combinations of experimental, computational and process control
methods to actively control processing of advanced metals, to achieve the target
microstructures that are predicted for optimized performance. Initial
implementations will employ custom-built equipment whereby manufacturing
conditions can be replicated at the laboratory scale, while imaging at very high
magnification how the microstructure of the material evolves. The evolving
microstructure will then be compared during processing to computational
simulations of the desired microstructure, and adjusted as required using active
control technologies. The optimum processing conditions will then be extended to
manufacturing conditions working with a set of industrial collaborators. This
work will thus develop new methodologies that can be of significant competitive
advantage to the US metals manufacturing industry. The set of students engaged
in this research will be trained in both the specific techniques and in the
overall outlook of applying fundamental materials research to the challenge of
accelerating manufacturing development cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will develop the understanding and methods necessary to generate and
interpret experimental and simulated descriptions of microstructural
transformation during thermo-mechanical processing, and then to apply the
necessary control of processing conditions to generate a prescribed
microstructure in the alloy Ti-6%Al-4%. Real-time scanning electron microscope
observations and mechanical property measurements during thermo-mechanical
deformation will be coupled to predictive simulations of microstructural
evolution. Real-time adjustment of the evolving microstructure will then be
enabled through adaptive control of the temperature and strain history using
model-based feed-forward control and measurement-based feedback control.
Furthermore, through working with an established set of industrial
collaborators, this new knowledge will be translated into macro scale
applications. The overall intellectual significance of this work is thus the
synthesis of experimental characterization, process control, and microstructure
simulation to predict, monitor and control microstructural evolution during
thermo-mechanical processing, and the scaling of laboratory tests to macro-scale
applications. The major broader focus will be on training the next-generation
workforce to be skilled in the integrated experiment-simulation-data approach
epitomized by the Materials Genome Initiative.