* 1729350
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Accelerated Development of Damage Tolerant and Oxidation Resistant Alumina-Forming MAX Phases
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Miladin Radovic, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,055,165.00

Materials capable of withstanding harsh environments have the potential to
enable a wide range of important technologies. A family of ceramic carbide and
nitride materials referred to as MAX phases possess unusual and often unique
sets of properties that combine some of the best attributes of ceramics and
metals. These are light, stiff, stable and able to resist high temperatures like
typical ceramics, but also damage tolerant, ductile at high temperatures and as
readily machinable as metals. In addition, some of the MAX phases form
protective layers when heated in air, that are extremely resistant to thermal
shock, thermal cycling and chemical attack. This Designing Materials to
Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) award supports fundamental
research to understand the process by which these protective layers in MAX
phases are formed. This research will incorporate computational simulations and
experimental synthesis and characterization to build the knowledge base for the
accelerated development and design of MAX phase materials with outstanding
mechanical properties for high temperature applications. Results of this project
will foster application of MAX phases in power generation, energy conversion,
transportation, aerospace and defense technologies. This project also provides
specialized multidisciplinary training for graduate and undergraduate students
on integrating materials informatics, modeling, atomistic computations and
experiments in materials design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite two decades of
experimental studies on MAX phases, designing their optimal composition and
microstructure has remained a challenge mainly because of the large number of
possible compositions and microstructures, and a lack of robust physical models
that relate their composition and microstructure to properties. The overall goal
of this research program is to overcome those challenges and foster design of
MAX phases for high temperature applications by: (1) developing physics-based
predictors for the formation of protective alumina layers; (2) developing
micromechanical models and identifying compositional/structural parameters that
control intrinsic thermomechanical properties; (3) designing Bayesian
calibration protocols for parameter identification; (4) implementing and
deploying Efficient Global Optimization protocols for the efficient discovery of
MAX phases with optimal thermomechanical properties and; (5) validating the
proposed framework through material synthesis, characterization and
thermomechanical testing. This will provide guiding fundamental knowledge and
protocols to design optimal compositions and microstructures of the MAX phases
for high temperature application.