* 1729406
* Neural and cognitive bases of costly altruism toward strangers
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Abigail Marsh, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 438,886.00

The purpose of this research is to investigate the role of altruism on behavior,
and to investigate ways to develop altruism. Millions of Americans engage in
risky and costly behaviors to help complete strangers. For example, every year
hundreds of altruistic kidney donors undergo major surgery. This surgery
involves removing one of their kidneys so that it can be transplanted into a
person they have never met, and likely will never meet. Acts of extraordinary
altruism like this are difficult to explain using existing theories of social
behavior, which focus on altruism that benefits relatives or a group one is
closely connected to. This research tests the novel hypothesis that costly
altruism toward strangers can be explained in part by emotional responses to
close and distant others. This project examines patterns of activity in
subcortical brain regions that drive rapid emotional responses toward socially
distant others. It is hypothesized that structured training in generating
kindness and compassion towards progressively distant others will lead to
greater altruism toward strangers as well as patterns of neural activity that
supports such costly acts. This project aims to identify neural processes that
support extraordinary altruism for strangers, which may provide key insights
into the roots of human care and compassion with great implications for the
health and well-being of the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines
the role of social distance on donating a kidney to strangers, and its neural
underpinnings. As people are more distant to the self the willingness to
sacrifice for others drops steeply. In contrast, those who engage in acts of
extraordinary altruism show minimal social discounting and are willing to
sacrifice for even distant others. Dr. Abigail Marsh and her team at Georgetown
University examine the neurological mechanisms that support this reduced social
discounting. They compare altruists to controls as they make decisions about
keeping or sharing resources. Further, they examine the influence of a structure
loving-kindness training on reducing social discounting. Brain imaging will be
used to examine the influence of training on affective neural responses, and to
understand the ways that ordinary people learn to be more altruistic toward
strangers. Identifying the mechanisms that support social discounting, and
determining how flexible these mechanisms are is crucial for understanding how
people develop the capacity for generosity and altruism for distant others, even
strangers.