* 1729882
* Collaborative Research:  Understanding the Late Paleozoic Icehouse from a Southern Hemisphere (Parana√¨ Basin, Brazil) paleo-perspective
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Isabel Montanez, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 355,168.00

The late Paleozoic Ice Age is the longest-lived glacial interval of the past
half billion years, sharing many parallels with the current icehouse in which
humans evolved and live. During the Paleozoic icehouse (340 to 290 million years
ago) atmospheric oxygen and carbon levels were anomalous, life moved onto land,
the first wooded forests expanded across the Earth, and large-scale wildfires
emerged. Thus, it is important that we develop a more complete understanding of
the late Paleozoic Earth and its dynamic glaciation history. The glacial-marine
Parana Basin, Brazil provides an ideal opportunity for this work and the project
will include training for U.S. and Brazilian students through seminars, field
and lab work, and exchange visits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
address three research objectives. First, an exportable, accurate and high-
precision chronostratigraphic framework will be built by defining U-Pb zircon
ages of unprecedented precision and accuracy for this region. This will permit
testing of existing hypotheses of Gondwanan glaciation and will place
constraints on the degree of synchronicity of the glaciations and establish the
timing of terminal deglaciation in west-central Gondwana. Second, refined
depositional and glaciation models will be developed through sedimentologic and
detrital zircon provenance studies, integrated into the high-precision
chronostratigraphic framework. This will place quantitative constraints on the
timing, source, and geographic extent of glaciers feeding into the Parana Basin
and permit reconstruction of changes in their glacial mass balance through time.
Third, this research will develop U-Pb age-calibrated geochemical proxy records
of continental climate variability that will test the hypothesis that major
shifts in regional climate occurred in-step with periods of glacier
advance/retreat and terminal deglaciation. This project will lead to a more
complete understanding of icehouse to greenhouse transitions of the past.