* 1729452
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: A Data-Centric Approach for Accelerating the Design of Future Nanostructured Polymers and Composites Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Curt Breneman, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 795,623.00

Polymer nanocomposites are highly tailorable materials that, with careful
design, can achieve superior properties not available with existing materials.
Most polymer nanocomposites are developed using an Edisonian (trial and error)
process, severely limiting the capacity to optimize performance and increasing
time to implementation. The solution is a data-driven design approach. As an
example, this Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future
(DMREF) project will design new material systems that simultaneously optimize
for dielectric response and mechanical durability, a combination currently not
achievable but necessary for high voltage electrical transmission and
conversion. These new materials will have a significant economic impact on
society because they will enable higher efficiency generation and transmission
of electricity. More broadly, this new design approach will result in new
nanostructured polymer material systems that will impact a wide range of
industries such as energy, consumer electronics, and manufacturing. To ensure
broad access to this work, the data, tools and models developed will be
integrated and shared through an open data resource, NanoMine. The team will
interact with the scientific community to create an integrated virtual
organization of designers and researchers to test and improve the models.
Educational components will reach undergraduate and graduate communities via
interdisciplinary cluster programs at the two institutions, and provide
undergraduate research opportunities and web based instructional modules and
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is based on a central research
hypothesis that using a data-driven approach, grounded in physics, allows
integration of models that bridge length scales from angstroms to millimeters to
predict dielectric and mechanical properties to enable the design and
optimization of new materials. Data, algorithms and models will be integrated
into the new and growing nanocomposite data resource NanoMine to address
challenges in data-driven material design. This research will result in
advancements in three areas. First, integrating a broad set of literature data
and targeted experiments with multiscale methods will enable the development of
interphase models to predict local polymer properties near interfaces considered
critical for modeling polymer composites. Second, a hybrid approach utilizing
machine-learning to bridge length scales between physics-based modeling domains
will be used to create meaningful multiscale processing-structure-property
relationship work flows. And, third, a Bayesian inference approach will utilize
the knowledge contained in a dataset as a prior probability distribution and
guide 'on-demand' computer simulations and physical experiments to accelerate
the search of optimal material designs. Case studies will demonstrate the data-
centric approach to accelerate the development of next-generation nanostructured
polymers with predictable and optimized combinations of properties.