* 1729603
* Collaborative Research: CI-SUSTAIN: StarExec: Cross-Community Infrastructure for Logic Solving
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Aaron Stump, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 610,641.00

StarExec is a web-accessed compute service that was developed (under a prior NSF
grant) as a community resource/infrastructure to support researchers in the
field of automatic theorem proving and other research areas that depend on
logic-solving methods. Research groups in these areas cannot support their own
infrastructure due to the high cost of the hardware and the high degree of
specialized expertise needed to run and optimize large-scale solver executions.
StarExec users can upload solvers and benchmarks to the system, configure and
execute jobs to run selected solvers on selected benchmarks, and collaborate by
sharing data and artifacts. The infrastructure was first developed to facilitate
solver competitions and now supports a large number of users in many areas of
research where logic solvers are used. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new grant
sustains and expands StarExec by providing additional hardware (computing
clusters) and human resources at the University of Iowa to meet the growing
demand for this infrastructure, as the use of logic solvers expands to new
research areas and larger-scale problems. Part of the long-term, sustainability
strategy is to create multiple instances of the StarExec software, starting with
the University of Miami, which will serve as a demonstration and model for
future expansion.