* 1729289
* Epigenetic influences on the early development of social brain functions
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* James Morris, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 06/30/2021
* USD 560,415.00

Acquiring skills for effective social interaction is critical for infants. This
project will examine the early development of brain processes that underpin
successful social interactions, and identify factors that affect social
functioning. The researchers will investigate social and brain development
during the first year of life with a specific focus on the role of oxytocin, a
neurotransmitter and hormone implicated in several social behaviors. By
revealing how brain biology shapes and interacts with early infant social
development, this research will fill an important gap in our knowledge and has
broad implications for understanding healthy and atypical development. The
project is multidisciplinary in nature as it uses a cutting-edge approach
combining epigenetic, neuroscience, and behavioral methods. The findings will be
broadly applicable to multiple disciplines and will inform understandings of
molecular biology, neuroscience, and social psychology. The planned experiments
will provide valuable research opportunities and unique training for students
interested in developmental psychology, cognitive science, molecular genetics,
and developmental neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The human brain undergoes
critical development during the first year of life, which allows for the
effective processing of social information from faces and voices. This project
will test the hypothesis that endogenous oxytocin impacts social information
processing during early development by regulating levels of neural noise during
face and voice processing. Oxytocin acts as a neurotransmitter in the mammalian
brain and plays a critical role in many social behaviors. Oxytocin receptors
(OXTR) allow the brain to respond to oxytocin, and their quantity in the brain
is variable in the population. The production of these receptors is under
epigenetic control, specifically through DNA methylation, and variability in
OXTR prevalence is linked to variability in social information processing among
adults and to the presence of neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism. The
project will examine whether, from early in development, neural noise plays a
predominant role in establishing the salience of social information conveyed by
faces and voices, through a process governed by the oxytocin system. To this
end, this project will (1) investigate longitudinal changes in neural noise
across the first year of life using electroencephalography, (2) assess whether
individual differences in neural noise predict social information processing and
behavioral outcomes during infancy, and (3) map how epigenetic modifications in
the oxytocin system impact levels of neural noise during early development.
Studying neural noise in typically developing infants and identifying the
processes that contribute to its individual variability will foster a deeper and
more mechanistic understanding of early social and brain development.