* 1729887
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Multiscale Alloy Design of HCP Alloys via Twin Mesh Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Irene Beyerlein, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 09/30/2022
* USD 400,000.00

Hexagonal close packed (HCP) metals such as magnesium and titanium have the
potential to provide unprecedented combinations of mechanical properties.
Successful incorporation of HCP metals into engineering designs is, however,
hindered by their limited plasticity. Recent research results have introduced
the exciting potential of an approach termed "twin mesh engineering" which can
be applied to induce simultaneous strengthening and toughening in HCP metals.
This Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) award
supports fundamental research to formulate the scientific framework required to
design twin meshes. The integrated experimental and modeling research activities
will seek to discover if alloying can be used to create the right twin mesh for
high strength, high toughness HCP alloys. The resulting materials will have
applications in energy efficient manufacturing where materials with attributes
such as high strength, low density, room-temperature formability and cost
competitiveness are required. A diverse group of student researchers will
participate in the research program at both the graduate and undergraduate
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a research collaboration
between the Universities of California at Santa Barbara, Irvine and Davis to
explore interrelationships between slip and twinning in HCP metals, such as
magnesium and titanium. As fine slip tends to accentuate twinning in FCC metals,
one of the goals of this research will be to evaluate the influence of alloying
elements on slip patterns, both experimentally and computationally using first
principles. After discerning compositions that twin readily, textures that
enable the formation of 3-D twin meshes in polycrystalline samples will be
assessed computationally. Since slip and twinning occur concomitantly, twin
meshes will block both slip and twins, leading to strengthening and toughness.
The knowledge generated from this research will be used to create a multiscale
tool kit, called the twin-mesh module (TMM), which when fully operational will
coordinate calculations pertaining slip-twin and twin-twin interactions,
processing, twin-mesh microstructure evolution, and properties. Experimentally
validated TMM will accelerate materials discovery and design of HCP alloys by
providing guidance on processing pathways to create 3-D twin meshes that are
consistent with industrial practices. This advancement along the Materials
Development Continuum will lead to expanded use of low-density, high strength,
high toughness alloys, reducing weight and fuel consumption.