* 1729915
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Recovering Ergativity in Heritage Samoan
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Kamil Ud Deen, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2019
* USD 16,952.00

Human languages can be split into two groups based upon how they mark the
grammatical subject and object in a sentence. Accusative languages like English,
Spanish and Japanese mark subjects distinctly from objects; ergative languages
like Kaqchikel, Inuktitut and Samoan mark the direct object of a transitive verb
in the same way as the subject of an intransitive verb. Ergativity is thought to
be a fragile feature of language since ergative languages may lose their
ergative marking and become accusative languages, but accusative languages
rarely become ergative. This shift occurs because children acquire ergativity
quite late in childhood, making ergativity susceptible to loss. Second language
(L2) learners have great difficulty with it, and heritage speakers whose
childhood home language is ergative have particular difficulty with ergativity
if the dominant societal language is accusative. Thus many ergative languages
are in danger of losing this defining characteristic. This dissertation project
investigates how ergativity might be strengthened in the minds of heritage
Samoan speakers by presenting them with a targeted protocol designed to increase
their knowledge of ergativity. This project contributes to our understanding of
an important though understudied property of human language, ergativity, as well
as a large (and understudied) learning population, namely heritage speakers. It
also furthers our understanding of an important language of the Pacific: Samoan.
The research protocol and results will have important implications for language
pedagogy that target languages with fragile grammatical features such as
ergativity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiments will be conducted by Grant
Muagututi&amp;#699;a, a doctoral student at the University of Hawaii, and will
involve three groups of learners (native, heritage, L2) in a series of
experiments targeting morphological ergativity (case) and syntactic ergativity
(relative clauses, wh-questions) in both comprehension and production. The
durability of the recovered ergativity is tested by increasing the length of
time between instruction and testing. Comparing L2 speakers and heritage
speakers addresses whether the increase in ergativity is attributable to
knowledge gained as (heritage) children, while testing case, relativization and
wh-questions addresses whether morphological ergativity transfers to syntactic
ergativity.