* 1729489
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Structure Genome of Metal-Insulator Transitions
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Susanne Stemmer, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,200,000.00

Non-technical Description: The world has seen an enormous increase in computing
power, but the current path forward for the semiconductor industry is beset with
roadblocks. A different strategy for a future generation of electronic devices
is based on materials that exist in multiple electronic states. A new generation
of electronic materials are required for this purpose, as are the means for
switching between multiple electronic states. The fundamental science that is
the focus of this project is centered on the sudden change in the electrical
properties of certain materials when they are switched through a so-called
metal-to-insulator transition by an external trigger. On one side of the
transition, the material behaves like copper metal, while on the other side, it
behaves like insulating wood. The project goal is to design and discover
materials exhibiting such metal-to-insulator transitions that enable room-
temperature operation and that display large changes in the key property of
interest; the electrical resistivity. The strategy is to control properties by
structural design at the atomic scale. The approach employs a tightly integrated
combination of experiment, theory, and data-mining of the literature, that would
enable new insights to emerge and aid in the design of desirable materials. This
project will deliver a research workflow with a suite of tools to enable
assessment and experimental validation of new concepts for the discovery of key
materials. The project will articulate protocols for selecting high-performing
materials, leading to an expanded palette of compounds that could impact future
technologies. The teaching and training of students and the discovery
capabilities of the project are interwoven, and aimed at broadening
participation through the involvement of the investigators and their group
members in public outreach events. The development of modules for undergraduate
and graduate courses and the involvement of students in interdisciplinary team
environments are intrinsic to project plan. The project will yield a plethora of
new and mined data on a range of oxides and new computational materials
approaches. These will be aggregated into open-access databases on public
portals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: This project will pursue
discovery of the atomic-level genetic code of materials displaying metal-to-
insulator transitions through approaches that establish links between unit cell
level crystal structure and the macroscopic electronic response, profiting from
a coupling of theory, data, and comprehensive experimentation. At the present
time, the essential data and structure-electronic function relationships to
decipher the genetic code (generic descriptors) of metal-to-insulator
transitions do not exist in a format which permits predictive synthesis. The
project?s significance is that it recasts the problem into one of atomic
structure, focusing on the role of different kinds of structural distortions,
notably, breathing modes, Jahn-Teller distortions, and Peierls-like
instabilities across a broad range of structure types and chemistries. The
project will generate and collect a range of data that will permit the mapping
of electronic interactions into atomic features, applying informatics-based
methods to enable supervised and unsupervised learning. The project will
articulate predictive rules and protocols for selecting high-performing
materials, leading to an expanded palette of compounds that could impact
technologies beyond electronics. The teaching and training of students at
multiple levels and the discovery capabilities of the project are interwoven and
aimed at broadening participation by through public outreach events, through the
development of modules for undergraduate and graduate courses; and finally, by
involving students in interdisciplinary team environments. The project will
yield a plethora of new data on a range of oxides and new computational
materials approaches. These will be aggregated into databases on public web-
portals using a new portable file format designed for materials data. New
methods of data visualization will allow external users to interact, query, and
analyze the data for aims beyond those proposed herein. Data-driven models and
informatics workflows for generating quantitative models for metal-to-insulator
performance will be hosted with the aforementioned data and visualization tools
on the MIST: Metals and Insulators by Structural Tuning platform. The PIs also
plan to release MIST as open source and build a user community around the
platform by ensuring that interested researchers are able to contribute to the
MIST codebase. This will allow a wider growth of the project. This aspect is of
special interest to the software cluster in the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure, which has provided co-funding for this award. Advances in
synthesis, theory, and characterization will strengthen the scientific
capabilities and workforce by allowing students and academic or industrial
researchers to employ the formulated structure-property relationships for
educational and research purposes.