* 1729209
* CPS/Synergy/Collaborative Research: Safe and Efficient Cyber-Physical Operation System for Construction Equipment
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Chinemelu Anumba, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 12/31/2021
* USD 338,323.00

Equipment operation represents one of the most dangerous tasks on a construction
sites and accidents related to such operation often result in death and property
damage on the construction site and the surrounding area. Such accidents can
also cause considerable delays and disruption, and negatively impact the
efficiency of operations. This award will conduct research to improve the safety
and efficiency of cranes by integrating advances in robotics, computer vision,
and construction management. It will create tools for quick and easy planning of
crane operations and incorporate them into a safe and efficient system that can
monitor a crane's environment and provide control feedback to the crane and the
operator. Resulting gains in safety and efficiency wil reduce fatal and non-
fatal crane accidents. Partnerships with industry will also ensure that these
advances have a positive impact on construction practice, and can be extended
broadly to smart infrastructure, intelligent manufacturing, surveillance,
traffic monitoring, and other application areas. The research will involve
undergraduates and includes outreach to K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
work is driven by the hypothesis that the monitoring and control of cranes can
be performed autonomously using robotics and computer vision algorithms, and
that detailed and continuous monitoring and control feedback can lead to
improved planning and simulation of equipment operations. It will particularly
focus on developing methods for (a) planning construction operations while
accounting for safety hazards through simulation; (b) estimating and providing
analytics on the state of the equipment; (c) monitoring equipment surrounding
the crane operating environment, including detection of safety hazards, and
proximity analysis to dynamic resources including materials, equipment, and
workers; (d) controlling crane stability in real-time; and (e) providing
feedback to the user and equipment operators in a "transparent cockpit" using
visual and haptic cues. It will address the underlying research challenges by
improving the efficiency and reliability of planning through failure effects
analysis and creating methods for contact state estimation and equilibrium
analysis; improving monitoring through model-driven and real-time 3D
reconstruction techniques, context-driven object recognition, and forecasting
motion trajectories of objects; enhancing reliability of control through dynamic
crane models, measures of instability, and algorithms for finding optimal
controls; and, finally, improving efficiency of feedback loops through methods
for providing visual and haptic cues.