* 1729646
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Ethnographic and Historical Study of Therapeutic Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Jennifer Hirsch, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2018
* USD 25,200.00

This project seeks to understand how history and institutions may affect the
understanding of appropriate forms of therapy in specific times and places. By
examining the historical, political, and cultural processes that give rise to
particular therapies, the research will advance social scientific understanding
of the historical production of therapeutics, particularly for addictive
behaviors. The research is focused on the rise and spread of the therapeutic
community movement. Therapeutic communities are mutual-aid communities where
substance users and the homeless are sent to rehabilitate each other. No longer
common in the United States, where bio-medical and pharmaceutical approaches are
more common, therapeutic communities continue to spread in other parts of the
world. The researcher asks why this is the case and what the effects are for
caregivers, care receivers, and other stakeholders.

The research will be carried out in Puerto Rico by Columbia University
anthropology doctoral researcher, Caroline Parker, supervised by Dr. Jennifer
Hirsch. In Puerto Rico, which is both home to many therapeutic communities and a
key source of their spread to other countries, this form of care comprises a
crucial safety net for some of the island's most vulnerable populations. Puerto
Rican therapeutic communities are usually peer-operated: program graduates
perform essential caregiving duties as therapists, treatment leaders, and
directors. The researcher will undertake archival research and oral history
interviews to trace the historical growth of Puerto Rico's therapeutic
communities from a single state-run program founded in the early 1960s to a
decentralized network of over 150 mutual-aid collectives operating across the
island. In addition to the historical component, she will conduct twelve months
of ethnographic fieldwork in two of the communities, collecting data through
long-term participant observation and in-depth interviews. Finally, she will
combine legal-policy research and key informant interviews to examine the
specific institutions, state practices and laws that produce and sustain these
forms of care.