* 1729677
* DMREF:  Collaborative Research for the Design and Synthesis of Novel Magnetic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Kai Ming Ho, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2022
* USD 566,077.00

Non-technical Description: This collaborative research project will implement
new, transformative strategies for the design of novel magnetic materials, with
special focus on sustainable materials containing earth-abundant and inexpensive
elements. The project will couple a strong experimental effort with recent
theoretical advances in quantum modeling algorithms and software, data-mining
techniques, and high-performance hardware to accomplish its objectives. Magnets
play a crucial role in contemporary technologies. They are essential components
in generators, computer hard drives, mobile devices, and in all electric motors.
This research will focus on the discovery of new phases with anisotropic
structures, high magnetization, high Curie temperatures, high spin polarization
and high magnetic anisotropy. Materials with these properties will have
important applications in ultra-small spintronics devices, new high-density
data-storage schemes and high-energy-product permanent-magnet materials. The
broader impact activities of the project will involve graduate education,
maintaining contact with the private sector, and outreach to underrepresented
groups and middle-school students. Specially designed activities will include
the Alice in Wonderland, Nanocamp and STEM after-school, and summer-intern
programs. The algorithms, code, and databases created in this research will be
made available to other accelerated materials-discovery efforts, and will be
placed in the public domain on a website dedicated to this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The technical design and
synthesis of new magnetic materials is an intimidating problem, especially
because of the huge numbers of possible combinations of composition and
structure. This research will use computationally nonequilibrium explorations
and materials-structure prediction coupled with experiment to identify materials
with desirable properties. An adaptive genetic algorithm coupled to first-
principle codes specifically designed for magnetic properties will be used for
structure and property searches. The algorithm will possess the speed and
efficiency of classical simulations, while maintaining the accuracy of quantum-
based simulations. Concurrent, experimental research will involve novel
synthetic techniques and a comprehensive set of characterization methods. With
guidance from theory, nonequilibrium processes will be employed to generate
transitional-metal-rich (stable and metastable) material phases, including
inert-gas condensation techniques, and sputtering methods to synthesize
nanoscale clusters and particles, and ultra-fast quenching from the melt to
produce bulk materials for sustainable technologies. Comprehensive structural
characterization of these material phases will be performed with x-ray and
neutron diffraction, and high-resolution electron microscopy; magnetic and
electronic-structure studies will be pursued with magnetization, x-ray magnetic
circular dichroism and other methods. The characterization of these material
phases is key to validate and verify theoretical work, and provide strategies
for the synthesis of new materials. The PIs also plan to release codes for the
magnetic and structural properties of clusters and solids, named PARSEC and AGA,
respectively, as open source and build a user community around the language by
ensuring that interested researchers are able to contribute to our codebase.
This will allow a wider growth of the project. This aspect is of special
interest to the software cluster in the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure,
which has provided co-funding for this award.