* 1729780
* Incorporation and Culture Change as the Result of Culture Contact
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Scott Ortman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2020
* USD 298,793.00

Dr. Scott Ortman of the University of Colorado Boulder will conduct research
that re-frames the effects of Spanish contact on Pueblo Indian communities.
Recent studies of the initial century of Spanish contact in New Mexico have
tended to focus on population decline, resistance and revitalization. The
hardships brought on by Spanish colonization were real, but contemporary Pueblo
tradition also incorporates ideas and practices that were introduced by Spanish
settlers. This suggests a deeper understanding of the Columbian encounter can be
obtained through study of this incorporation process. Dr. Ortman will conduct
archaeological, ethnographic, and linguistic research in collaboration with the
Pueblo of Pojoaque, a federally-recognized Indian tribe, to determine why
certain elements of Spanish culture were incorporated into Pueblo tradition
while others were not, to document the effects of introduced domesticates for
Pueblo settlement and land-use, and to determine the extent to which Spanish
introductions affected material standards of living, or what Pueblo people refer
to today as "abundance." The research activities will involve contemporary
Pueblo community members and University of Colorado students in all stages of
the process, from field recording to exhibit design to final publications. The
work will document and provide insight into a unique American way of life.

Existing documentary evidence concerning the Columbian encounter is highly
biased toward the perspectives and perceptions of Spanish colonizers, and
reliance on these sources has led to an imbalanced view of this period in
contemporary society. This research addresses the imbalance by collecting new
archaeological data from Pueblo settlements inhabited before, during, and after
Spanish contact, and by analyzing words for Spanish introductions in Pueblo
languages. The results will support a more realistic understanding of native
experience during the Columbian encounter. The project will problematize the
concepts of "native" and "tradition" in developing a view of Spanish contact
that de-emphasizes historical rupture and emphasizes social processes that have
governed cross-cultural interaction throughout history. It will also blur the
boundary between Pre-Hispanic and Historical archaeology in New Mexico by
extending the chronological scope of regional archaeological datasets, and it
will provide the first comprehensive study of changes in Pueblo languages that
accompanied Spanish contact.