* 1729241
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Practices and Policies of Peri-urban Land Conversion
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Erik Harms, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2018
* USD 15,129.00

The research funded by this award examines peri-urban land and social
transformations. The goal is to address broader questions about the current and
future trajectories of agrarian societies in a world increasingly characterized
by agricultural land dispossession, the conversion of rural lands to urban uses,
and rural to urban migration. One outcome of these processes has been an
increasing number of mega-cities, with populations in excess of 10 million
residents, in places that formerly had longstanding agricultural economies. As
cities grow, farmers lose land and livelihoods, and peri-urban city outskirts
become informal settlements of concentrated poverty and underdevelopment. The
research will address the following overarching questions: How do agrarian
households that have lost agricultural land engage with the immense material and
social changes to their lives? And how do their responses to land dispossession
and land-use change, which can range from local-level coping to public protests
and political engagement, figure into the process and strategy of urban
development? Comprehensive inquiry on the micro- and macro-level implications of
city expansion for those living on the urban margins is important because it
will elucidate contempoary global developments in urbanization, land grabbing,
and rural political movements. This knowledge will aid in future planning for
politically, socially, and environmentally sustainable mega-
cities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out in peri-urban
Hanoi, Vietnam, by Yale University anthropology doctoral student, Emily Nguyen,
under the supervision of Dr. Erik Harms. Hanoi is an appropriate research site
because recent Vietnamese economic reform policies and urban master plan
strategies have driven large-scale conversions of agricultural land into
industrial and high-end residential zones. The recentness and intensity of these
developments will highlight, and thereby make more amenable to study, the
relationships to be examined. Findings can then be extended to other sites
around the world, including in the United States. The researcher will collect
empirical data through a mixed-methods approach, which will include: semi-
structured interviews stratified by gender and generation, the elicitation of
oral histories, participant observation, archival document analysis, and land-
use mapping. Results from the study will produce a theoretical and
methodological platform for understanding how formal planning, informal
practices of using space, and diversity in population response come together to
transform agrarian landscapes. Findings also will be useful to policy makers
undertaking capital-driven urban planning in a context with socialist agrarian
histories.