* 1729185
* Global Family Change
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Hans-Peter Kohler, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2022
* USD 462,001.00

This project advances the study of global family change (GFC) by exploring the
complex ways in which families are changing across low and middle-income
countries (LMICs). The innovation of the project lies in the premise that we
need better foundations for understanding why and how families change on a
global scale. While country-specific and small-scale comparative research on GFC
exists, sociologists currently lack a global and comprehensive lens on these
changes of family systems, particularly in LMICs, where change is most rapid and
dramatic. The project contributes to both theoretical and empirical
understandings of the determinants and consequences of GFC, training of scholars
from LMICs and disadvantaged backgrounds, and the creation of an easily
accessible data infrastructure for studying GFC. The research agenda promoted by
the project will also help inform discussions, evaluations, and developments of
family, health, and gender-related policies worldwide. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project integrates over 450 Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS)
and Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys (MICS)--along with GFC-related contextual
information on policies, social norms, geography, and environment--for 118
unique LMICs covering a time span of more than three decades (1980s-present).
Building on this wealth of data, the project seeks to: (i) develop a theory-
based and policy-relevant set of comparative indicators of family change at the
global level, across multiple dimensions of GFC such as individual behavior,
"linked lives", and life-course patterns; (ii) test the leading theories of how
and why family systems change with economic and demographic development,
including analyses of whether demographic development leads to the convergence
of family systems, and how culture and institutions moderate change to produce
divergent patterns within regions or nations; (iii) investigate the implications
of GFC for the welfare of nations by linking diverse patterns of GFC throughout
LMICs to their demographic, economic, health, and social consequences. The
research team will adopt a wide array of demographic and statistical approaches
to address the above research questions, such as standardization and life-table
techniques, spatial analyses, regression analyses, and cluster analyses.