* 1729775
* Automated collection and coding of online campaign advertising.
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* David Peterson, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2021
* USD 537,020.00

General Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Election campaigns serve an extremely important role
in our democracy. The messages sent to voters help to define what elections will
be about and how voters will ultimately choose. Two new advertising technologies
-- the use of large amounts of data about individual voters and new online
advertising platforms such as YouTube -- have the potential to revolutionize how
campaigns are able to craft specific messages to appeal to individual voters. To
date, however, there is no systematic evidence about the accuracy or
effectiveness of targeting via online video advertising. This project will be
the first to test how effectively campaigns can target voters with online
advertising. The PIs will develop new computer science tools to capture and code
the content of online advertising. This will allow the PIs to test a series of
hypotheses about the effectiveness of targeting, the strategies used in online
advertising, and the abilities of the rival campaigns to respond to one another.
The interdisciplinary team will make its tools and data freely available to the
research community, train students in both political science and computer
science, and create mechanisms for real time tracking of advertising, which will
be shared with leading media outlets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, the PIs set devise an empirical study of
the effectiveness of political campaigns to micro-target online advertising to
audiences. They develop two sets of computational tools to test the
effectiveness of online advertising micro-targeting. The first of tools are a
set of 'bots' with manipulated profile characteristics that mimic different
types of voters. These bots allow the team to track the advertisements shown to
"voters" and test for differences based on the bots' profile characteristics.
The team will rely on YouTube as the on-line platform for the study as it is
very popular, and was utilized by candidates during the recent presidential
election campaigns. YouTube boasts over 1 billion users, and over 4 billion
video views a day. More than a million advertisers utilize the Google ad
platform that provides advertisers ability to select target users based on
factors such as gender, age, marital status, and interests that coincide with
Google's categories of interest. Furthermore, the platform accepts ads delivered
from third-party sites. To test hypotheses about the effectiveness of targeting,
the team plan to develop a second set of tools that allow them to code
automatically the online ads along multiple dimensions. This will allow them to
construct real-time measures of the messages sent to voters and to assess
multiple theories regarding the ability of campaigns to target voters via online
advertising.