* 1729509
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Materials Engineering of Columnar and Living Liquid Crystals via Experimental Characterization, Mathematical Modeling, and Simulation
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Lothar Reichel, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Scientific exploration of soft matter resulted in numerous technological
advances, such as synthesis of a super-strong polymer Kevlar, liquid crystal
displays (LCDs), development of new approaches to drug delivery, electrolytes,
nano-templated materials, etc. The goal of this project is to explore the
remarkable ability of soft matter to form a plethora of complex, well-organized
functional structures and to understand the underlying principles by which the
complex soft matter structures can be designed, produced, and controlled under
both equilibrium and out-of-equilibrium conditions. The focus is on a broad
class of biologically-compatible orientationally-ordered materials, the so-
called lyotropic chromonic liquid crystals (LCLCs) and their composites with
swimming bacteria, called living liquid crystals (LLCs). Complex structures of
LCLCs and LLCs span a broad range of length scales, ranging from about 1 nm (the
typical molecular size), to 10 microns (the size of a swimming bacterium), and
further to the macroscopic scale, at which the structure can perform a useful
function, such as microfluidic mixing or delivery of microscopic cargo (such as
drugs). The project is a combination of modeling and experimental efforts
connected to several emerging applications. In particular, the investigations
will outline the potential of using the swimming ability of bacteria in
constructing microscale systems for mixing and targeted delivery of microscopic
cargo. The project will also elucidate the connections between LCLC and packing
of DNA in viral capsids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal research objectives
of this project are to explore morphogenetic complexity of the equilibrium
biphasic states of LCLCs that require an implicit balance between the
interfacial and bulk energy and to understand the mechanisms of coupling between
the out-of-equilibrium behavior of living LCs and anisotropic interactions
between the constituents, including the interplay of bacterial activity,
bacterial concentration, vector field of velocities, and orientational order.
These goals will be achieved through controlled experiments and theoretical
modeling. In the case of an equilibrium behavior, a challenge is in finding the
shapes of orientationally- and translationally-ordered structures in confined
geometries, exemplified by the nuclei of the chromonic hexagonal columnar phase
in the isotropic environment. The complex shapes observed in experiments need to
be described through minimization of both the internal elastic bulk energy and
the anisotropic surface anchoring energy. In the studies of dynamics of LLCs the
challenge is in simultaneous tracking of a number of scalar, vector, and tensor
fields. The project aims to advance our ability to use mathematical algorithms
for fast acquisition of big data characterizing dynamic systems with complex
structure. It will also enhance predictive capabilities via the development and
analysis of associated mathematical models.