* 1729944
* RCN-UBE: A New Faculty Development Approach to Expand Authentic Course-based Research Opportunities Focused on Microbial Bioinformatics and Functional Genomics
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Bradley Goodner, Hiram College
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2023
* USD 499,619.00

This RCN-UBE project aims to greatly expand the incorporation of authentic
genomics, bioinformatics, and functional genomics research into the
undergraduate curriculum by providing training workshops, an updated Web-based
genome re-annotation platform and a collaborative support network to faculty
members at 2- and 4-year colleges and universities across the U.S. Biology has
been transformed by the exponential increase in genomic information, but the
value of that information hinges upon accurate predictions of gene function
(annotation) and experimental evaluation that tests those predictions. The
network will empower faculty to engage students in the concepts, skills, and
experimental thinking that not only increases student scientific literacy and
problem-solving abilities but also allows them to contribute to science and
society right now through the deeper second-pass annotation of large numbers of
genes in microbial genomes and experimental testing of predicted gene
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Network training workshops will be based on a
geographic node model wherein groups of nearby participants agree on a common
meeting site and time, and then one or more trainers travel to that site to run
a weekend workshop. Each workshop will focus on either (a) gene annotation
(genomics and bioinformatics) and functional prediction or (b) experimental
testing of gene function (functional genomics). Training in gene annotation will
be broken down into several modules such as sequence similarity searches and
prediction of protein localization, and will involve appropriate freely
available bioinformatics tools. The use of a freely available Web platform for
re-annotation of genomes from Bacteria and Archaea (GENI-ACT) allows for users
to easily construct, assign, and manage gene annotations across a large number
of students in multiple courses. Virtual lab notebooks for each gene annotation
allow individual or collaborative work in collecting and analyzing data. The
platform capability includes students combining their own bioinformatics
analyses with data from the research literature and their own functional
genomics efforts to reach conclusions and make the data available for the larger
research community and public. Workshops on functional genomics will focus on
how to bring together well-known (e.g., transposon mutagenesis, PCR) and more
specialized lab strategies (e.g., site-directed mutagenesis, protein
overexpression) within the context of laboratory courses to test the predicted
function of genes. Participants will be encouraged to brainstorm with trainers
and other participants on appropriate strategies for non-model bacterial strains
and genes of interest to them. Participants will be encouraged to form
collaborations within and between nearby institutions using a freely available
Web teaching/research support structure (GENI-SCIENCE). Further cross-
fertilization of ideas and support are provided by the network using social
media tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO), Division of Biological
Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources (EHR),
Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to address the
challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call
to Action (http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/). This project is also co-
funded by the Division Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB) in the BIO
directorate.