* 1729737
* DMREF: Metallic-type transport in polymers: Establishing materials design criteria and predicting structure/property interrelations
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Seth Marder, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,500,000.00

Non-technical Description: A materials design framework is proposed that will
provide quantitative insights into what determines charge transport properties
in organic semiconductors, and will provide verifiable hypotheses towards
accelerated materials discovery. The motivation is partly that, although the
multibillion dollar organic electronic industry is based on a unique combination
of performance and processability of organic semiconductors,
solubility/processability, intermolecular interactions, and other factors
impacting delocalization of charge carriers, which determines transport
properties, are still not fully understood for these materials. Critical
properties can depend subtly on chemical structure and processing conditions
and, often, changes in properties and processing parameters are intertwined in
non-obvious ways. This creates a daunting task to establish comprehensive
structure/processing/property interrelations, often reducing materials discovery
to heuristic time-consuming, expensive studies. To unravel the complex
interaction of structure/processing and transport properties, a
multidisciplinary team of materials chemists, materials engineers, ultrafast
spectroscopists, and theorists from Georgia Tech (GT), University of
Massachusetts Amherst (UMass), and Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL), has
been assembled. This research will provide critical insights that will enable
the quantitative design of materials that optimize both mobility and
conductivity. It will also make available to a broad community an extensive
database that can be mined to advance materials science discovery platforms, and
that will be used in education. We will develop theoretical tools with improved
parameterization, allowing the modeling of a broader set of materials. The
target materials will be employed in a variety of applications including,
amongst others, electrodes, thermoelectric materials, and charge-extraction
layers. The highly diverse team will reach out to under-served communities, by
recruiting female and under-represented scientists and engineers to carry out
research in its shared program, but also through extensive interactions with
high schools and the public through a variety of engagement programs and public
outreach events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The research
addresses fundamental questions of how charge-carrier coherence length and
transport properties correlate with specific structural features in doped
organic materials. Optical spectroscopies (absorption, photoinduced absorption,
photoluminescence, photoluminescence excitation, and two-dimensional coherent
excitation spectra), along with thermal analysis and X-ray diffraction data,
will be used to construct a database on doped polymers, oligomers and small
molecules, utilizing a variety of dopants. Key spectral observables will be
modeled with existing theoretical tools at LANL, using first-principle
calculations with atomistic approaches, nonadiabatic molecular dynamics
simulations, and parameterized Holstein lattice models to simulate quantum
dynamics of charges, focusing on spatial coherence lengths of charge carriers in
materials. Nonlinear spectroscopies will be used to refine the details of the
quantum dynamics models, as they provide details of not only population but also
temporal and spatial coherence dynamics. In particular, these measurements can
isolate the homogeneous excitation linewidth from the total spectral lineshape,
thereby providing a very sensitive probe of spatial coherence, limited by the
quantum dynamics that lead to carrier localization. The PIs also plan to release
the DMREF Polymeric Semiconductor Toolbox and Database as open source and build
a user community around the language by ensuring that interested researchers are
able to contribute to the DMREF Polymeric Semiconductor Toolbox and Database
codebase. This will allow a wider growth of the project. This aspect is of
special interest to the software cluster in the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure, which has provided co-funding for this award.