* 1729482
* A new look at perspective: Novel insights into the function of first-person and third-person imagery
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Lisa Libby, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 430,581.00

For many reasons, people might want to think or feel differently about events in
their lives. Examples include wanting to move beyond past negative experiences
or optimally preparing for upcoming challenges. The research in this project
explores how people can use a common feature of their thoughts about life events
to achieve these desired ends. When recalling past experiences or imagining
future ones, people frequently "see" those events in their mind's eye. Often
people see events from their own first-person perspective, looking out at the
situation through their own eyes. However, other times people see events in
their mind's eye from a third-person perspective, seeing themselves in the image
from an observer's vantage-point. The proposed research develops and tests a new
model suggesting that visual perspective in mental imagery fundamentally shapes
how people interpret and respond to the events they picture. These unique
insights into the function of imagery perspective will help to develop practical
imagery tools that people can use, with minimal training, to modify their
emotional responses in desired ways, strengthen their close relationships, and
motivate themselves to act consistent with their
values.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research tests hypotheses about the core
functions of first-person and third-person imagery by experimentally
manipulating which of these perspectives individuals adopt as they picture
target events. According to the proposed model, third-person imagery leads
people to reflect on the broader implications and coherent meaning of the
pictured event. A series of experiments tests whether this coherence-building
function of third-person imagery clarifies and focuses people's emotional
reactions, relative to the undifferentiated emotional reactions people
experience with first-person imagery. Other experiments explore how this
predicted effect of third-person imagery may be used to improve the performance
of individuals in threatening situations. The model further indicates that
first-person imagery functions to heighten people's awareness of their gut
reactions and implicit evaluations. A series of experiments tests whether this
enhanced self-insight with first-person imagery can be used to help individuals
recognize implicit feelings of trust towards close others and thereby strengthen
commitment to those relationships. A final series of experiments tests whether
first-person imagery can give people insight into gut reactions that conflict
with their explicit values, thereby helping them exercise self-control and
behave in line with their values in situations of conflict.