* 1729469
* Families of High Net Worth: Challenges and Opportunities
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Annette Lareau, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 09/30/2023
* USD 149,887.00

This project examines the ways in which wealthy families give money to charity,
family and others. Families across the United States who have more than eight
million in net worth will be interviewed. Since even a modest increase in
charitable giving has important implications for the money available for
charities in the U.S., this study has the potential to reveal valuable
information that is unknown. Many members of this group of families are upwardly
mobile, so the study also provides a comparison of the experiences of "old
money" and "new money" in a racially diverse sample of wealthy families across
the political spectrum in the U.S. This study of 70 wealthy families will also
investigate some unique challenges of wealthy families. For example, it will
illuminate the worries of older wealthy family members regarding how wealth can
be perilous for their children and grandchildren. Overall, the study will help
to expand our knowledge about the lives of family members among wealthy
Americans who have been rarely studied. This study will provide policy
recommendations on ways to increase family members' charitable
giving.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The study uses a snowball sample (in which
respondents refer other possible respondents) as well as "cold calls" to recruit
members for in-depth (i.e., two to three hour interviews) of persons in 70
families with high net worth. In 50 of these families, in-depth interviews will
also be held separately with each spouse and, if possible, the wealth manager
who works with the family. Documents about the families will also be collected.
Furthermore, for a subsample of eight families, in-depth interviews will be
carried out with all available siblings, children, and other extended family
members yielding up to 40 interviews per family. In these eight families,
participant-observation of events will also be held twice a month for two years
of key events including family foundation meetings, charity events, and other
family activities. Although some families feel comfortable having their identity
revealed, in the vast majority of cases the family identity will be concealed.
The subsample will include upwardly-mobile families, including white and
African-American families, as well as families with inherited wealth. The study
will examine a host of related issues including gender dynamics (and tensions)
surrounding wealth and philanthropic giving in families, particularly when the
wealth of the wife exceeds that of her husband. In sum, there is insufficient
data on the families at the top of the social stratification system. In
addition, the studies of stratifications are too much about individuals and not
enough about families, yet all signs suggest that the strategies for the
intergenerational transmission of wealth often are aimed at preserving the
position of an entire family. Wealthy families are very important sources of
donations to charities. This study seeks to understand the social processes
which shape families as they make these important civic and family decisions.