* 1729935
* RCN-UBE Incubator: Equity and Diversity in Undergraduate STEM (EDU-STEM)
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Cissy Ballen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Mark Pauley
* 07/31/2018
* USD 49,104.00

Equity and Diversity in Undergraduate STEM (EDU-STEM) is a collaborative network
that will implement evidence-based approaches to counter barriers to equity in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields, with an initial
focus on the life sciences. Specifically, EDU-STEM partners will apply lessons
learned from psychology to large-enrollment, introductory courses that often
select against historically underrepresented students such as women, and
underrepresented minorities (URMs). Such students face challenges unrelated to
academic competency, such as discrimination, feelings of exclusion, and imposter
syndrome that contribute to well-documented underperformance and high attrition
rates. The EDU-STEM network will first assess the status of women and URM
students by bringing together individuals that teach introductory science
courses from a diverse range of institutions: large public universities,
community colleges, Ivy League schools, and minority-serving institutions. The
underlying mechanisms that lead to gaps in performance or representation will be
quantified among different demographics by investigating three broad metrics:
academic performance, whole-class participation, and affective measures (i.e.,
those that do not directly relate to performance outcomes, such as confidence,
interest, and feelings of inclusion). By involving a range of educators from a
diverse set of institutions, this network will establish tendrils of equity
awareness among groups of faculty not typically engaged in educational research
or evidence-based teaching techniques. The network seeks to empirically document
factors that affect participation in STEM in order to broaden institutional
capacity for STEM learning, ultimately contributing to a STEM workforce that is
representative of the nation as a whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, EDU-
STEM aims to: (1) reveal regional differences, if they exist, in the cultural
climate for women and minorities in STEM disciplines; (2) develop a community of
faculty that can serve as leaders--at their home institutions and nationally--in
inclusive teaching and assessment; and (3) increase the number of faculty in the
US that are familiar with barriers to inclusion in STEM, and can apply
evidenced-based techniques for countering known barriers. Participants will
engage in an "Inclusivity in STEM" workshop, including a discussion of
comparative data on in-class participation, performance, and affective metrics
such as susceptibility to stereotype threat. Network data will establish
baseline measures of disparities between genders and ethnicities, if they exist,
and detect any regional or institutional differences. Initial findings will test
the hypothesis that regional factors (such as the Gender Gap Index, or the
percentage representation of a given minority group), contribute to disparities
in participation, susceptibility to stereotype threat, and sense of inclusion in
STEM. This will set the stage for leveraging these data to plan on-site
interventions at the home institutions of network partners, leading to greater
engagement of science faculty with scientific teaching and discipline-based
educational research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded
by the Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO), Division of Biological
Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources (EHR),
Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to address the
challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call
to Action (http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/).