* 1729815
* Fleeting Decisions and Risks in Pedestrian Road-Crossing Behavior: Building Insight with Next-Generation Data, Models, and Platforms
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Paul Torrens, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 08/31/2021
* USD 399,383.00

In this project, the Principal Investigator will examine road-crossing behavior
over very small moments of space and time, by observing and studying real-world
road-crossing sites. The conditions observed will then be recreated in a motion
capture studio that will allow collection of very detailed data that can be used
to build what-if models for training, planning, and design. The decision to
cross a road can take mere fractions of a second and centimeters of action, but
over this small window of space and time, people are at risk of injury and death
in collisions with vehicles. Despite decades of work to design interventions
that might promote safe crossing behavior, many people continue to engage in
unsafe crossing, among them our most vulnerable - pedestrian youth and seniors.
The aim of the project is to uncover the, often cursory, decisions and risks
that people invoke when they move at the roadside. The focus on the microcosm of
road-crossing will enable identification and measurement of subtle signals from
body language, expression, social cues in crowds, gaze behavior, and footfall
that can convey both covert and overt insight into crossing intent. These
signals and the road-crossing behaviors that they relate to will inform
actionable understanding of road-crossing activities that can be used to improve
the design of crossing infrastructure, that can be used in training and
education, that might enhance signaling schemes, and that can be used to inform
Advanced Driver Awareness Systems now being deployed in many
vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project make use of a coupled research
instrument that allows for coded real-world observation to be paired with
advanced sensor-based instrumentation in motion capture studios, and with what-
if modeling based on human automata that can facilitate the exploration,
identification, and measurement of subtle signals of pedestrian decision-making
and risk-taking while crossing. The technical focus of the project is to
identify, capture, measure, and frame human-environment signals of road-crossing
behavior in ways that can be used for broader pedestrian sensing and detection.
The project will generate a robust library of data, including qualitative
observations, sensor data, and model output that can be reused by communities in
the socio-behavioral sciences and the computing sciences. These data, and the
models they will power, will form the backbone of an immersive Virtual
Geographic Environment that can be used for training and education.