* 1729594
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Accelerating Thermoelectric Materials Discovery via Dopability Predictions
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Eric Toberer, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,009,018.00

Non-technical Description: Thermoelectric devices, which transform heat flow
into electrical power and vice versa, have the potential to revolutionize how
society produces electricity and cooling. However, thermoelectric materials
suffer from poor power conversion efficiency and the search continues for new
materials with enhanced performance. In this project, advances in computation
and machine learning are leveraged to accelerate this search for advanced
thermoelectric materials. These efforts build upon the prior NSF DMREF research
of some of team members on predicting a material's potential for thermoelectric
performance. High throughput screening focused on identifying semiconductors
with desirable electronic and vibrational properties. However, these efforts did
not include a strong focus on the role of intrinsic defect or the potential for
dopability. In the next stage of this research, these critical components will
be pursued through a mixture of high throughput theory, experimental validation,
and machine learning. Together, these efforts will yield accurate prediction of
the thermoelectric potential for thousands of semiconductors and the realization
of new materials for solid state power generation. Beyond thermoelectric
materials, these efforts to establish a dopability recommendation engine will be
critical in the development of next generation microelectronic and
optoelectronic materials such as transparent conductors and photovoltaic
absorbers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The project's ultimate
objective is to build a robust and accurate dopability recommendation engine to
overcome the dopability bottleneck in thermoelectric materials discovery. The
recommendation engine will use materials informatics to enable high-throughput
predictions of dopability, relying only on quantities that are inexpensive to
calculate, experimental measurements, and known structural/chemical features as
inputs. It will thus allow dopability screening of thousands of compounds.
First, an accurate training set will be built for the recommendation engine
containing native defect formation enthalpies and structural/chemical
descriptors from a diverse array of thermoelectric-relevant compounds. Whereas
prior dopant studies focused on single compounds, a new, automated calculation
infrastructure will be leveraged that allows the rapid creation of an extensive
training set, initially containing approximately 30 compounds but growing to
over 100 during the project. Experimental charge transport and local dopant
structure measurements will validate the training set. Second, the prediction
engine will be trained on the data to extract patterns and correlations, and
ultimately identify robust descriptors of dopability. Initially, the engine will
predict if `killer' defects limit the available dopant range. The engine will
ultimately grow to suggest specific extrinsic dopants for compounds that pass
this initial screening. Together, this combination of accurate predictions of
intrinsic transport properties (prior DMREF) and dopability (proposed DMREF) is
expected to accelerate the discovery process for thermoelectric materials.