* 1729875
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: New Housing Design Models and Sustainable Urban Growth
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Keith Murphy, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 25,200.00

Already more than half the world lives in urban areas. As urban growth continues
planning experts and government officials are working to design new models for
housing and urban development that make more efficient use of public resources
and create more livable cities. In particular, some experts are promoting
"densification" through designing compact, higher-density housing as a way of
creating a more sustainable city and fostering social integration. This project,
which trains a graduate student in how to conduct rigorous, empirically grounded
scientific fieldwork, explores the impact of these sustainable design practices
on urban governance, housing policy, and social relations. Understanding the
societal impact of these new design principles is critical for developing better
policies that will create more robust urban infrastructures, optimize public
resources, and create a better quality of life for American
citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of California, Irvine doctoral
candidate Melissa Wrapp, supervised by Dr. Keith M. Murphy, will examine the
implementation of principles of sustainable urban development in the context of
public housing policy. The researcher asks how changes in the technical aspects
of housing design impact the management of urbanization and shape social
relations, both between residents and with local government. She will undertake
twelve months of ethnographic fieldwork in Cape Town, which will involve
extended participant observation and structured interviews with municipal urban
designers, architects, and residents involved in public housing provision. The
African continent is urbanizing at one of the fastest rates in the world.
Because of South Africa's unique political and legal history, it has become an
important site for active experimentation with urban policy. The research will
be conducted in Cape Town, South Africa, where municipal officials have worked
to implement densification policies since 2012. Cape Town has the most
competitive property market in the country, and also has a reputation for being
the country's most segregated city, making it an ideal site to situate this
research. This study will provide a timely contribution to interdisciplinary
social science research on the global issue of sustainable development and
design, particularly in contexts of economic and social inequality. Findings
will also increase knowledge of socio-cultural drivers in land use patterns and
improve the execution of public policy in light of ongoing urbanization.