* 1729555
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Design and synthesis of novel materials for spin caloritronic devices
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Chia-Ling Chien, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2022
* USD 624,938.00

Non-technical Description: Microelectronics, which has propelled modern
technologies to unprecedented levels, has been severely hampered by the intense
Joule heating generated by the motion of electrical charge carriers. A new
approach exploits pure spin currents in devices that use a minimum of electrical
charge carriers, thus generating minimal heat in metals and virtually no heat in
magnetic insulators, which are charge-carrier free. The spin Seebeck effect
(SSE) allows one to generate a pure spin current from a temperature gradient in
a magnetic insulator. The SSE, experimentally discovered only a few years ago,
has lead to a burgeoning new field known as spin caloritronics, which offers new
strategies for the conversion of waste heat to electricity as well as thermal
management in electronic devices. This project, through close theory/experiment
interactions, will focus on the fundamental understanding of the SSE effect and
will explore new ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic insulators for advancing
spin caloritronic phenomena and devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: The proposed project will combine theory, characterization, and
materials synthesis efforts to better understand spin caloritronic phenomena and
devices. The effort will be built on three key and interlocking elements. These
include a theoretical understanding of the physics and issues associated with
the spin caloritronic phenomena, measurement of spin caloritonic properties of a
broad variety of single crystals of magnetic and antiferromagnetic insulators,
and the fabrication of spin caloritronic thin films devices exploiting materials
with superior properties. By extending the fruitful research on topological
insulators where the spin-orbit coupling is a critical factor and the theory of
phonon-magnon interaction, Fiete will develop a microscopic theory for
understanding physics associated with spin caloritronic phenomena. He will also
develop computational tools for screening and designing new materials for
fabrication of spin caloritronic devices. The simulation work will cover the
materials for generating spin current and metallic materials to convert spin
current into electric potential with a high efficiency as well as the interface
design. The project will capitalize on the extensive experience and expertise of
Zhou in growing a broad range of bulk single crystals including ferrimagnetic
rare earth iron garnets, double perovskites, spinels, antiferromagnetic layered
materials with peculiar magnetic properties like uniaxial, easy-plane,
biskyrmion, and pyrochlores. Earth abundant elements are prioritized in the
computational screening and design for the spin caloritronic devices. The most
challenging problems in the material synthesis, especially with Earth abundant
elements, could be overcome by high-pressure synthesis. The procedures, the
fabrication, and measurement techniques for spintronic devices developed in
Chien's laboratory will be used to study the performance of spin caloritronic
devices made from these new materials. The experimental results will be compared
with the computational model and provide new inputs to further refine the model.
An iterative feedback loop will be formed among the co-PIs.