* 1729412
* Digital News and the Consumption of Information Online
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Sandra Gonzalez-Bailon, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2021
* USD 130,046.00

This project will analyze patterns of online news consumption to determine the
impact that digital technologies have on access to political information. Blogs,
new media sites, news aggregators, social media platforms, and the online
version of legacy media have multiplied the number of entry points to news.
However, in spite of the many claims made about the effects of digital
technologies on news consumption, there is still a scarcity of observational
data on how audiences get their news online. In particular, there is no
empirical evidence to allow a comparison of trends over time and across
different political contexts. This project will fill this gap by making three
contributions: (i) a methodology to measure patterns of news consumption using
panel data that tracks online browsing behavior; (ii) new metrics to compare
those patterns over time and across countries; and (iii) an application of the
metrics to explain trends and differences in news consumption as they relate to
the media and regulatory contexts in which they take place. Ultimately, the goal
is to use a novel comparative approach to characterize online news consumption
and use that information to evaluate the impact that digital technologies have
on access to politically-relevant information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The question
as to how digital platforms are transforming news consumption has gained much
prominence in recent years. Some argue that digital technologies encourage
fragmentation, balkanization, and the self-selection of audiences in "filter
bubbles" that reinforce preexisting views. Some others go one step further to
argue that digital media is radically transforming the democratic process by
allowing misinformation to spread more easily. This project will provide novel
evidence to evaluate those claims in a comparative perspective, drawing data
from two sources: international surveys conducted annually by the Reuters
Institute for the Study of Journalism to study news consumption across
countries; and representative panels tracking online browsing behavior in those
same countries, collected by a media measurement company. The project will use
measures of audience reach and audience duplication across online news providers
to build networks of audience flow. The project will analyze these data to
answer four main questions: (1) Is there evidence of increasing fragmentation in
news consumption? (2) Are there systematic changes in the centrality of digital-
born news media compared to legacy media sites? (3) Are there significant
differences in news consumption patterns across socio-demographic groups? And
(4) are there significant differences across countries and regulatory contexts?
Many observers and commentators have recently emphasized the increasing
relevance that social media (like Facebook or Twitter) have as entry points to
news and political information. This project will provide unprecedented data to
contextualize the actual role that social media platforms play in the overall
news consumption landscape.