* 1729540
* Developmental Changes in Reasoning about Biological Kinds
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Marjorie Rhodes, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 07/31/2020
* USD 635,011.00

This project will develop new strategies to facilitate efficient scientific
reasoning in young children. From early in development, children use categories
to learn about the world around them. For example, upon learning something about
an individual animal, children can generalize this information to the category
as a whole and use it to guide behavior. In this way, if a child learns that a
particular spider will bite, the child might infer that all spiders bite, and
use that information to avoid spiders in the future. A critical challenge of
this type of reasoning is determining whether a limited sample of evidence--for
example, a specific spider observed on a particular day--provides information
likely to be true of other category members as well. Young children often
evaluate samples of evidence much less efficiently than older children or
adults, which can impede their biological, social, and scientific reasoning.
This project will enhance basic understanding of how and why inductive learning
changes across childhood. Through a series of experiments, it will reveal the
cognitive and developmental mechanisms that underlie the age-related changes in
children's reasoning strategies that have been documented in previous studies.
This project will then use this knowledge to devise and test new strategies for
facilitating efficient reasoning in children. By developing new educational
strategies, partnering with a major informal educational institution, and
providing training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, this
project maximizes opportunities for this research to influence educational
practices and benefit educators, children, and future
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present studies test the hypothesis that
younger children seek out samples of evidence that they think best exemplify
what members of a category should be like, whereas older children and adults
seek out samples that cover the broad variation that exists within categories.
For example, young children might think that birds should be relatively small
and fly, so when they are seeking information about birds in general, they might
choose to consider primarily birds with these traits, such as robins and
bluebirds. In contrast, older children might seek out more diverse samples,
containing birds such as robins and penguins. To test this hypothesis
experimentally, children will be presented with samples of animals and asked to
choose which are most informative for learning about the category as a whole. To
chart the trajectory of developmental change in children's strategies, the first
set of studies will examine whether 5- to 10-year-olds select samples that
maximize values on key properties (e.g., choosing to examine the two fastest
cheetahs in the world to learn about cheetahs) or diversity (e.g., choosing to
examine some fast and some slow cheetahs). The second set of experiments will
test two possible accounts of the developmental and cognitive mechanisms
underlying observed age-related changes. The third set of studies will develop
and test new strategies for facilitating efficient biological and scientific
reasoning in educational contexts. Thus, in addition to addressing key
theoretical questions in cognitive and developmental psychology, this project
will also have immediate implications for education.