* 1729822
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Experimental Evidence on Individual Labor Supply Decisions
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2019
* Joshua Angrist, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 12/31/2019
* USD 18,978.00

Abstract 1729822 Angrist&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The extent to which workers
respond to higher wage rates is important for our understanding of the
determinants of income and poverty. This is especially true for workers with
little education and other disadvantages such as a criminal record or a history
of substance abuse. These workers may have few opportunities to improve their
positions. Understanding how these people respond to wage offers will provide a
guide to policies designed to increase employment and earnings for disadvantaged
workers. This research project will provide new experimental evidence on the
response of low skilled and other disadvantaged workers to changes in wages.
This project is unique in its use of experimental methods and in its focus on
low-skilled men and women who may have criminal records or face other challenges
in the labor market. The estimates will be used to project the potential
effectiveness of various public policies to stimulate labor force participation.
These results may contribute to the design of policies that increase employment
in the U.S. and therefore strengthen the U.S. economy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Labor force participation rates among low skilled
disadvantaged groups have been on the decline in recent decades. Yet very little
is known about labor supply elasticities to wage offers of these groups. The
researchers will conduct a series of randomized experiments in collaboration
with a national ridesharing company to produce experimental estimates of
intensive and extensive margin labor supply elasticities. The research targets
populations of interest, including low-skilled men and women to produce
estimates of labor supply elasticities that can be used to inform current public
policy debates including those on the labor force participation rate and the
gender wage gap. The project will provide some of the first experimental
evidence on disadvantaged workers? labor supply elasticities. The results of
this research may contribute to the design of policies that increase employment
in the U.S. and therefore strengthen the U.S. economy.