* 1729016
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Synthesis, Characterization, and Modeling of Complex Amorphous Semiconductors for Future Device Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Robert Chang, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2022
* USD 959,999.00

Non-technical Description: By understanding a material's structure, it is
possible to predict and design its properties. Whereas crystals are well-
understood by their regular pattern of atoms, the structure of amorphous
materials with their randomly bonded atoms is extremely challenging to
determine. Yet this disorganized structure is exactly what makes these materials
advantageous for many technological applications. For example, large-areas can
be coated with amorphous materials in smooth layers for application in the next-
generation flexible flat panel displays. An important objective of this project
is to gather, decipher, integrate, and organize large experimental and computer
generated data to accurately describe the structure and properties of a large
class of complex amorphous materials. This materials data along with open-source
statistical software developed within the project will be made accessible as
part of the Global Materials Network to accelerate the discovery of new
materials with unique features and performance and to help produce new products
at a much faster pace and reduced cost. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: Unlike Si-based semiconductors, amorphous oxide semiconductors
exhibit optical, electrical, thermal, and mechanical properties that are
comparable or even superior to those possessed by their crystalline
counterparts. Most notably, carrier mobility of amorphous oxide semiconductors
is an order of magnitude larger than that of amorphous hydrogenated silicon
commonly used in solar cells and flat-panel displays. Within unified theoretical
and experimental framework, this project aims to establish genomic deposition-
structure-property relationships in complex amorphous oxide and chalcogenide
semiconductors in order to systematically record and organize the data into a
searchable database. The research will integrate controlled synthesis, advanced
characterization, multi-scale modeling, time-dependent studies, and accurate
first-principles calculations to provide microscopic understanding of the
complex interplay between the nanostructure, morphology, and electron transport
regimes across the entire crystalline-to-amorphous transition. Development of
realistic approaches for non-stoichiometric-melt cooling and time-dependent
statistical analysis, will enable studies of defect formation and dynamics, ion
diffusion, structural evolution and stretched-exponential relaxation, phase
transformation, and crystallization processes, bringing the computer-aided
design of amorphous materials to a new level. The PIs plan to release the
Amorphous Structure Analysis (AStA) as open source and build a user community
around the language by ensuring that interested researchers are able to
contribute to AStA codebase. This will allow a wider growth of the project. This
aspect is of special interest to the software cluster in the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure, which has provided co-funding for this award.