* 1729090
* Empirical Analysis of Resource Allocation Problems
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Nikhil Agarwal, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 250,290.00

Approximately 100,000 patients are waiting for a life-saving kidney transplant,
but only about 12,000 patients receive a transplant through the deceased donor
waiting list in a typical year. Another 6,000 patients receive a live-donor
kidney transplant. Given the scarcity of donors, it is important to find the
best ways to organize organ allocation systems in the US. The investigator aims
to use data driven methods to find better designs, promising savings on the
costs of dialysis while simultaneously improving health outcomes. More broadly,
this research is of interest to a growing body of empirical work studying how
non-market mechanisms can be used to allocate scarce resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research studies both deceased and living donor
kidney allocation systems. Priorities on the deceased donor list are determined
by a variety of factors. Remarkably, most donor offers are turned down by
several patients before their organs are ultimately transplanted because many
patients prefer waiting for a better organ. The first project thus studies how
to design the priorities and the allocation system to better align the system
with objectives such as allocating organs to those that will get the most life-
years from it. The second project on living donor kidney allocations studies the
effects of hospital decisions to select which patients and donors are registered
on nationwide kidney exchanges. This project uses data driven techniques and
designs a well-tailored priority system that can align hospital incentives for
participating in these platforms with social objectives. These projects
complement and build on a recent body of theoretical work in economics that has
studied how to allocate these scarce resources. Specifically, the investigator
develops empirical approaches to study and evaluate dynamic allocation problems
and barter exchanges. These techniques are likely to be useful in the study of a
variety of other resource allocation problems including the allocation of public
housing, child-care and child adoption in addition to organs of all types. The
methods developed in this research present new approaches to topics studied by
researchers in Operations Research, Health Economics, and Medical
Transplantation.