* 1729908
* Greek Refugees: The Socioeconomic Consequences of the 1923 Population Exchange between Greece and Turkey
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Stylianos Michalopoulos, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2022
* USD 365,502.00

Abstract 1729908 Michalopoulos&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2015, Europe
received about 1.3 million new asylum claims and more refugees are expected as
the Middle East crises continue. Mandatory, large-scale population movements
constitute a structural break in the economic and social history of modern
nations. Understanding how involuntarily relocated people and the receiving
communities fare economically are affected in the short- and long-run is of
crucial social and economic importance. Moreover, how communities react to
today's refugees is likely to be shaped by their historical experience of
refugee flows. Data availability prevents the study of these
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Roughly 1.2 million Orthodox Greeks were forcefully
resettled from Turkey to Greece after the Greco-Turkish war of 1919-1922,
increasing the Greek population by 20% within few months. While several
ethnographies document how this large number of refugees affected specific
villages and towns, there is no systematic exploration of their overall impact.
This research will assemble a large dataset and assess existing hypotheses
regarding the influence of refugees on receiving economies and sending Turkish
communities. Was there a systematic pattern of spatial settlement of refugees;
how did the refugees fare economically; did the natives benefit; how do these
questions affect the attitudes of the forced migrants and local population
towards current refugees in Europe; and do answers to these questions depend on
location of refugee settlement and time horizon considered? This research will
digitize and geocode two main data archives---the 1928 Greek census which lists
the number of refugees in the local communities and an individual level
catalogue of 270,000 refugee families indicating village of origin in Turkey and
destination in Greece. The data will be used to examine the rate of economic
integration of refugees and their influence on the local economies using
empirical tools of growth and labor economists. The dataset will also be
valuable for studying the presence of agglomeration economies and/or diminishing
returns associated with the influx of refugees, the role of religious
homogenization of local communities, and their political attitudes towards
current refugee flows. The data will be a valuable infrastructure for the study
of the effects of large-scale immigration. The results of this research could
provide valuable inputs into U.S. immigration
policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will study the impacts of large-
scale population movements by exploiting a historical natural experiment---the
compulsory population exchange between Greece and Turkey at the beginning of the
20th century. Following the Greco-Turkish war of 1919-1922, approximately 1.2
million Greek Orthodox were forcibly resettled from Turkey to Greece, increasing
the Greek population by more than 20% dramatically altering the socioeconomic
landscape. This research will first, assemble an original dataset with
comprehensive coverage of the universe of Greek villages and cities from 1920
till today and their respective refugee shares in 1928, and second, complement
the highly disaggregated regional-level data with individual-level data from
post-1970 Greek censuses as well as a unique historical catalogue of the
universe of rural refugee families. These individual-level data, will be linked
to region-specific statistics that are available over the 1920-2010 period and
to the Greek Yellow Pages in 1980s onwards allowing the PIs to trace the
occupational specialization of natives and refugees and their descendants. The
data will then be used to explore the economic, social, and political status of
both refugees and locals. The research will investigate the impact of this
historical resettlement on the current political attitudes towards the ongoing
refugee flows in Europe. The dataset will also be valuable for studying the
presence of agglomeration economies and/or diminishing returns as well as the
consequences of religious homogenization of local communities.