* 1729151
* Mapping Linguistic, Cosmological, and Political Dimensions of Place in Riverine Environments
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Christopher Ball, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 239,913.00

The research supported by this award investigates the relationship between
language, culture, livelihood, and landscape. Scientific study of the role of
language in defining landscape perception and landscape use has often focused on
the significance of place names attached to prominent geological features.
Unfortunately, this narrow approach misses much of importance because talk about
landscapes is always much broader than just how it is labeled. At a time when
landscapes everywhere are under severe stress, the researcher argues that we
need to broaden our understanding of people's perception of the natural world
and their place in it, as well as how and to what extent it is mediated by the
language they speak. This information is essential if policy makers and social
scientists are to understand why people act as they do in the particular
environments they inhabit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be conducted
by linguistic anthropologist Dr. Christopher Ball (Notre Dame University) among
the indigenous Waujá people in the Xingu River basin, a main tributary of the
Amazon River. This is an appropriate location because the Waujá are a small
(population &lt;500) group of people who use language to pass along knowledge
about the river to members of their own group, to define the group and its
territory in relation to others, and for subsistence. The small size of the
group and the cultural centrality of their language and place linkages make the
connections more conducive to intensive technical study than would be true for
larger and more diverse populations. Nonetheless, findings will be applicable to
riverine and other landscapes in the United States. The researcher will collect
data by undertaking expeditions on the river, targeting named places deemed to
have valuable natural resources and cultural significance. Using digital still
photos, audio, and video, he will record narratives in the indigenous language
as they are recounted by Waujá historians about these river places. Each site's
coordinates will be marked using GPS. The investigator will translate these
local language narratives into English and compile them to assess their fit as
an environmental map. The audiovisual data will be combined with the GPS
location data to generate interactive digital maps linked to interviews and
photos, a new way to spatially model the oral transmission of ecological
knowledge. The maps also will comprise a useful local resource for new forms of
knowledge preservation and transmission, as younger people, as well as
scientists, utilize them to hear, see, and speak about these environments.
Combining the modelling of ecological language practices in space and providing
for the continuation of these practices will further understanding of how local
residents throughout the world contribute to global environmental knowledge.
Funding this project also supports documentation of an endangered language and
the education of undergraduate and graduate students.