* 1729258
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Biological and Cultural Influences on Infant Stress Response Development
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Lawrence Schell, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/29/2020
* USD 22,880.00

Research has established that there are a variety of biological and cultural
factors that influence health outcomes and disparities. One of the major
scientific challenges that remains is understanding how those factors change
over time. This project takes up one such example in immigrant communities, who
in the U.S. exhibit unique and somewhat paradoxical health trajectories.
Initially their health profiles exceed expectations, but over time they decrease
to mirror health disparity patterns found among U.S.-born populations.
Typically, this has been theorized to be the product of acculturation and other
environmental factors. In looking at differential psychological stress, this
project, which trains a student in the methods of empirical, scientific data
collection and analysis, asks whether there might be a biological dimension to
this, measurable by assessing the influence of maternal stress on infants'
stress response development. Considerable research shows that the early
emotional environment can have a significant influence on how infants develop.
In assessing how mothers' feelings of stress can lead to altered development of
infants' stress responses, the findings will be disseminated to organizations
that seek to improve mothers' stress in ways that can have repercussions on the
function and wellbeing of the next generation. The project will provide
information on the types of resources or programs immigrant mothers may need to
ameliorate stress in small communities around the country.

Elizabeth Holdsworth, under the supervision of Dr. Lawrence Schell of the State
University of New York at Albany, will explore what factors contribute to
physiological stress, particularly acculturative stress, among immigrant women,
how the local ecological context is embodied in the experience of stress, and to
what extent maternal stress is transmitted transgenerationally, influencing
infant stress response development. This project will interview immigrant
mothers of infants living in the Capital Region of New York State who moved to
the U.S. within the past five years. Immigrant mothers will complete
questionnaires about perceived stress, acculturative stress, and other topics,
as well as participate in semi-structured interviews to provide more information
on what immigrant mothers identify as their most significant challenges and
struggles. These responses will be associated with amounts of cortisol in
mothers' hair, a measure of chronic stress response activation over the past
three months, to determine which stressors lead to the greatest chronic physical
stress in immigrant mothers. Saliva samples will also be collected from
immigrant mother's infants before and after an injected vaccination to assess
the change in cortisol production, a measure of stress response reactivity.
Infant stress response extent will also be associated with mothers' reports of
stress to determine which factors have the greatest influence on infant stress
response development. Lastly, the investigators of this project will participate
in local community events and observe programs to determine what resources are
available to and accessed by immigrant mothers in the area that could improve or
exacerbate stress. The project will contribute to debates in biocultural
anthropology and other fields about the co-occurrence of acculturative and other
forms of stress, the influence of psychosocial stress on health disparities, the
influence of local ecology on stress exposure, and the relationship between
postnatal maternal stress on infant stress response.