* 1729158
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Consumer Citizenship Among Internally Displaced Persons
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Tetiana Bulakh, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2018
* USD 17,496.00

The research supported by this award investigates the politics, routes of
circulation, and patterns of consumption of material aid given to displaced
people. This project asks three sets of research questions: (1) Aid provision:
How do governments interpret and protect the social rights of its displaced
citizens through the distribution of aid? What is the role of non-state aid
providers in these processes? (2) Aid consumption: What kind of bureaucratic
procedures do internally displaced people (IDPs) navigate to qualify for aid?
How do IDPs consume material assistance? How does aid reinforce or dismantle
IDPs' ideas about the state and belonging? (3) Aid circulation: Does the value
of humanitarian aid change in the process of its circulation? What meanings does
aid accrue in contexts of political ambivalence? The research is important
because displacement is one of the biggest and fast-growing challenges in the
contemporary world. While humanitarian aid in the wake of displacement is an
entrenched feature of the modern world, including American foreign policy, the
full range of effects is not well documented. Findings will be useful to policy
makers concerned with making aid more effective and to social scientists
building theories of the material aspects of contemporary
citizenship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted by Indiana
University anthropology doctoral student Tetiana Bulakh, under the supervision
of Dr. Sarah Phillips, focusing on IDPs in the Ukraine. This is an appropriate
site because the Ukraine has one of the highest IDP populations in the world.
The researcher will focus on officials who develop IDP policies, representatives
of international organizations, local volunteers, and IDPs and their social
networks. She will collect data using a mixed-methods approach, including
interviews, participant observation, "social biographies" or tracking of aid
objects, aid-focused interviews, projective tests, and analysis of archival
documents related to IDP policy.