* 1729213
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Accounting for the Experiences of People with Down Syndrome in Clinical Settings
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Anne Kohler, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2018
* USD 21,279.00

Cognitive variability is a central aspect of human diversity but it remains an
understudied topic in social science research in general and anthropological
research in particular. Therefore, in the research funded by this award,
anthropology doctoral candidate Anne Kohler, supervised by Dr. Sarah Willen,
will undertake to help fill this gap by studying the people who have some level
of intellectual disabilities but who are nonetheless capable of expressing
nuanced perspectives on their lives, including considerations of how disability
affects their social experience. She will focus on individuals with Down
Syndrome, examining how they navigate social relationships and moral commitments
within a biomedical setting. The research is significant because it will
illuminate intellectual disability as lived experience. Furthermore, this
investigation of cognitive difference, an understudied dimension of human
experience, can deepen our understanding of such core social science concerns as
the nature of human morality and the sources and effects of inequality and
social discrimination.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research will take place in a
Down Syndrome clinic at a major teaching hospital in the northeastern United
States that is well-known for its innovative work. Research will proceed in
three phases: (1) observation of clinic visits; (2) interviews with individuals
with Down Syndrome, their clinicians, and their parents, and (3) a photographic
project in which Down syndrome participants will photograph their daily lives
and reflect on their photos to communicate their experiences. These data will
allow the researcher to explore how individuals with Down Syndrome experience
healthcare and how they deploy social networks as they consider their health,
their life goals, and their social and caregiving relationships. Key research
foci include the individual desires and lived experience of those with Down
Syndrome, and how healthcare encounters affect and are affected by their life
plans and personal values. The research will bring an understudied aspect of the
human experience -- the lived experiences of individuals with intellectual
disability -- into emerging social scientific theory on intellectual disability
and health inequality. Findings also can be used to improve clinical care and
build equitable health policy. Existing research collaborations will ensure that
study findings are shared with clinical and policy audiences locally and
nationally.