* 1729518
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Evaluating Models of Rehabilitation and Probation in the Criminal Justice System
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Richard Wiener, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Reggie Sheehan
* 08/31/2019
* USD 14,859.00

Many communities in the United States increasingly have turned to alternative
correction programs, such as probation and other forms of rehabilitation, to
deal with high rates of incarceration. These various programs attempt to reduce
prison costs and overcrowding, while better integrating offenders into society.
This project will examine the utility of some rehabilitative programs as
probation officers make decisions about high risk offenders. Consequently, the
project will evaluate new case management tools in the criminal justice system
with respect to decision making, recidivism, and public safety.

The project will examine various models of rehabilitation used during the
probation phase of criminal justice. It does so by incorporating and integrating
theories and models from the disciplines of rehabilitation, social psychology,
and criminology. The result of the evaluation will be an integrated model of
rehabilitation reform that provides high risk offenders and their probation
officers with motivating goals to influence behavior and reduce recidivism.
Evaluation will take place first through a field study of archival data from the
Nebraska Office of Probation Administration, and then via an experimental design
employing nearly 300 probation officers, in order to ascertain how probation
officers use various rehabilitative tools and programs. Predictions of
recidivism will be examined through the lens of various theories and models.