* 1729065
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Incarceration, Ethics, and Nonviolence
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Naveeda Khan, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2018
* USD 16,603.00

The research supported by this award will investigate the taking on of ethical
choices and non-violent identities under conditions of confinement. From airport
security lines and waiting rooms to mass incarceration, confinement has become
entrenched in everyday life. The researcher will focus on what happens when life
under confinement is not reduced to either defiance or compliance. The goal is
to understand if ethical solutions, rather than intensifying rules or
surveillance techniques, can solve crisis-level problems, such as cycles of rage
and violence. To investigate this question, the researcher will focus on the
extreme example of prisons, taking advantage of the research opportunity offered
by the introduction of "faith and character-based programs" across Alabama state
prisons.

The research will be conducted by Johns Hopkins University anthropology doctoral
student, Thomas Thornton, with guidance from Dr. Naveeda Khan, inside a maximum-
security prison faith dorm. Through ethnographic fieldwork grounded in long-term
observations, interviews, and engagement with prison and chaplaincy personnel,
the researcher will pursue three overarching questions: How does penal
compliance connect to an ethics of nonviolence? How is nonviolence effectively
encouraged through textual study? How is nonviolence cultivated and embodied by
the prisoners? By studying how faith is practiced among male inmates, the
researcher's project will examine the micro-processes through which nonviolent
life is fostered, even adjacent to the perpetual presence of violence. Findings
from this research will contribute to prison policy discussions among scholars,
legislators, and the general public.