* 1729395
* The Welfare Effects of E-Commerce and Entry in U.S. Retail
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Liran Einav, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 406,000.00

The research team will use a unique data set to analyze competition in U.S.
retailing, data on billions of credit card transactions. The first project will
look at the impact of e-commerce with a focus on which consumers benefit the
most from the growth in internet commerce. A second project uses the same data
source to examine retail entry and how new stores grow and acquire customers.
They want to characterize the growth of new retail outlets, the extent to which
a new store will pull sales away from competitors, and the benefit to consumers
from new store openings. This project will increase our understanding of
consumer spending and retail competition in the United States. The results will
be able to guide policymakers; policies that affect internet commerce and
traditional retailing have a substantial effect on the U.S.
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first project evaluates the impact of
e-commerce on consumer welfare. The PIs develop a model in which consumers
choose an optimal bundle of merchants to shop at, allowing imperfect
substitution between online and offline transactions. They will use the data to
estimate the model?s parameters and obtain quantitative estimates of welfare
gains associated with the expansion of e-commerce. They will also consider how
those kinds are distributed across different classes of consumers. The second
project examines retail entry. The PIs use a discrete choice demand model for
stores, using detailed data on store and customer location and the date a new
store opens to obtain distance elasticities for each for each merchant and
consumer type. These are then mapped to estimates of consumer
welfare.&lt;br/&gt;