* 1729733
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Legal Regulatory Regimes and Small-Scale Business Productivity
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Akhil Gupta, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 21,918.00

Small-scale businesses have long been viewed as crucial to community
livelihoods. They constitute the largest block of employers, are significant in
creating new jobs in growth industries, and are critical for diversifying the
local economy. Artisanal production in particular has been identified as an
important channel for economic revitalization in areas afflicted by increased
unemployment and declines in the agricultural and industrial sectors. But they
face challenges when entering larger regional and global markets. Existing
research on artisanal economies has long debated whether artisanal production
can remain separate from processes of mass production as their popularity
increases in global markets. It is not clear what influence legal property
certifications, such as a geographic indication (GI) and origin trademarks, are
having in expanding and protecting market access for new businesses. This
research project, which trains a student in the methods of empirical, scientific
data collection and analysis, explores what impact introductory legal regulatory
regimes have on the productive capacity of small-scale enterprises. In addition
to providing funding for the training of a graduate student in anthropology,
findings will be disseminated to aid organizations that explore and manage the
causes, consequences, and complexities of intellectual and cultural property.
Aditi Halbe, under the supervision of Dr. Akhil Gupta of the University of
California, Los Angeles, will explore the impact of legal property
certifications on artisanal production. This research will be conducted in
Kachchh district of India's third largest industrialized state, Gujarat. Home to
many artisan communities that make traditional crafts as their primary means of
livelihood, Kachchh experienced a 7.7 magnitude earthquake in 2001 that
devastated community livelihoods. Following the earthquake, development
organizations, social enterprises, and government programs helped reengage and
expand markets for traditional crafts, reaffirming the importance of artisanal
production. Kachchh is thus uniquely situated to understanding how daily
practices of artisanal production intersect with larger development agendas,
attuned to livelihood concerns in the face of current, social, ecological and
political uncertainties. Focusing on collaborations between artisans and
designers to innovate products for international markets, the research will
examine how artisans negotiate the demands of global consumers through
adjustments to everyday processes of traditional craft production. Methods
include traditional ethnographic data collection techniques such as participant
observation, in-depth semi-structured interviews, and oral histories with
artisan producers and stakeholders, development workers, and for-profit
organizations. Attending to the authentication and regulation of these products
through legal cultural property designations like origin trademarks and
geographic indication, this research will analyze the institutional mechanisms
by which economic development strategies are enacted upon small-scale artisanal
producers. The research findings will address how artisanal producers and
consumers envision and negotiate their relationship within the global market.