* 1729338
* DMREF: INFEWS: Collaborative Research:  Photocatalyst by Design: Computational Screening of Reconstructed Perovskite Semiconductor Electrodes for Efficient Solar-to-Fuel Conversion
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Venkatraman Gopalan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2021
* USD 716,589.00

Non-technical Abstract: The production of hydrogen fuel from sunlight and
seawater has the potential to profoundly reshape the food-energy-water (FEW)
landscape and to revolutionize the generation of electric power for
transportation and residential applications. Hydrogen is a sustainable energy
carrier whose catalytic reaction with oxygen generates electrical energy and
heat without emitting carbon dioxide; the only byproduct of this reaction is
clean water. Solar-to-hydrogen conversion offers the advantage of not requiring
agricultural resources to produce synthetic fuels, overcoming one of the major
constraints currently imposed on the FEW supply. The goal of this collaborative
research is to develop a widely applicable computational protocol, which will be
supported by a high-throughput cyberinfrastructure and validated against
experimental data, to accelerate the selection of photoactive materials that can
efficiently split water (H2O) into hydrogen (H2) and oxygen (O2). At the
educational level, this project will promote the emergence of a diverse and
well-trained workforce accustomed to collaboration at the frontier of data-
driven theory, computation, and experimentation towards solving the outstanding
challenges of materials design, which are facing the global FEW system in the
twenty-first century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: To accelerate the
design of new photocatalysts, the research team will exploit novel computational
capabilities that extend the scope of conventional quantum-mechanical
simulations in describing solar-to-hydrogen conversion. An integrated
experimental and computational cycle will be followed to validate the
theoretical approach and to assess the effectiveness of advanced performance
metrics for the successful selection of new classes of photocatalysts.
Specifically, the Schottky barrier height, which sets an upper limit for the
solar-to-hydrogen turnover number, will be used as an aggregate of the various
performance parameters that collectively contribute to photocatalytic activity.
Ultimately, this work will deliver a robust high-throughput framework to guide
the optimization of novel photocatalysts with an initial focus on oxynitride and
oxysulfide perovskites, taking into account realistic synthetic constraints and
conditions of operation. Beyond exploring innovative solutions for solar-to-
hydrogen production, the team participants have been and will continue to be
actively involved in outreach and undergraduate mentoring in an effort to
significantly increase the participation of women and underrepresented
minorities in science and engineering and build effective collaborations with
international institutions.