* 1729446
* Economic Inequality and Risk Taking
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Brian Payne, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 397,989.00

In the last half century, economic inequality in the United States and in many
other developed economies has increased dramatically. The top 0.1% of Americans
now holds as much wealth as the bottom 90%. Researchers across the social
sciences, and stakeholders across the political spectrum, have emphasized how
growing inequality may pose threats to the social fabric of society and to the
health and well-being of individuals within it. This project aims to understand
how changes in the inequality of an income distribution affects the decision
making of individuals. The specific hypothesis guiding this project is that
higher levels of inequality encourage high risk / high reward decision
strategies. Such strategies can have both benefits (for those who receive high
rewards) and costs (for those who lose due to high risk).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use six behavioral experiments to
establish the cause and effect relationship between inequality in economic
outcomes and decision making strategies. The project will also employ an
analysis of large-scale data from government sources (Census, US Department of
Labor) and internet search data to examine the relationship between economic
inequality and risk taking in everyday life. This "big data" approach will
extend findings from the laboratory to consequential types of risky decisions,
including financial decisions (such as taking pay day loans) as well as health
decisions (such as smoking or drug use). This research will shed light on how
and why economic inequality changes people's priorities when making decisions,
with consequences for the health and well-being of individuals and societies.