* 1729783
* DMREF: Collaborative Research on High throughput Exploration of Sequence Space of Peptide Polymers that Exhibit Aqueous Demixing Phase Behavior
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Rohit Pappu, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Anderson
* 09/30/2021
* USD 266,212.00

Non-technical Description: Proteins are incredibly adaptive molecules. For
example, when exposed to a stimulus, such as an environmental change in
temperature, pH or light, some proteins undergo conformational (shape) changes
that can lead to useful material properties, such as a phase transition, turning
from a solid to liquid, or a liquid to solid. Understanding and predicting how
these changes occur on the molecular level could lead to the creation of an
entire class of soft materials that can respond to environmental cues. This
research will develop and apply computer algorithms to quickly go through large
amounts of protein sequence data to predict as yet undiscovered temperature-
sensitive peptide sequences. These sequences can then be subjected to computer-
based modeling to predict conformational changes that ensue from a phase
transition. Finally, experiments will be conducted to predict and determine the
2D and 3D materials architectures that can be created by combining stimulus-
responsive peptide sequences. If successful, these methods could create a
toolkit for the efficient design and fabrication of a large variety of materials
with custom-designed properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:
Stimulus responsiveness is a striking feature of proteins in Nature, whereby
responses to chemical stimuli such as ligand binding, phosphorylation, and
methylation, and physical stimuli such as changes in temperature, pH, light, and
salt concentration lead to sharp conformational or phase transitions. Unlike
proteins, which encode diverse responses to numerous stimuli by richly sampling
amino acid sequence space, current bioinspired designs of repetitive
polypeptides have focused on a tiny fraction of the vast conceivable expanse of
sequence space. The primary goal of the proposed research is thus to develop
generalized materials design rules, by combining experiments, fast and accurate
physics-based computer simulations, and data science, to accelerate the
discovery and development of a potentially huge class of thermally-responsive
polypeptide materials by a systematic exploration of sequence space. This
research will "for the first time" provide a complete atomistic understanding of
the determinants of the lower critical solution temperature (LCST) and upper
critical solution temperature (UCST) phase behavior, enable de novo molecular
design of LCST and UCST peptide polymers and identify rules on how to combine
them to create hierarchically-ordered, nanostructured polypeptide materials that
exhibit unique morphologies that can be tuned as a function of their stimulus
responsiveness. These materials could serve as nanostructured scaffolds and
templates and enable a broad range of biocatalytic, bioelectronic, or assay
devices. The PIs also plan to release the PIMMS modeling package, a set of tools
for performing lattice-based simulations of polymers. PIMMS will provide support
for the machine learning algorithms that enable the design of responsive
protein-based polymers. The PIMMS codebase will be released as open source. A
user community will be coalesced around the language by ensuring that interested
researchers are able to contribute modules to or implement application-specific
algorithms within the codebase. This is expected to allow a wider growth of the
project. This aspect is of special interest to the software cluster in the
Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure, which has provided co-funding for this
award.