* 1729165
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Disintermediation and the Reorganization of Labor
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2018
* Jatin Dua, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 4,637.00

Research exploring changes in the contemporary workplace have tended to focus on
the shift from waged, contracted employment to more flexible labor arrangements.
Some view these as preconditions for creative economies that can transform
productive landscapes. Others are concerned with the extent to which these
regimes have generated precarity in the labor force. But what conclusions can be
made when the focus of study is on those who have historically functioned
outside the discipline of contract labor practices, such as artisans, merchants,
and middlemen? This project, which trains a graduate student in how to conduct
rigorous, empirically grounded scientific fieldwork, addresses a broader
phenomenon that economists refer to as "disintermediation," in which middlemen
are being cut out of industries and supply-chains. Global in scope and
interconnected in configuration, disintermediation is rapidly transforming the
lives of workers everywhere: in the fast-fashion apparel and fair trade coffee
supply-chains, the hospitality and tourism sectors, and the taxi service
industry. In addition to providing funding for the training of a graduate
student in anthropology, findings will be disseminated to organizations and
individuals that explore and manage the causes, consequences, and complexities
of economic precarity.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Samuel Shuman, under the
supervision of Dr. Jatin Dua of the University of Michigan, will explores what
role disintermediation has in the reorganization of labor. The research takes
place among a Hasidic community in Antwerp, Belgium, who is now in the process
of reskilling its male workforce and refashioning them into local entrepreneurs.
After World War II, thousands of Jewish refugees fled Eastern Europe to Western
Europe. Among these refugees were Hasidim, a pietistic sect of Judaism, which
landed in the port-city of Antwerp. Over 80% of its workforce depended upon the
diamond industry for their economic livelihoods. In recent years, however,
through the rise of national and supranational forms of regulation and
e-commerce, Hasidic Jews are being cut out as middlemen in the diamond supply-
chain. Within the context of this transition, the study asks three series of
questions: 1) How are attitudes toward work, value, and virtue becoming reshaped
through this economic transformation and through austerity policies? 2) How is
surveillance informing how transactions are both conducted within the regulated
industry and within an emerging, local community of entrepreneurs? 3) What does
this economic transition reveal about the role of the middleman within the long
history of global Capitalism and what might it illuminate about a new phase of
Capitalism where middlemen may no longer be needed? Data will be gathered
through a range of established ethnographic techniques over a 12-month period,
including participant observation and interviews among attendees at a vocational
school, traders, brokers, and artisans in the diamond bourse. In contributing to
scientific work in legal and economic anthropology, this project emphasizes the
economic middleman as the exemplary figure through which to understand the
reorganization of modern political economies and the boundaries of inclusion and
exclusion within these worlds.