* 1729295
* Investigating the Impact of Social-Class Cultures on Social Cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Eric Knowles, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 356,214.00

One common attribute of human societies is the distribution of people into
different social classes. In the United States, we often speak of the "working
class," the "middle class," or the "upper class." One view of social class
considers a person's relative position within a social hierarchy, with social
class reflecting differences in financial resources, education, and occupations.
Another view treats social class as reflecting differences among people in their
values, ideas, practices, and outlooks on life. Regardless of their origin, the
existence of social classes is important to understand, because many important
outcomes in employment, education, and achievement are linked to a person's
social class. One interesting difference, for example, is the "ethics gap"
between classes -- the observation that higher-class individuals tend to break
ethical norms more frequently than others. The current research develops a
social-cognitive model to account for such differences. Rather than attributing
unflattering social values to the rich (e.g., greed), the model developed in
this research considers how one's social class might shape basic perceptions of
others. Specifically, the proposed model links a diverse array of class-related
phenomena to appraisals of "motivational relevance" -- that is, to rapid and
spontaneous judgments of others' significance for one's current goals and well-
being. The model suggests that divergent relevance appraisals lead lower-class
individuals to pay more attention to other people, to see others as physically
closer, and to more readily infer others' beliefs and desires, as compared to
higher-class perceivers. These social-cognitive processes may be responsible for
previously observed social class differences in a variety of areas, including
economic prosperity, educational achievement, and occupational
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A series of six studies will test the
hypothesized social-cognitive effects of social class. Eye-tracking and
immersive virtual reality technology will be leveraged to examine how lower- and
higher-class individuals deploy their visual attention in real-world contexts.
One set of experiments will examine whether attentional differences between
lower-class and higher-class perceivers extend to auditory attention. Other
experiments seek to understand how social class affects patterns of visual
perception -- specifically, whether lower-class perceivers see other people as
more salient and physically closer than do higher-class individuals. One
hypothesis to be tested is that higher-class perceivers, because of their
chronic tendency to judge other people as low in relevance, are less able to
readily infer what others are thinking and feeling. A final experiment will seek
to establish the causal role of social class cultures through a "cultural
priming" technique that cues members of multiple social classes (e.g., first-
generation college students) to adopt one or the other of their class-based
worldviews. The knowledge gained in the research will help identify ways of
reducing the barriers that working-class individuals face in higher education
and other "gateway contexts" -- thus promoting achievement, upward mobility, and
economic growth.