* 1729778
* Liver Exchange
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* M. Utku Unver, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2019
* USD 291,749.00

Liver transplants can save the lives of people with liver failure, but the need
for transplants exceeds the number of donors. As a result, lives can be saved if
we find better ways to use all potential donors. This award funds research that
builds on previous efforts to use economic theory to improve outcomes for
transplant patients. The team will focus on new theories and methods that can be
applied to the unique aspects of liver transplant from living donors. Donors
have two lobes (left and right) and can donate one. The left lobe is smaller,
and donating this lobe is less risky for the donor. However, the lobe must be
large enough to support the recipient. Tissue compatibility is also an issue.
Many willing donors either cannot donate to their loved one or can only do so by
making a larger, riskier donation. The team wants to develop methods that will
make it possible to match more patients with donors while also minimizing donor
risks. The project will require new technical methods beyond previous work in
organ (kidney) exchange. This project develops new ideas in economic theory and
proposes specific methods that can be implemented in clearinghouses that can
match donors with recipients. The award therefore has the potential to save
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will proceed in several distinct stages.
The first will consider the size compatibility issue assuming that each
recipient is matched to one living donor. The second stage will model a
medically feasible alternative: a recipient needing a large liver might be
matched with two donors who each donate a small lobe. In this case the recipient
receives two donor organs. The research team will first develop an exchange
method assuming that each recipient has two loved ones who are willing to donate
(at least one tissue incompatible) and will be matched with two donors. The
third stage examines whether or not even better outcomes might be possible if
unbalanced exchanges are allowed; that is, a patient may provide only one donor
(with a large liver and therefore a large donation) and receive two small
donations. The team will develop new theoretical tools in mechanism design,
using discrete and continuum graphs with multi-dimensional lattice compatibility
requirements to model size compatibility and blood type compatibility.