* 1729039
* Improving Vocabulary Learning through Working Memory Training: Examination of Causal Effects and Learning Trajectories
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Young-Suk Grace Kim, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

One of the biggest challenges in education is promoting oral language
development. In particular, vocabulary learning is key for the development of
higher-order oral language and literacy skills. New insights from theory and
evidence-based approaches will help children build this foundational skill which
in turn will ensure success in school. To this end, researchers will examine the
extent to which vocabulary learning is influenced by a cognitive factor (i.e.,
working memory) and an environmental factor (i.e., input frequency and quality).
The two primary goals are to develop and examine the feasibility of implementing
working memory training for young children, and to develop working memory
training on vocabulary learning, with the potential of mitigating effects of
impoverished input often associated with children from low socio-economic (SES)
backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the causal role of
cognition (i.e., working memory) in vocabulary learning for young children. In
the first year, the researchers will develop several child-friendly and engaging
working memory training modules to examine whether working memory training
improves vocabulary learning in general, as well as working memory for children
from low SES backgrounds. In the second year, the training modules will be
implemented in a small-scale pilot trial where children are randomly assigned to
four conditions: (1) working memory training; (2) vocabulary training; (3)
combined training on working memory and vocabulary; and (4) business-as-usual
control. The findings are expected to provide proof-of-concept for development
of a causal model of working memory in vocabulary learning, which can inform the
development and design of interventions to improve vocabulary learning.