* 1729720
* The Development of Relational Processing in Infancy
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Kenneth Forbus, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 07/31/2023
* USD 596,080.00

Analogical ability is the ability to make relational comparisons between
objects, events, or ideas, and to see common relational patterns across them. It
is a cornerstone of higher reasoning ability, and is essential for learning
mathematics and science. This project investigates the nature of this ability
and how it develops in infants, tracing its development over the first year of
life. Delineating the conditions that promote relational learning in young
infants, will lead to insights into how best to promote relational learning in
children and in adults who show lags in abstract learning. One result of the
proposed studies will be a set of methods and tools that can be used by teachers
and caregivers to support relational learning. For example, this research can
serve as a springboard for developing targeted interventions for young children
diagnosed with language delay, as well as those diagnosed with autistic spectrum
disorders. Another result will be a better understanding of how to build
artificial intelligence systems that learn more like people, with far less data
than today's systems require.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The starting point for this
proposal is a recent demonstration that 7- and 9-month-old infants can form
abstract same and different relations, and apply them to new objects. The
preliminary studies suggest that even 3-month-old infants are capable of
relational learning; however, they are highly vulnerable to distraction by the
interestingness of the objects in the pairs. The new research will use four
series of experiments to trace infants' ability to learn abstract relations. The
first will examine the processes that promote relational learning in 3-month-
olds. The second will investigate the conditions that support spontaneous
comparison and learning in 7- and 9-month-olds. The third series will test how
language influences relational learning- specifically, whether naming relations
can improve learning, and whether naming objects can impede relational learning.
The fourth series of experiments will investigate the generalizability of these
effects by testing a variety of abstract relations. Computational modeling of
the learning patterns found in our studies will provide complementary insights
on these processes. Taken together, these studies will reveal information
critical to understanding analogical processes and the origin and evolution of
higher-order cognition.