* 1729280
* Econometric Methods for Models with Covariate Adaptive Randomization and Partial Identification
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Federico Bugni, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 163,770.00

This research develops new econometric methods to address two types of problems
recently faced by applied researchers in several areas of economics and other
social sciences. First, development economists often employ randomized control
experiments using covariate adaptive randomization to "balance" the impact of
the underlying observed covariates. Standard inference methods are typically
used in this setting, but they can produce invalid results. In light of this,
the first part of the research develops novel inference methods that are both
valid and easy to implement. Second, partially identified models have been
widely used in labor economics and industrial organization to incorporate
missing data or multiplicity of equilibria, but the literature has not
adequately addressed how to test the validity of a subset of the moment
conditions. The second part of the research thus develops a new method to
address this problem. In particular, the hypothesis test considered in this
project can be also used to evaluate whether a certain instrumental variable is
valid or not in a model with moment equalities and
inequalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops new theories and
methods for analyzing two econometric models. The first two projects study
inference on the average treatment effect in randomized control experiments that
use covariate adaptive randomization. The first project considers experiments in
which there are multiple treatments, and the assignment is not necessarily
evenly distributed among the control and the treatment groups. The project
proposes regression-based inference methods that are shown to be valid, to have
excellent power properties, and to be easy to implement. The second project
considers experiments with assignment occurring at a group or cluster level,
e.g., classroom, village, etc. The statistical dependence among individuals
within each group requires developing new methodologies. Finally, the third
project considers an inference problem in a partially identified model defined
by moment equalities and inequalities. In this context, the goal is to test the
validity of a subset of the moment conditions, while maintaining the validity of
the remaining ones. This project develops a new bootstrap-based method that is
shown to be valid and has good power properties.