* 1729011
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Self-assembled peptide-pi-electron supramolecular polymers for bioinspired energy harvesting, transport and management
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2017,10/31/2018
* Andrew Ferguson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Peter Anderson
* 10/31/2018
* USD 536,783.00

Non-technical Description: Nature exquisitely controls the spatial arrangement
of key pigments and dyes in the process of photosynthesis to harness solar
energy. Mimicry of controlled dye arrangements in synthetic materials can be
realized through tailored design of molecules and molecular arrangements.
However, exerting reliable control over the assembly of engineered molecular
materials in the crucial 10-100 nanometer "mesoscale" regime, thousands of times
smaller than a millimeter, remains elusive. Such mesoscale molecular structures
will combine charge and energy transfer activities with capabilities for
assembly in biological solutions, and compatibility with biological
environments. Given the multitude of molecular design possibilities, it is
essential that experimental programs incorporate computer modeling and data-
driven screening to guide experimental design and synthesis. Tight integration
and mutually reinforcing feedback between computation and experiment can reveal
fundamental design rules for molecular assembly, and accelerate the discovery
and development of multi-molecule assemblies with tailored structure and
function. This project will develop these functional molecular superstructures
in a collaboration encompassing molecular synthesis, self-assembly analogous to
biological systems, modeling of the structures and electrical properties of the
assemblies, and utilizing the assemblies to manage interactions between light
and electricity. The PIs are committed to workforce training and development
within this project, guiding the next generation of materials and data
scientists of diverse socio-economic background in state-of-the-art tools and
exposing them to an integrated interdisciplinary mode of work that will define
future research.

Technical Description: The photophysical and electrical properties of pi-
conjugated supramolecular systems depend critically on the explicit nature of
the intermolecular electronic interactions. These interactions are governed by
the precise molecular structure and chemistry and emergent supramolecular
arrangements. The PIs developed a peptide construct that offer a pathway to
exert such control over emergent supramolecular structure through tailoring of
steric bulk and variable hydrophobicity of the component sequences to influence
intermolecular orientations, higher-order fibrilization, and specific electronic
outcomes. They initially used an Edisonian approach to uncover these variations,
but the goals of this project are to wield explicit engineered control through
tightly integrated atomistic simulations and electronic structure calculations.
The research activities build upon the team?s strong foundation to accomplish
these goals in two specific objectives: (i) the development of sophisticated
peptidic semiconductor materials with advanced optoelectronic functionality and
(ii) the development of new assembly paradigms leading to heterogeneous peptidic
nanomaterials with chemical and electronic gradients and localized electric
fields. The execution of this work will entail interconnected efforts by the
research team in the (i) synthesis of new pi-electron units and new self-
assembling peptides, (ii) molecular and data-driven modeling of the nanomaterial
aggregates and their higher-order assemblies, and (iii) characterization of
electrical transport within the nanomaterials. This project will make special
provision for research opportunities for undergraduate students, women, and
underrepresented minorities. The PIs will train and mentor researchers in state-
of-the-art experimental and computational tools and expose them to an integrated
interdisciplinary mode of work. K-12 outreach activities will inspire excitement
and awareness of materials science and encourage students to pursue higher
education in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) fields.