* 1729334
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Distributive Properties of the Bureaucracy
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,10/31/2020
* Tara Slough, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 10/31/2020
* USD 21,231.00

The hiring of public sector employees is an important part of the bureaucratic
process. Political incentives to target government jobs to certain populations
or constituencies have the potential to influence the manner in which these
jobs, as well as public goods, are distributed. Thus, understanding the
distribution of bureaucratic jobs can provide insight into the functioning of
governance. The project will examine interactions between the legislature and
bureaucracy, as well as constituent relations and political incentives, to study
the distribution of bureaucratic jobs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
present a formal model of how bureaucratic jobs are distributed. In addition to
legislative bargaining, several policy instruments that shape who is hired will
be included in the model. As well, the model will include variables relating
social structure to the use of these policy instruments and the ultimate
composition of the public sector. Moreover, the formal model will seek to
demonstrate the link between hiring and public goods, by identifying
inefficiencies resulting from the political determinants of hiring. To test the
predictions of the model empirically, the project will collect systematic,
micro-level data on public employees, official public sector wages, and proposed
public sector reforms.