* 1729513
* The Social and Environmental Dynamics of an Agricultural Boom
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Sarah Osterhoudt, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 42,119.00

The research supported by this award investigates the effects that extreme
shifts in agricultural commodity prices may have on social and economic
inequality. Boom and bust cycles have long shaped relationships of international
commodity production and trade. As more producers become entangled in the global
economy, they become increasingly exposed to these often dramatic price
fluctuations. In this research, the investigator focuses on two overarching
questions: (1) When prices for market crops rise and fall, how are social,
economic, and environmental relationships altered? and (2) How and to what
extent do individual producers then re-position themselves within these larger
environmental, economic, and cultural systems of exchange? These questions are
important because in both the United States and the world at large, crops
subject to boom and bust cycles are frequently produced by vulnerable
smallholder operators. Local successes and failures can affect the larger system
as well as have consequences for local households and communities. Findings from
this research will be of interest to both social scientists trying to better
understand the dynamic linkages that comprise globalization and to policymakers
who seek to control economic extremes and mitigate negative effects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted by Indiana University
anthropologist, Dr. Sarah R. Osterhoudt, in northeastern Madagascar. This is an
appropriate site for this project because families in this region have been
cultivating an important international commodity -- vanilla -- within agro-
ecological systems for multiple generations. The researcher will follow vanilla
from the growers that produce the beans through the many specialists in
packaging, transport, export, certification, and sales that bring it to
international markets. She will collect data at all points of this commodity
chain by employing a combination of ethnographic methodologies, including:
participant observation, agro-forestry inventories, semi-structured interviews,
market narratives, and analyses of court and police records concerning land
disputes. These data, collected in the current "boom period," will be combined
with comparable data collected during the 2010-2011 "bust" period. The result
will provide a unique, in-depth, longitudinal analysis of the dynamic social and
ecological dimensions of a key international crop across a boom and bust cycle.