* 1729784
* Collaborative Research: Career Success in Government Bureaucracy: Evidence from Individual-Level Data
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2020
* Yongxiang Wang, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2020
* USD 164,835.00

Abstract: 1729806.Fisman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title Change: Career Success in
Government Bureaucracy: Evidence from Individual-Level Data
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leaders affect performance in many kinds of organizations:
business, government, and non-profit. This award funds four different projects
that will use novel data sources to shed new light on the kinds of college
graduates who enter bureaucratic careers, the choices they make about how to
allocate their time to various tasks, and how political connections may help
them advance. The results are important for economic science for two reasons.
First, it is known that government performance is key to overall economic
performance for developing countries, which is one reason why political
corruption can be a barrier to economic growth. Understanding the circumstances
that lead to high-functioning governments is a first step to determining how
policies, such as anti-corruption programs or rules governing bureaucratic
promotion, may spur economic growth. Second, testing theories about how local
government officials allocate their time across competing priorities is a test
of more general economic theories of government. The research team will use new
data from China to test these hypotheses; thus, the project can help U.S.
businesses to navigate the complexities of working in China and will help us
understand the role of government in China?s rapid economic
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs plan to explore who chooses to become a
bureaucrat, what factors affect career success, and what groups of officials
(city mayors and party secretaries) do once they have attained higher office.
The research will analyze how each of these questions is affected by anti-
corruption policies. The PIs will collect several novel datasets for analysis,
using information provided by universities, information published in national
and local city newspapers, data from civil service exam results and from
university libraries, and biographical information available on the Web. The PIs
will employ novel identification strategies and the research contributes new
data and methods to the literature on bureaucratic governance in an
international context. In addition to contributing to the academic literature,
the results of this research also will provide inputs into how best to reduce
corruption, improve governance, hence accelerate economic growth in developing
countries.