* 1729018
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Child Acquisition of Sociolinguistic Variation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Jennifer Nycz, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 08/31/2019
* USD 18,660.00

Public schools in the United States are responsible for the education of more
linguistically- and ethnically-diverse students than ever. A consequential part
of this linguistic diversity is diversity in dialect of English spoken, as
varying dialects of English characterize different socio-economic, ethnic, and
racial communities and networks. Children enrolling in their first year of
public schooling will exhibit the linguistic forms and patterns they have heard
in input from their caregivers and the community surrounding their home
environment. In many cases, the dialect learned at home may differ substantially
from the variety of English used by teachers and peers. This change in input may
prompt a child to alter their language, either through the development of the
ability to code-switch or style-shift, or through a trade of the forms and
patterns they learned from caregivers in favor of those used by their peers. A
study of the mechanisms and outcomes of peer linguistic learning in a diverse
peer group will add much to the understanding of first language development as
well as social development at this age. This study, by focusing on a small
Greater Boston metropolitan area city with an extent of ethnic, racial,
linguistic, and socioeconomic diversity representative of similar metropolitan
areas in the region, addresses an under-representation of multi-dialectal and
multi-cultural public early education communities in the region. It seeks to not
only document child linguistic, social, and sociolinguistic development, but
also to provide a datapoint that will inform future American early education
language learning policies and practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
investigates the acquisition of new dialect forms and patterns of variable
language through accommodation to peers in the Kindergarten classroom.
Participants in the study (n=30), children in their first year of public
schooling, have enrolled in a socioeconomically, ethnically, racially, and
linguistically diverse Kindergarten class in a small industrial city in the
Greater Boston metropolitan area. Linguistic diversity includes, not only the
presence of languages other than English--such as Spanish and Portuguese--among
peers, but also features associated with various dialects, ethnolects, and
varieties of English, such as Eastern New England English, Latino English,
African American English, and phenomena associated with second-language English.
Participants will be audio-recorded speaking naturally and spontaneously
throughout a week of classes at 10 time-points throughout the 2017-2018 school
year. These recordings will be analyzed for convergence between peers across (9)
relevant sociolinguistic variables. A component tracking peer physical proximity
and mutual affinities will extricate automatic processes of linguistic
accommodation from the role of the social factors which have been hypothesized
to mediate it in previous research. If social elements such as social group and
network formation are found to influence the rate, extent, or direction of
accommodation among peers across any of the contexts of variation, this will be
concrete evidence of the development of sociolinguistic competence.