* 1729883
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Perception and production of vowel contrasts in Welsh-Spanish bilinguals
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Michael Hammond, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2019
* USD 9,012.00

Although bilingualism or multilingualism is the norm around the world, the bulk
of linguistic research has focused on monolingual populations. Current theories
of second language acquisition maintain that accurate second language sound
perception is 1) correlated with speakers' production ability on an individual
level and 2) dependent on observable similarities between the native and target
language. This project tests these hypotheses with experimental and naturally
collected language data. Examining these effects is the first step toward
identifying areas of difficulty for learners of any given second language, which
will contribute to development of educational methods tailored to any individual
learner and language in question. The results of this project have the potential
to advance both English as a Second Language initiatives and foreign language
education methods in the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using methods drawn from
phonological, phonetic, and psycholinguistic research, this project tests the
above predictions with data collected from an understudied population of Welsh-
Spanish bilinguals in Argentina. This population has variation in age and
language learning backgrounds which makes it an ideal testing group, while the
nature of the Welsh vowel system provides a constrained set of testable
acquisition challenges for native Spanish speakers. A reading task will elicit
productions of Welsh and Spanish vowels from the test group and control
populations of Welsh speakers in Wales and Argentine Spanish monolinguals.
Statistical analysis of control group speech will be used to predict which Welsh
vowel contrasts are likely to challenge native speakers of Spanish. Results will
be compared to 1) bilinguals' accuracy in vowel identification and
discrimination and 2) the similarity of bilinguals' vowel productions to those
of the control groups. Understanding the challenges of vowel contrast
acquisition for this population will result in scalable predictions regarding
the nature and consequences of second language acquisition for the field of
bilingualism.