* 1729711
* A Lifespan Conceptual Model of Ethnic-Racial Identity
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Adriana Umana-Taylor, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 09/30/2019
* USD 24,369.00

This project will allow the University of Texas at Austin to host a two-day
workshop that will bring together an interdisciplinary team of scholars to
develop a lifespan conceptual model of ethnic-racial identity. Ethnic-racial
identity (ERI) is a psychological construct that re&amp;#64258;ects the beliefs
and attitudes that individuals have about their ethnic-racial group memberships,
as well as the processes by which these beliefs and attitudes develop over time.
Studies with adolescents show that aspects of ERI have protective effects on
academic achievement and mental health in ethnic minority youth and adults.
Unfortunately, there is little knowledge about ERI before adolescence, despite
evidence that it begins to develop as early as age 2 or 3 years. Because human
development proceeds as a function of the continuous, ongoing, and dynamic
interplay of environmental and individual factors across the lifespan, the study
of ERI must be based on a cohesive and holistic view of development from early
childhood into adulthood. To capitalize on the positive effects observed in
studies with adolescents, a better understanding of ERI across ages is needed so
that psychologists can effectively develop and implement prevention and
intervention programs to promote healthy development in diverse children, youth,
and adults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address this gap, the scholars involved in
this workshop will conduct a critical analysis of ERI in early childhood, middle
childhood, and adolescence, to establish when different components of ERI
emerge, and to examine the processes through which these components emerge.
Specific workshop activities will include a systematic review of the scientific
literature; an in-depth discussion of developmental theories relevant to
identity development; and consensus-building regarding key developmental
processes that guide ERI across developmental stages. Collectively, these
activities will serve to inform a lifespan conceptual model of ERI as a
construct that develops throughout childhood and adolescence into adulthood.
This model can then serve as a foundation for future research on ERI.