* 1729862
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Who breaked the rule? Rethinking English Past Tense Overregularizations
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2019
* Megan Figueroa, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2019
* USD 9,221.00

To learn a language, children must go beyond simply imitating speech and learn
the rules of the language from their surrounding linguistic environment. One way
to tell that children learn rules is that they apply rules to an overly broad
set of words. For example, English-learning children produce forms like
"breaked" or "catched" at around 3 years of age. These forms, called past tense
overregularizations, show that children have implicitly discovered the past
tense formation rule: namely, "add -ed to a verb to create the past tense." But
does it take children until age 3 to discover such rules? A better understanding
of the timeline of rule discovery will help us to develop more realistic
milestones to measure children's progress in first language learning. It will
also help to us understand why the past tense form is so difficult for second
language learners of English and allow more informed pedagogical intervention
for these learners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work has two goals: the first is
to seek evidence that the past tense rule can be found in 16-month-olds, which
would be consistent with many observations that children display significant
receptive abilities long before their productive abilities reach the same level.
The second goal is to determine if the production of past tense
overregularizations can be explained by factors other than the discovery of a
grammatical rule. There is growing evidence that overregularizations in
production reflect children's need to simplify their utterances as they attempt
to say more and more complex sentences. Factors that may influence a child's
need to simplify utterances are frequency of the lexical item and the child's
age. The proposed project will combine a behavioral study with 16-month-olds and
a corpus analysis of longitudinal, spontaneous child speech to achieve these
goals.