* 1729176
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Predictive Modeling of Polymer-Derived Ceramics: Discovering Methods for the Design and Fabrication of Complex Disordered Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Ridwan Sakidja, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2021
* USD 111,121.00

Non-technical Description: In the broader context of the materials-by-design
grand challenge, this project will focus on developing a novel methodology for
accurate design and fabrication of complex disordered solids using a combination
of advanced computational and experimental techniques. Complex disordered solids
are non-crystalline materials for which the fundamental building blocks are
typically molecules or molecule fragments, and therefore they have great
potential for tunable structure and properties for various applications of great
scientific and technological importance. The key feature of our novel approach
is to develop an efficient iterative loop that involves simulating the atomic
structure of complex disordered solids, subsequently characterizing the
resultant structures/properties, and sending the information back to fabrication
conditions for further optimization. This new development is significant because
it will demonstrate a computation-based design principle for systematically
obtaining the growth parameters needed to make complex disordered materials with
targeted properties. Ultimately, that ability can be directed to produce
materials that are optimized for particular applications. It is envisioned that
the results of this project will be transferrable to a wide range of complex
disordered material types, growth methods, and structural/functional properties.
The complete system is designated as the amorphous materials designer (AMD)
program. During the construction of the AMD, students from high school up though
Ph.D. graduate school will be trained by the investigators in all aspects of the
research including materials simulation, fabrication, and characterization using
advanced state-of-the-art methods.

Technical Description: The research will focus on developing an ab initio
molecular dynamics (AIMD) and hybrid reverse Monte Carlo (HRMC) simulation
algorithm, augmented by ab initio based energy constraints, that couples with
experimental input and feedback, using a series of thin-film amorphous
preceramic polymers (a-BC:H, a-SiBCN:H, and a-SiCO:H) as suitably complex and
technologically relevant case studies. The unique utility of modern solid-state
nuclear magnetic resonance techniques to obtain specific bonding and
connectivity information and the sensitive medium-range order information
available from fluctuation electron microscopy - a specialized technique based
on transmission electron microscopy - will be combined with neutron diffraction
and more routine physical and electronic structure characterization methods to
provide input and constraints for the simulations. The HRMC modeling efforts
will be optimized via particle swarm optimization and subsequently used to train
an artificial neural network (ANN) that will predictively link the parameters
used to simulate a desired material with the growth parameters needed to
fabricate said material. Consequently, the investigators expect to substantially
advance the state of the art and surmount traditional challenges associated with
(1) identifying non-global potential energy minima for materials produced under
non-thermodynamic conditions and (2) aligning simulation and growth process
timescales. This effort will benefit technology and society by advancing the
science of design of complex disordered solids. The novelty of the effort lies
in developing the algorithms and rule-sets that will tie together growth,
characterization, and simulation, as well as in developing strategies for
mapping (not necessarily reproducing) fabrication conditions and desired
properties, and it is this that takes the effort from evolutionary to
potentially revolutionary. The PIs also plan to release the AMD program as open
source and build a user community around it by ensuring that interested
researchers are able to contribute to the AMD codebase. This will allow a wider
growth of the project. This aspect is of special interest to the software
cluster in the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure, which has provided co-
funding for this award.