* 1729067
* Online Criminal Drug Networks
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2020
* Dana Haynie, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2020
* USD 310,975.00

The aim of this study is to collect network data from an online drug market to
examine its structure and the processes through which it forms. The focus is to
evaluate 1) how the market grows, behaves, and changes over time and 2) how the
market reacts to law enforcement efforts. The project aims to shed new light on
criminals' use of technology and to track changes in drug dealers' distribution
tactics, drawing from network theories and theories of criminal coordination.
Drug procurement through online drug markets and encrypted Internet services is
increasing. Scholars and policy makers are calling for more research on drug
access via the Internet through encrypted online drug marketplaces.

Encrypted virtual criminal networks are an ideal case to study the impact of
emergent technologies on the organization of real world crime. By limiting the
risk of detection, anonymizing technologies provide a unique medium for criminal
groups to coordinate offending. Deterrence strategies assume that most crime is
committed by a few key actors, who sometimes recruit others to participate.
Crucial to this understanding is that crime is a group-level phenomenon, where
1) crime groups are fluid, and can be better understood as a network of criminal
affiliations, and 2) only a few offenders direct network activities and are
responsible for most offending. In this regard, criminal coordination refers to
recruitment and participation in a network of criminal affiliations, even when
participants may not consider themselves to be members of a crime group. This
makes network analysis ideal to understand how disruption efforts affect crime
groups' behavior and coordination, especially when the network takes the shape
of a market, because it treats crime groups as a series of affiliations, rather
than as a stable entity. The study will employ network methodologies to answer
two broad research questions: (1) How do online criminal networks organize and
what actor characteristics drive transactional ties? (2) How do online criminal
networks behave over time and react to potential deterrence strategies? Findings
will generate knowledge about new forms of criminal organization, as well as
drug enforcement and prevention agencies, and will shed light on the relational
dynamics that sustain and facilitate the growth of online crime networks.