* 1729837
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Integrating Managerial Insight and Optimal Algorithms
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2017,08/31/2018
* Elena Katok, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 08/31/2018
* USD 23,287.00

An extensive body of experimental work shows that human decision-makers
routinely make sub-optimal choices when faced with uncertainty in the
laboratory. Since these deviations from rational behavior cut into firm profits,
one might conclude that employees who routinely encounter such choices should be
replaced with software that is programmed to automatically implement optimal
strategy. On the other hand, if human managers have ?managerial insight? that
can resolve some of the uncertainty about future demand, then they should be
considered valuable assets rather than liabilities. Humans have a broad
contextual awareness of the world, but their computational abilities are limited
and error-prone. Computers are relatively unaware, but they are unerring and
have nearly unlimited processing capability. This Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement Grant, the co-PI develops a model to examine how a business might
best take advantage of human managers? insights while scaffolding their
decision-making with technology. The project will explore whether it is better
to have human managers adjust recommendations made by an automated system or
whether managerial insight should be translated into a machine-usable format for
automated processing with the software holding ultimate decision rights.
Implications of these findings to issues like supply chain management will be
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves an experimental methodology
where participants in a ?newsvendor problem? setting are endowed with managerial
insight in the form of a noisy signal about upcoming demand. With this
additional piece of information, a manager computing the optimal insight-
informed ordering policy should outperform the optimal policy absent this
information. However, in the lab, human subjects fail to improve profitability
when making these decisions because their superior demand information is
undercut by their inferior computational ability. The co-Pi will explore
whether, by disaggregating the forecasting task (where managerial insight can
improve operations) from the order quantity selection (which can be mechanically
computed once demand information is known) can lead to truly optimal responses.