* 1729463
* Collaborative Research: Inequalities in Technology Use and Health Lifestyles of Children and Adults
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Stefanie Mollborn, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2021
* USD 191,750.00

This project will analyze the use of technologies by children and teenagers in
the mobile internet era. The focus is how technology use is situated within the
interaction of children's lives and families, and how social class plays into
these processes. With technologies changing rapidly, research on young people's
technology use have lagged. The study will contribute to knowledge in several
areas. First, the project will provide new information about the type,
frequency, and context of technology use among children and youth. Second,
investigators will build upon the emerging body of evidence and theory on
children's health lifestyles by integrating technology use as a health behavior.
Third, investigators will consider children's and parents' negotiations,
practices, and emerging understandings around technology use. Understanding
children's technology use as it relates to other behavior is important for
improving the longer-term development, health, and well-being of children. This
is particularly important for marginalized populations--racial/ethnic
minorities, children of immigrants, and children living in poverty. Student
training is central to the project, with students heavily involved in analysis,
dissemination of findings, theoretical development, and integration of
quantitative and qualitative results.

Relatively little is known about children's technology use in the mobile
technology era or about how current patterns of technology use relate to other
aspects of health lifestyles, such as physical activity or socializing with
peers, in early life. This project will address three research questions. First,
how does social class currently shape children's technology use and its role in
their health lifestyles? Second, how does social class influence parents'
perceptions of emerging technologies and their strategies for structuring and
negotiating children's access to and use of these technologies? Third, do family
negotiations and practices around technology use help to explain socioeconomic
variation in children's technology use? This project will draw on two new data
sources to provide breadth and depth in understanding the relationship between
social class and contemporary children's technology use and processes underlying
it. The 2014 Child Development Supplement (CDS) of the Panel Study of Income
Dynamics collected survey and time diary data from a US-representative sample
ages 0-17. The 2016 Children's Health Lifestyles study provides multimethod
qualitative data on families with elementary-aged children. The observational
data permit a fuller understanding of the social settings of technology use, and
interview and focus groups illuminate perceptions of and negotiations around it.