* 1729300
* Collaborative Research:  What Do Leaders Want?: Collecting and Coding Issue Positions and Demands in the Militarized Interstate Dispute (MID) Data, 1816-2010
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Douglas Gibler, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 07/31/2022
* USD 249,225.00

General Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates a strange
paradox that persists in the study of international conflict. Most theories
explain international conflict in terms of differences over issues or across
issue positions, but few actually examine the particular types of issues lead
states to fight. This is due primarily to the lack of good data on the types of
issues over which states contend. This work will alleviate this problem by
collecting data on all salient issues for all actors involved in militarized
conflicts from 1816 to 2010. For each issue in contention the team will code the
status of the issue at the beginning of the dispute for each actor, each actor's
initial position on the issue, and how those positions change as the conflict
persists. The data will provide policymakers and scholars the ability to
generalize about the causes and consequences of international conflict with a
greater level of precision, examining the specific issues most likely to lead to
conflict and how issue positions evolve as states demonstrate their capabilities
and willingness to fight.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;International conflict scholars know territorial
issues are war-prone while bargaining models provide a theoretical roadmap to
the onset and evolution of militarized conflict. However, territorial conflict
scholarship routinely conflates indicators over what leads states fight with
indicators of why states are fighting. Meanwhile, bargaining theory's rich
formal models cannot actually be tested because the appropriate data on issue
positions does not exist. The current Militarized Interstate Disputes (MID)
dataset gives us only broad summary measures, and no other data set is available
to document issue positions of combatants over time and across the international
system. This project addresses this by building on the team's previous projects
that gathered and analyzed source data on militarized interstate disputes. The
team will collect, code, and analyze issue positions and issue position change
data within all disputes from 1816 to 2010. The corresponding data set generate
will provide information about initial demands from disputants and will
chronicle the evolution of these demands over the duration of the dispute. These
data are central for bargaining model assumptions that states respond to
demonstrations of capabilities and resolve, and specific issues are important
for those arguing threats to territory are difficult to settle. This extensive
coding project will also provide firsthand experience for numerous graduate and
undergraduate student researchers.