* 1729856
* Relationship Dynamics: Endocrinology and Behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Steven Gangestad, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

In national and worldwide surveys, people regularly rate family and
relationships as among the most important things in life and greatest sources of
satisfaction and happiness. Yet romantic relationships are also great sources of
personal distress. Their dissolution involves great costs to individuals and
society (e.g., through loss of productivity, burdens on health services,
negative impacts on children). An appreciation of what affects the well-being of
relationships requires an understanding of relationship dynamics. Relationship
dynamics, in turn, can be affected by women's hormonal status, as it changes
through the cycle. A variety of evidence suggests women's social motivations are
predicted by levels of ovarian hormones (notably, estrogen and progesterone), as
they change across the cycle. During the non-conceptive phase following
ovulation, progesterone levels increase. During this time, women may become more
sensitive to the well-being of their relationship. Moreover, although oxytocin -
a hormone that is thought to play key roles in maintaining close relationships,
circulates through women's bodies throughout the cycle. This hormone may
particularly affect their attention to partners when progesterone levels
increase. Yet no research to date has explored specifically how ovarian hormones
and oxytocin might affect relationship dynamics across cycles. This research
aims to do so by examining how hormones influence changes in behaviors that
strengthen relationships over time, which could enhance public well being.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A sample of 260 naturally ovulating women (ages 18-35) who
have been involved in romantic relationships lasting at least 3 months will be
recruited for the study. They will participate in 4 sessions, with sessions
scheduled to be held at different points within women's cycles. A first session
will assess women's own involvement in their relationships: their satisfaction
with it, their commitment to it, their passions for it, and the ways they seek
to nurture it. Women's views of their partner's involvement will also be
assessed. In all 4 sessions, women will be asked about the frequency and
intensity of events in their relationship: their particular interests in their
partner and in men other than their partner, their concern for intimacy more
generally in their relationship, and their efforts to seek intimacy with their
partner. Women will also engage in a 10-minute thought-listing task about the
relationship, which previous research has shown to produce an oxytocin response
(assessed by measuring the hormone in saliva both before and after the task),
contingent on relationship involvement. Hormone levels (estradiol [a form of
estrogen], progesterone, testosterone, cortisol) will be measured in urine
samples collected each session. Statistical analyses will examine how these
hormone levels and oxytocin response, both by themselves and in combination, are
associated with events key to understanding relationship dynamics, as they vary
over time. These findings could provide insights into ways that relationships
are strengthened or weakened, and affect public well being.