* 1729931
* Collaborative Research: Computational Photo-Scatterography: Unraveling Scattered Photons for Bio-Imaging
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Ramesh Raskar, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 02/29/2024
* USD 732,000.00

Much of the success of today's healthcare is due to rapid advances in our
ability to collect and analyze high-resolution data about the human body.
However, current methods to achieve cellular resolution are invasive (e.g.,
blood test or tissue biopsy), and non-invasive imaging modalities do not achieve
cellular resolution. The principal goal of this Expeditions project is to
develop computational imaging systems for non-invasive bio-imaging, deep beneath
the skin, and at cellular-level resolutions. This project has the potential to
fundamentally impact healthcare and medicine, by enabling live views of cross
sections of human anatomy, simply by pointing a camera at any part of the body.
This would put individual users at the center of their healthcare experience and
make them true partners in their healthcare delivery. The health imaging devices
that result from this project will act as an important pillar in the
personalized medicine revolution. This research expedition also holds the
potential to launch new healthcare paradigms for chronic disease management,
pediatrics, low-resource healthcare, and disaster medical care. Beyond
healthcare, making progress on the problem of cellular-scale deep-tissue imaging
using light will push the frontiers of the fundamental problem of inverse
scattering, which impacts numerous areas of science and engineering. The order
of magnitude advances made in inverse scattering and imaging through scattering
media will have significant cross-cutting applications in diverse areas such as
basic science, consumer imaging, automotive navigation, robotics, surveillance,
atmospheric science, and material science. Finally, projects with a single,
easy-to-appreciate, and high-impact goal have the potential to inspire the next
generation of scientists, attract diverse set of students driven by humanitarian
and social causes, and become a platform for inclusion and
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to
develop, test, and validate new computational imaging systems, to non-invasively
image below the skin at tunable depths, in highly portable form-factors such as
wearables or point-of-care devices. The main challenge is that light scatters as
it travels through the human body, and in this process, the spatial information
from different points within the body gets mixed up. A new concept,
Computational Photo-Scatterography (CPS), is being applied in this project in
order to computationally unravel the scattered photons in an imaging system, and
allow creation of sharp images and accurate inferences. Recognizing that the
brute-force complexity of unraveling scattered photons is prohibitively high,
the project uses a computational co-design framework that leverages advances by
team members from multiple domains: programmable illumination and optics, image
sensors, machine learning, inverse graphics, and hybrid analog-digital
computing. The project will use machine learning (ML) instead of physics-based
de-scattering to speed up the solution of the underlying inverse problem. A
combination of physics-based inverse graphics algorithms, and ML algorithms
combining deep learning and generative modeling will be used to estimate tissue
scattering parameters - motion due to blood flow induces time-variation in
tissue parameters, which makes solving the inverse scattering problem more
difficult. The project will use ML to create fast but approximate estimators,
which will serve as accelerators for inverse scattering. The development of new
sensors, able to capture the data necessary to reconstruct the structure of the
tissue deep below the skin, constitutes the most important contribution of the
project. These systems and algorithms will have the potential to break the
current resolution limits of noninvasive bio-imaging by nearly two orders of
magnitude, enabling cellular-level imaging at depths far beyond currently
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.