* 1729304
* DMREF/GOALI: Discovery and Design of Additives for Novel Polymer Morphology and Performance
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Richard Braatz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,125,775.00

Plastics like polyethylene and polypropylene constitute an important and
increasingly diverse sector of the advanced materials market, due to their
unique combinations of processability, mechanical, thermal, optical and even
electronic properties. Historically, these materials have been developed and
refined over many decades, largely through time-consuming empirical methods. In
today's world, global competitiveness depends on shorter development cycles for
the discovery and development of new materials. For example, the design of
additives to produce lightweight plastics that are stiffer and tougher than
those currently available would benefit societal and economic requirements for
energy and material conservation. With these things in mind, this Designing
Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) Grant Opportunities
for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project seeks to accelerate the
development of advanced plastics through the rapid evaluation of additives that
change the structure, and therefor the properties, of the final product. It does
so through an iterative process of high throughput screening using high
performance computing, and targeted experimentation with "best in class"
candidates. This approach represents a new paradigm that can contribute to US
competitiveness and innovative practices, which in turn translate into job
creation within the US manufacturing economy. Collaboration with industry on
this project provides a mechanism to realize these benefits. This project
further serves society through the education and professional development of
engineers and scientists, and through propagation of successful practices into
other areas of advanced materials discovery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new
paradigm for materials discovery envisioned for this project is based on the
synergistic application of (i) molecular level simulation, (ii) experimental
validation, (iii) materials design and optimization, and (iv) industrial
application, to identify essential relationships between molecular structure,
morphology and performance. In the program, this paradigm is realized through
the discovery and design of additives (nucleating agents, clarifiers,
nanofillers, etc.) that alter the semicrystalline morphology of polyolefins, and
thereby their properties as well. Molecular simulations are used to conduct
broad screenings of additive classes and then validated experimentally in select
cases using a new technique to measure heterogeneous nucleation kinetics.
Evolutionary strategies and related methods are used to design and optimize
candidates within and across additive classes, for subsequent synthesis,
development and characterization within the laboratories of the industrial
collaborator. This project advances scientific and technical knowledge regarding
how the properties and performance of polyolefins can be transformed through
rational design of additives that can manipulate crystallization kinetics and
semicrystalline morphology. It results in new theoretical and computational
methods that not only predict nucleation kinetics, but also provide insight into
nucleation mechanisms.