* 1729017
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Programming mesostructured colloidal soft matter through complex quenching and annealing
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,10/31/2017
* Roseanna Zia, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 10/31/2017
* USD 391,203.00

The project supports integrated experiments, modeling and simulations to enable
new ways of controlling material properties through thermal processing of
colloidal materials. The goal is to develop new colloidal suspensions with
temperature-sensitive interactions, and strategies by which they can be
controllably processed into colloidal solids with desired structure and
mechanical properties through quenching, annealing and tempering. The
development of these new tools and the knowledge they create could lead to
transformative new and scalable processing methods for colloidal materials with
well-controlled and novel properties, and potentially impact a range of
technologies including artificial tissue scaffolds, separation membranes, and
inks for additive manufacturing. The research will be integrated with
educational activities to train students in a new approach to making colloidal
solids having unique structures and properties.

Thermal processing has long been known and employed for atomic and molecular
materials, but has been elusive in colloidal materials because of a lack of
colloidal systems with easily controlled temperature-responsive behavior, as
well as a dearth of fundamental understanding for how the thermal history
influences the development and arrest of structural morphologies and features in
these systems. In this project, these challenges will be overcome using newly
developed thermoresponsive colloids, and large-scale simulations and experiments
that can rapidly probe the multitude of possible thermal histories and
structures that emerge from them. Experiments and simulation will be combined to
characterize how kinetic trajectories in thermodynamic variables map onto the
relevant descriptors of emergent structural correlations and material properties
including rheology. Leading efforts will establish categorical behavior for
quenches in the homogeneous fluid phase, as well as in both metastable (binodal)
and unstable (spinodal) regions of phase coexistence, followed on by more
complex quenches involving annealing in more than one of these regions to seek
out novel structures and rheology. Doing so will enable a more fundamental
understanding for how kinetic processes of gelation, phase separation and glass
formation compete in colloidal fluids to initiate, evolve and eventually arrest
structure, and how the features of the arrested structure control the linear and
non-linear mechanics of the material. This fundamental understanding will be
used to develop a new conceptual framework for using thermal processing to
design and engineer colloidal materials with well-specified structure and
properties.