* 1729166
* DMREF/GOALI: Integrated Framework for Design of Alloy-Oxide Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Carlos Levi, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 03/31/2022
* USD 1,301,338.00

Nearly every metal and alloy system is susceptible to reaction with air to form
an oxide. The oxidation processes leading to scale formation often occur in an
uncontrolled manner, resulting in corrosion and metal degradation. In some
instances, however, oxidation can be managed in a way to produce a protective
scale that makes the alloy resistant to degradation in reactive environments.
The oxidation of metals and alloys can also be exploited as routes to
synthesizing new materials for wide ranging functional applications such as
catalysts, Li-ion batteries and photovoltaics. Oxidation is among the most
challenging non-equilibrium processes to model and predict. This Designing
Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) award supports basic
research directed at developing the scientific foundation necessary to predict
oxidation of high performance alloys. It will lead to the development of a suite
of integrated modeling and experimental tools that will enable the rational and
directed design of superior alloys for wide ranging aerospace, automotive,
biomedical and energy conversion applications. The close collaboration with ATI,
a leading manufacturer of advanced alloys, will ensure that the scientific
outcomes of this project have a viable path for impacting technology. This work
will impact education, science, and technology in a cross-cutting effort by: 1)
providing an open framework integrating theory, experiment and computation to
enable the design of higher-performance alloys with controlled oxidation
behavior; 2) exposing students and professionals to cutting-edge modeling,
synthesis and characterization tools, thereby preparing them for future careers
in STEM fields; and 3) impacting other fields where oxidation and corrosion are
significant issues. The program will promote the participation of students and
professionals from underrepresented groups in an open learning setting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-equilibrium materials processes such as the oxidation
of metals and alloys remain poorly understood and lack robust theories that link
macroscopic behavior to properties at the electronic structure scale. This
research program seeks to develop and apply a framework that integrates first-
principles statistical mechanics approaches, continuum mechanics, phase
transformation simulation tools and state-of-the-art experiment to enable (i)
the discovery of predictive theories of non-equilibrium processes such as
oxidation and (ii) the rational and directed design of new alloys with
controlled oxidation behavior. Computational approaches will be developed that
link the atomic and electronic structure scales with the continuum scales. These
approaches will be tightly integrated with experiment (synthesis and
characterization), which will serve to validate predictions and inform
model/theory development. The resultant multi-scale infrastructure will enable
the development of a mechanistic understanding of non-equilibrium processes and
will be applied in a study of the oxidation of Ti alloys to generate the
scientific knowledge base and understanding needed to design alloys that have
prescribed oxidation behavior. This activity, in collaboration with the
industrial partner, will lay the scientific foundation to enable the design of
new Ti alloys that form protective scales and that are not susceptible to oxide
decomposition and dissolution reactions due to the highly reactive nature of
Ti.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.