* 1730286
* CyberTraining: CDL: Security-Assured Data Science Workforce Development in Pennsylvania
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* James Joshi, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 476,903.00

Data is growing exponentially at unprecedented levels. In the recent years, we
have been witnessing a huge proliferation of digital data capturing our lives
and our surroundings. While this provides promising opportunities for path-
breaking innovation using data science and data-driven technologies, ensuring
data security and data privacy has become a critical barrier. Cybersecurity is a
key component of data science and security-assured data science impacts all
aspects of personal, organizational, community and national life. The workforce
capable of impacting security-assured data science is significantly
understaffed, while the demand for workforce with required skills is fast
increasing. This project creates a new model and curricula for foundational
education in security-assured data science to young professionals that provides
an opportunity to create a workforce trained to make innovative solutions
leading to smarter health care, improved social good, smart transportation,
advancements in social, behavioral, and economic sciences and smarter analytics
for security. The project thus serves the national interest, as stated by NSF's
mission: to promote the progress of science; to advance the national health,
prosperity and welfare; or to secure the national defense.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address this growing national challenge to enable the
next generation data-enabled innovation and research with qualified talent, it
is critical that regional collaborations be formed to streamline and support
sharing of data science and cybersecurity resources in the context of security-
assured data science training and education. This project expands upon existing
partnerships with local school districts to increase digital literacy and
cybersecurity awareness at the secondary level and induce high school students
to initiate activities that would enable them to pursue cybersecurity and data
science education at the postsecondary level. The project aims to
collaboratively develop an integrated curriculum on Security Assured Data
Science Education and Training (SADET), an undergraduate level curriculum to be
offered to high school students as part of Pitt's College in High School (CHS)
program. The key goals and activities of the project include (a) developing
interdisciplinary curriculum components focused on security-assured data Science
education to be offered through University of Pittsburgh's College in High
School (CHS) program, (b) enhancing and widening University of Pittsburgh's
existing offering of introductory cybersecurity and information science courses
in this area, (c) promoting and increasing the adoption of SADET modules through
the CHS program, (d) conducting a security-assured data science materials
competition for high school teachers to develop additional educational and
training materials for use in classroom teaching, and (e) creating an online
repository and a regional alliance to share security and data science training
resources and expertise, and to increase the awareness, training and education
in the western Pennsylvania region through workshops. The proposed framework
will provide a model for more regional collaborations at the intersection of
data science and cybersecurity areas in the context of security-assured data
science education, training and research. The framework will also provide a
basis to reach to broader communities including schools, colleges, industries
and government related organizations. Long-term impact of the project includes
bridging the gaps between high school and college level curricula in this
rapidly emerging field. The project also provides a model for increasing the
participation in data science and data security related fields at the
undergraduate level leading to a focused workforce development in this important
area.