* 1730399
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Attention and Beliefs in Games: an Experiment
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Alessandra Casella, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 05/31/2023
* USD 12,544.00

Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Game theory has become an indispensable tool in
the analysis of strategic interactions between people, groups, and nations. It
rests on Nash equilibrium as its central concept. In a Nash equilibrium, (1)
each player?s action is best, given his or her beliefs over others? actions and
(2) those beliefs are correct. However, even under the idealized conditions of
laboratory experiments, there are systematic deviations from the predictions of
classical game theory. That this is true for even the simplest of games suggests
the need to augment the standard theory to predict behavior in more realistic
games with policy relevance, such as those used to model firms? decisions to
enter markets or countries designing competing trade policies. To reconcile
theory with experimental data, this research proposes generalizations of Nash
equilibrium that replace conditions (1) and (2) with conditions that allow for
players to make mistakes in taking actions and forming beliefs. By collecting
experimental data in the laboratory from many simple games, theoretical
predictions will be tested and model performance will be assessed. The results
will provide a better understanding of how people, organizations, and nations
interacting strategically. Better understanding can then translate into better
policy-making, more carefully targeted, and more effective in its results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An approach for incorporating mistakes in actions already
exists in the literature. Called QRE (quantal response equilibrium), it posits
that players make mistakes with probability inversely related to the loss in
payoffs the mistakes induce. However, the origins of these mistakes are left
unspecified. By relating the mistakes to theories of optimal information
processing or ?attention?, the novel EQRE (endogenous QRE) makes different
predictions about how these mistakes depend on the game. BBE (biased beliefs
equilibrium), on the other hand, suggests a new way of incorporating
systematically biased beliefs into an equilibrium framework. A ?bias? is any
specific tendency to form mistaken beliefs over the actions of others. Tending
to believe one action will be played with greater probability than the
equilibrium level and tending to believe that the frequencies of different
actions will be more similar than the equilibrium frequencies are two examples
of biases. The experiment will involve subjects playing many 2x2 and 3x3 games
in which their beliefs are also elicited. Some games are specifically
constructed to distinguish between QRE and EQRE. The rest are designed to
understand how beliefs, and hence biases, depend on the underlying game. The
data set generated by the experiment, together with the theoretical BBE
framework, will be suited to answer questions of broader interest, such as: Can
biases predict actions in the aggregate? Can actions predict biases in the
aggregate? Are individual biases consistent across games and across time? The
results have the potential to make a significant contribution to empirical game
theory.