* 1730697
* Collaborative Research: CI-P: NJR: A National Java Resource
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Jens Palsberg, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2018
* USD 58,000.00

This planning project will plan an infrastructure called the National Java
Resource (NJR), which will be a collection of (on the order of) 10,000 Java
projects that build and run out of the box, and for which popular static and
dynamic analysis tools succeed and have cached outputs. The tasks of writing
build scripts and otherwise preparing Java projects and tools for the repository
will be largely automated. A prototype was developed to serve the DARPA MUSE
project, but that project is ending soon and does not have plans to establish
the NJR. A large and diverse set of Java-based research projects will be able to
use it, providing an experimental platform and benchmarks, and eliminating
barriers to performing the research. It is expected that the project will open
up new areas of research that have been impeded by the lack of a high-quality
corpus of such programs that can be easily compiled, run, and analyzed. The NJR
repository has the potential to push forward research on a wide range of Java-
based tools, such as bug finders, code repair tools, code synthesizers, software
evolution, software repository mining, along with other code analysis tools.

The planning activity will involve running workshops at major programming
languages conferences and possibly the major software engineering conference,
with a goal to engage users and fully understand their requirements. The project
will also continue experimenting with how to make downloading, compiling, and
running projects less painful, i.e., more automatic, and to improve the success
rate of how many projects are amenable to automatic builds, compilation and
execution. There is potential for additional communities to benefit if the
outreach can be extended to program comprehension, testing, and mining software
repositories conferences.