* 1730354
* IUSE/PFE:RED: Revolutionizing Engineering Education through Industry Immersion and a Focus on Identity
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Gregory Mason, Seattle University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,861,527.00

The culture of a program or department plays a significant role in effective,
inclusive, and innovative STEM education. Despite immense efforts to diversify
the student body in engineering programs, research suggests that department
culture continues to challenge engineering education and the educators who are
preparing the next generation of engineers. For example, too often engineering
departments reflect a narrow, stereotypical view of what it means to be an
engineer. Women and other underrepresented minorities who do not fit this view
do not identify with engineering and this can lead to dissatisfaction and
disengagement. This project implements a unique educational experience where
students and faculty are immersed in a culture of doing engineering with
industry engineers that in turn fosters an identity of being an engineer. This
new culture will be created through a shared department vision and a deep
immersion in industry and engineering practice. Some of the changes include
faculty participation in industry, makeathons that connect industry
professionals with students, and changes in how the department prioritizes
teaching, student research, industry connections, and faculty mentoring. Along
with these activities, this project serves to investigate the effects of this
new culture on the identity of students and faculty, and how these identity
changes affect students' engagement, performance, and commitment to engineering.
Identity describes who people think they are, what they think they can do and
be, and where and with whom they think they belong. It is a pivotal factor in
one's commitment and persistence in engineering, notably for women and
minorities. Identity development is a social process realized through culture.
Understanding how identities affect students, particularly females, could
transform how we teach STEM K-16. Such knowledge will allow educators to target
activities that produce the strongest effect on identity and be mindful of those
that negatively impact identity. The result is better retention for a more
diverse student body.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, during the
project, changes to the engineering program and to student and faculty
identities will be monitored through interviews, surveys, and many other tools.
Results of the study will lead to a clearer understanding of the changes that
promote engineering identities, particularly in women, and how such identities
affect students' sense of belonging in a program and their persistence in the
major. The study will also lead to a better understanding of the factors that
influence faculty identity, and how these richer identities affect how they view
their roles and their students. Key activities of this project include: (1) the
creation of opportunities for students to do realistic engineering, (2) an
industry immersion experience for faculty and teacher training, (3) revising the
curriculum to include connections to practice, (4) and implementing reflection
and portfolios for assessment of professional engineering identity development.
In the curriculum, this immersion will be achieved by integrating experiential
learning throughout as the connecting thread. Housed in a mechanical engineering
department, this project has the potential to impact engineering education by
offering a model and best practices in which the engineering identities of
students and faculty can be transformed by the immersion in real-world
engineering. This project is jointly funded by the Division of Undergraduate
Education; the Division of Engineering Education and Centers; the Division of
Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation; the Division of Electrical,
Communications and Cyber Systems; and the Division of Industrial Innovation and
Partnerships; reflecting the alignment of this project with the respective goals
of the divisions and their programs.