* 1730606
* CI-New:  Community Infrastructure Supporting Hardware Acceleration Research and Education
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Andrew Grimshaw, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 08/31/2022
* USD 499,558.00

Growth in data analytics is driving rapid development in specialized processor
technologies, in the form of hardware accelerators. In addition to known
accelerators such as the GPUs and FPGAs, exciting new architectures are offering
capabilities not previously possible. To support the computer and information
science and engineering (CISE) research community in understanding and making
the most of these technologies, the University of Virginia (UVA) is developing a
CISE Community Research Infrastructure to Support Hardware Acceleration Research
and Education (UVA-SHARE).  This cyberinfrastructure gives system researchers
access to an environment of diverse accelerators and tools to perform
accelerator research, and provides application researchers the necessary
resources to develop and test solutions that accelerate research computing
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UVA-SHARE offers researchers a suite of
clusters containing a diverse representation of the industry's latest
accelerators.  UVA-SHARE users also have access to software tools, libraries,
and technical support to make progress with research as soon as possible.  The
broader impact of this project will primarily come in the form of the research
it enables. Research enabled by UVA-SHARE is expected to make new advances in
computer processor technologies, software infrastructure to support diverse
accelerators, and enable new applications and new solutions in scientific
computing.  The PI team will implement a set of community engagement activities
to promote UVA-SHARE. Access and use of this cyberinfrastructure by early-career
researchers is especially encouraged. The research will also achieve broader
impact by training students in cutting-edge accelerator technologies and fluency
across diverse technologies.