* 1730678
* The Development of Teaching and Social Learning Across Cultures
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Cristine Legare, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 02/28/2022
* USD 905,631.00

Variation in human cultures is unique among animals in its extent, complexity,
and modification over generations. Humans display a wide repertoire of socially
acquired and transmitted behaviors that vary between groups and change over
time. Adaptations for social learning - acquiring, creating, and transmitting
cultural knowledge - provide the foundation for human culture. These learning
mechanisms should be flexible, enabling individuals to respond to diverse
cultural contexts. The objective of this cross-cultural research project is to
study the psychological processes that allow us to learn, create, and transmit
culture. Continuity and variation in child development within and across
populations will be documented and explained. Multiple methods - observation,
interviews, and experiments - will be used to examine the psychological
foundations of cultural transmission practices (teaching) and acquisition
strategies (social learning) across cultures. This project partners five
developmental psychologists, two evolutionary anthropologists, and an economic
psychologist, all with expertise in cross-cultural research. The dearth of
systematic research outside of Western cultural contexts presents a major
impediment to theoretical progress in the psychological sciences. There is a
need for a new path forward in developmental psychological science to better
understand global diversity in human development. The results of these studies
have the potential to inform the development of international education programs
by increasing understanding of variation in teaching and social learning
practices around the world, allowing teachers to adapt to the diverse ways that
people learn. This research team will work closely with local communities, at
our domestic and international field sites, to contribute to the preservation of
information about the beliefs, values, and practices of these unique cultural
contexts. This breadth and depth of study will help strengthen communities in
the United States and elsewhere by showing ways for them to connect, grow and
adapt. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A comprehensive account of teaching and early
social learning requires systematic study of childrearing practices and beliefs.
The objective of this research is to document and explain continuity and
variation in teaching practices and social learning strategies within and across
populations that represent the diversity of childrearing practices. This
research examines the interaction between the teaching practices of caregiving
adults and peers and children's social learning across populations. First,
naturally occurring teaching and social learning practices will be examined
using focused following, and structured interview data on beliefs about teaching
and social learning will be collected. Second, standardized observational data
will be collected to assess the teaching practices of adults and peers in the
context of imitation and joint problem solving tasks. The naturalistic and
standardized assessments of teaching practices will be compared to children's
social learning. The observational and experimental data will be compared to
examine the extent to which the teaching practices assessed in experimental
tasks are representative of teaching practices that occurs in everyday life.
Variability in teaching style depending on content, difficulty, and age and
status of the learner will be examined. This research will provide the first
systematic cross-cultural account of teaching by caregiving adults and peers and
children's social learning. Collecting observational, interview, and
experimental data will yield a far richer picture of cultural continuity and
variation in teaching and learning. This project is co-funded by the Office of
International Science and Engineering.