* 1730105
* CyberTraining: CIP: North Central Region Cyber Training Center for Cybersecurity at Dakota State University
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Yong Wang, Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 479,658.00

The gap between necessary cybersecurity skills and the demands placed on
cybersecurity professionals is a challenge for the scientific research
enterprise of the nation. This project will create a scalable online training
program and develop specific training materials in cybersecurity for the
advanced scientific cyberinfrastructure to address the skillset gap.
Investigators will collaborate with their academic and industry partners to
identify cybersecurity skill gaps specifically for advanced scientific
cyberinfrastructure and to develop corresponding training materials for the
online program. The project will engage a wide ranging audience from the
scientific research community and help them develop and expand their expertise
in cybersecurity for advanced scientific cyberinfrastructure. Thus, as stated by
NSF's mission, the project serves the national interest to promote the progress
of science; to advance national; and to secure the national defense.

The project will establish a North Central Region (NCR) Cyber Training Center
(CTC) for cybersecurity at Dakota State University. The goal of CTC is to create
a scalable online cyber training program to assist with the workforce
development of scientific cyberinfrastructure professionals in cybersecurity.
The target participants of the online training program include post-docs,
research scientists and faculty researchers and educators from 2-year and 4-year
colleges, as well as undergraduate and graduate students who want to develop
specialty in cybersecurity within the NCR and beyond. The CyberTraining
Professionals program is included in the project to increase the impact of the
program and establish a joint task force with industry to address the
cybersecurity skills gap challenge. Highlights of this online training program
are cutting-edge cybersecurity curriculum and hands-on labs and assignments to
promote and support the rich learning environment. A new online training web
site and an AWS Cybersecurity Lab will be created in the project to facilitate
the training activities. The project will also develop specific training
materials which are relevant to advanced scientific cyberinfrastructure and
provided online for public access. Examples of the training materials to be
included in this program include modules on compliance issues, identity
management on different campuses, science DMZ, and Internet of Things. The CTC
program will bring unique learning experiences to the project participants.
Dakota State University will leverage its NSA designation as a Center of
Academic Excellence in Research (CAE-R) and the already developed and
functioning Information Security Research and Education consortium (INSuRE) to
further promote and expand scientific research in the cyber world.