* 1730377
* CI-NEW: NIEUW: Novel Incentives and Workflows in Linguistic Data Collection and Annotation
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2023
* Mark Liberman, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,234,465.00

Language touches every aspect of human life. People speak and write in order to
manage relationships from the personal to the international, to gather and
provide information, to negotiate, influence and inspire. Scientists use
language to communicate their findings regardless of their field of study.
Although researchers have been working for six decades to process language via
computer, only in the past several years have their efforts have produced
technologies of sufficient maturity that they can affect the lives of the
average citizen. Today, some of the most fortunate use computers to search the
vast archives of the Internet, to translate material from languages they do not
understand into languages they do and to interact with smart devices by giving
them natural language commands and queries and receive responses in kind.
Despite the growth and promise of human language technologies, they are in fact
available for only a tiny portion of the world's approximately 7000 languages
and, even then, for only a limited range of situations. This is the case because
the approaches that have proven most successful in developing human language
technologies require vast amounts of spoken or written language material that
have been augmented by human judgment as to their interpretation, but such
resources are lacking for most languages and for many types of situations, even
for languages of international importance, including English. This Research
Infrastructure project will address this shortage of language resources by
supporting the language technology research community to employ novel incentives
and alternate workflows to greatly expand the methods that have been used to
date for collecting and annotating language data. The resulting resources will
support research and development on an expanded range of language technologies,
leading to the creation and deployment of applications for an increasingly broad
range of languages and situations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even a brief
observation of user behavior on social media, online games, citizen science and
public good initiatives demonstrates that many people around the world are
willing to devote collectively vast amounts of effort when given appropriate
motivation and effective tools. This project will harness some of the immense
people-power that drives such activities and focus it on problems of developing
language resources that help computers learn to process language. Specifically,
the project will create a software toolkit to be developed by the project team
in response to the needs of language technology researchers to create online
activities that yield language resources. The activities will include games,
citizen science and tools for language professionals, clustered into a series of
portals that appeal to different populations of users. The project will build
and maintain the database and web servers, with redundancy, load balancing and
fail over, to run the principal instance of all of the activities, and an open-
source release of the software will enable other researchers to build their own
instances independently. Finally, the data resulting from this project will be
shared with the least restrictive terms possible to further support language
technology research and development activities worldwide.