* 1730137
* CyberTraining: CIP - Professional Skills for CyberAmbassadors
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Dirk Colbry, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 498,330.00

Scientists and engineers use advanced cyberinfrastructure (CI) to conduct
research that benefits society. For instance, engineers use CI to build faster
airplanes; doctors use CI to discover new medicines; and scientists use CI to
develop safer materials. CI includes hardware (like supercomputers, high-speed
networks, digital cameras, and cloud-based storage), as well as the software and
tools used to collect, organize and analyze information. CI Professionals are
experts at developing and using CI, and scientists and engineers from many
disciplines ask CI Professionals to help them use cyberinfrastructure in their
research. In order to work effectively with these disciplinary experts, CI
Professionals need to be able to communicate across disciplines, work in diverse
teams, and serve as collaborative leaders and mentors. This project develops a
training program to help CI Professionals build these professional skills such
as communication, teamwork and leadership so that they can work more effectively
with scientists and engineers and help them use CI to improve research in many
areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides professional skills training
for technically proficient CI Professionals, with the goal of developing
CyberAmbassadors who are prepared to lead multidisciplinary, computationally-
intensive research at their home institutions. CyberAmbassadors will also be
prepared to help mentor the next generation of CI Professionals and CI Users,
who will become a sustaining source of new CyberAmbassadors. The first objective
is to develop curriculum that builds professional skills (communications,
teamwork, leadership) within the context of large scale, multi-disciplinary
computational research. The curriculum will be developed with input from an
External Advisory Board of CI Professionals and CI Users from academia, industry
and national laboratories. The pedagogical approach is grounded in
constructivism and socioculturism, and will combine in-person training with
examples from real, multi-disciplinary research. The second objective is to
pilot, evaluate and revise the curriculum. Pilot trainings will be held at
Michigan State University (MSU), at appropriate CI conferences, and at other
institutions and laboratories. During the pilot process, approximately 75
individuals will be trained as CyberAmbassadors and the curriculum will be
evaluated and refined based on these experiences. The third objective is to
"train the trainers" by collaborating with external partners (XSEDE, Blue
Waters, Software/Data Carpentry, Tau Beta Pi) to prepare a cohort of at least 20
facilitators who can offer the CyberAmbassadors training through regional or
national events. 100-150 additional participants will complete the
CyberAmbassadors program during the "train the trainers" process. The curriculum
developed as part of this project will be offered on a free, open-source basis,
with the longer-term goal of making the CyberAmbassadors training regularly
available at academic and research institutions nationwide.