* 1730003
* CI-New:  Collaborative Research:  Modeling the Next-Generation Hybrid Cooling Systems for High-Performance Processors
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Sherief Reda, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 06/30/2021
* USD 231,961.00

Design of future high-performance chips is hindered by severe temperature
challenges. For example, existing cooling mechanisms cannot efficiently cool the
extremely high power densities that are expected in exascale systems. Emerging
cooling technologies, which may address these temperature challenges, are not
easily accessible for experimentation to computer engineers. In fact, there is a
substantial lag before a cooling technology becomes available for system design
and optimization. Such lags cause design quality to be left on the table. To
this end, this project proposes a software infrastructure that enables accurate
modeling of cutting-edge cooling methods and that facilitates mutually
customizing the computing and cooling systems to dramatically push system energy
efficiency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed infrastructure is a system-level
design automation tool that includes compact thermal models of emerging cooling
methods (thermoelectric coolers, two-phase cooling with microchannels or
nanopores, phase-change materials, and single-phase liquid cooling). The project
plan includes (1) synthesizing novel device-level models into compact
representations; (2) using measurements on prototypes for validation of the
proposed models; and (3) developing automation tooling to co-design hybrid
customized cooling subsystems together with a given computing system. The
broader impact of the project will be to help advance computing beyond the
limitations of Moore's Law by making efficient design of high-power-density
systems possible. The proposed infrastructure will enable transformative
research in design automation, computer architecture, and system design with
emerging cooling technologies, particularly in the dimensions of performance,
variability, energy, heterogeneity, and cross-layer design. The infrastructure
will be released to the community as open source software. The interdisciplinary
nature of the project creates ample opportunities for undergraduate projects and
outreach programs for underrepresented groups and K-12 students.