* 1730483
* Coordination and Information Design
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Alessandro Pavan, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 276,000.00

This award funds research in economic theory that considers how to use
information disclosures in order to persuade individuals to coordinate actions
to benefit everyone. For example, suppose a bank faces a potential bank run and
depositor insurance is not available. In this case, a government policy
disclosing information about the bank's full portfolio of loans and excellent
long-run profitability could convince depositors to stay with the bank. The
research team wants to understand the best ways to disclose information under
two different circumstances; first, when all individuals see the disclosures and
second, when disclosures can be made to some people but not to others. The
project is relevant to many applications in banking and finance and could help
to improve policies designed to promote financial stability such as so-called
'stress-tests'.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project studies persuasion in markets
in which a large number of agents must choose whether to coordinate on a
socially-desirable action or else take action against the status quo. Agents are
endowed with heterogeneous private information about the underlying economic
fundamentals. The analysis focuses on properties of optimal information
disclosures, both in the case in which the mechanism designer must disclose the
same information to all participants as well as the case of private disclosures.
The project combines ideas from separate areas of economic theory: robust
mechanism design, persuasion games, and coordination games. The team will also
extend their analysis to consider the design of disclosure policies in settings
in which the policy maker is uncertain about the initial distribution of beliefs
among market participants. They will also consider the possibility of repeated
attacks and the characterization of optimal policies in markets in which the
designer must solicit information from the entity under scrutiny prior to
communicating with the market.