* 1730497
* IUSE/PFE:RED: A Revolution in Engineering Education Motivated by Needs and Designs
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Jianzhong Lou, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,999,995.00

This project will revolutionize the preparation of engineers to serve needs of
the United States in scientific progress, health, prosperity and national
defense by dramatically increasing engineers' desire to learn and to persist in
highly competitive professional environments. Success in identifying important
needs for society and in designing useful solutions will be embedded into the
entire educational experience of three engineering programs - biological,
chemical and bioengineering - at North Carolina Agricultural &amp; Technical
State University to motivate learning and propel student recruitment and
retention. As a result of this project, a new model of engineering education
will be envisioned and implemented to produce engineers with high motivation,
exemplary design abilities, strong identity as an engineer, ability to select
and solve problems critical to society, and problem solve with an
entrepreneurial mindset. To produce such engineers, a continuum of needs-finding
and design thinking will be integrated throughout the four year curriculum
bringing innovation and entrepreneurship in the academic culture of these
engineering programs. A broad range of educators and industry representatives
will be partners in these curricular innovations. Courses will be restructured
to scale back traditional lectures and to add significant prototyping and proof-
of-principle labs. Reverse internships for students will be created with
industrial mentors and entrepreneurs on campus. Faculty development will provide
engineering educators the knowledge and skills to integrate design in their
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's revolutionary approach to
undergraduate engineering education will be first implemented in three BS
engineering programs - biological, chemical and bioengineering - within the
College of Engineering at North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State
University. A public Historically Black University (HBCU) and the top producer
of Black engineers in the country, the institution and these engineering
programs will serve as a national model in which curricular innovation will be
investigated in the context of a diverse engineering student body. Upon
demonstration of educational effectiveness within these engineering programs,
dissemination to other programs across the country will assure broader impact of
the best practices. Using motivational and bioecological development theory,
students' learning will be assessed to gauge the effectiveness of needs-finding
and design thinking as problem solving techniques. It is anticipated that
results from this project will contribute to fundamental principles of
motivation during learning and benefit a wide range of student groups and
programs in the country. This project is jointly funded by the Division of
Undergraduate Education; the Division of Engineering Education and Centers; the
Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation; the Division of
Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems; and the Division of Industrial
Innovation and Partnerships; reflecting the alignment of this project with the
respective goals of the divisions and their programs.