* 1730583
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Effect of Nutrition on Ovarian Aging
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Baishakhi Basu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2019
* USD 18,201.00

Baishakhi Basu of the University of Washington will conduct research that aims
to clarify the mechanisms by which early life and late life undernutrition
affects ovarian aging and menopause in Bangladeshi women. The study is inspired
by the abundant evidence that the age at which women in resource-poor settings
experience menopause is about 6 months earlier than what is found in resource-
abundant settings. The underlying biological cause of this discrepancy is
unknown. One component of the study will investigate how nutritional stress in
fetal life and childhood affects menstrual cycles during the transition that
leads to menopause. Another component of the research will investigate whether
nutritional stress later in life decreases the age at which menopause occurs.
The broader impact of this study will be to elucidate the mechanisms by which
nutrition in early life and nutritional stress in later life affects the
reproductive biology and function in women. The study will potentially identify
which biological mechanisms shorten the reproductive lifespan for women under
nutritional stress.

The research has two distinct components. The first examines pathways through
which fetal life and childhood nutrition may affect the process of ovarian
aging. During the transition to menopause, the near depletion of the ovarian
follicle pool is reflected by increasingly irregular menstrual cycles. This
study hypothesizes that undernutrition during early-life leads to a smaller
ovarian follicle pool established in fetal life and/or accelerates the rate at
which the follicle pool is reduced. Either effect would result in an earlier
depletion of the pool of ovarian follicles and, consequently, an earlier
transition to menopause. The research will utilize previously collected
menstrual calendars on 2,300 rural Bangladeshi women born before, during and
after a severe famine in 1974. The women were born in households that
participated in a 1974 socio-economic survey, so the hypothesis is examined by
testing for any statistical associations between household wealth in 1974 and
the age a woman starts transitioning to menopause. The second component examines
whether women experience a type of stress-related amenorrhea (absence of
menstrual cycles) that disrupts menstrual cycles before the pool of ovarian
follicles is fully depleted (true menopause). This so-called hypothalamic
amenorrhea is indistinguishable from, and therefore can be mistaken with, true
menopause. To test this idea, Basu will conduct a two month long investigation
with the participation of 500 rural Bangladeshi women who have stopped cycling
in the past 9-15 months. Urinary specimens provided by the participants will be
tested for a hormonal marker that distinguishes true menopause from hypothalamic
amenorrhea.