* 1730546
* Illinois Wellness Study: A Field Experiment on Participation Incentives and Selection into Workplace Wellness Programs
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Damon Jones, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Award Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nearly all large firms in the U.S. offer
workplace wellness programs, which are widely touted to improve employee health
and reduce health care costs. The Affordable Care Act has further expanded the
government's support of wellness programs by including multiple provisions
encouraging their use. Despite their growing popularity, there is little
rigorous evidence available on the causal effects on health or distributional
impacts of these programs. In addition, many firms find it challenging to obtain
high participation rates among their workforce. This project seeks to improve
our understanding of workplace wellness programs. The researchers will analyze
data from a randomized study to estimate the effect of financial incentives on
program participation; investigate who benefits from these programs; and
estimate the effects of these programs on health care costs, utilization, and
worker productivity. The results of this research will inform policies aimed at
increasing efficiency in the provision of health care in the US, and in so
doing, improving the health of Americans and strengthening the U.S.
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project continues the PIs on-going
study on the effectiveness of workplace wellness programs. The research team
will design and implement a field experiment at the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign. The researchers will randomly assign some employees to a
treatment group who will be given the opportunity to participate in a high-
quality workplace wellness program, and the rest to a control group. The project
will also randomly offer different monetary incentives to employees in the
treatment group. In this extension of the project, the PIs will introduce an
additional year of the wellness intervention and track outcomes two years after
the initial study. Data on outcomes (health care cost, health care utilization,
and labor productivity) will be collected for both treatment and control groups.
The researchers will then estimate the distributional effects of the program by
comparing employees in the treatment group who choose to enroll into the program
to those who choose not to enroll. Finally, the PIs will estimate the two-year
causal effect of the program by comparing health care costs, utilization, and
productivity among employees of the treatment group to employees in the control
group. Differential monetary incentives within the treated group will allow for
the estimation of response elasticities at various levels of incentives. The
results of this research will contribute to the efficient development of health
care policy in the US, thus strengthening the US economy.