* 1730108
* Economic Mobility: The Impact of Individual, Parent and Spatial Factors Using National Survey and Administrative Data
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Henry Pollakowski, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2021
* USD 326,179.00

Economic and social mobility across generations has become an important policy
issue world-wide. However, researchers have not effectively identified the
causes of this lack of mobility, partly because of lack of appropriate data.
This project addresses the causes of lack of economic and social mobility by
examining the relationship between childhood circumstances and later adult
earnings, education, child-bearing, and incarceration. The relationship between
parents' earnings and children's later adult earnings is very relevant to
concerns about lack of mobility for American children. Using information for
millions of children, this research measures economic mobility in a detailed
manner. A key contribution of this research is that it combines numerous sources
of information from the Census Bureau and other government agencies to identify
demographic characteristics of children such as race, neighborhood, family
structure, and level of parents' education. The researchers also measure time
spent in subsidized housing and its effect on future earnings. Using this
information, the researchers can compare mobility levels across childhood
circumstances. In addition to employment and earnings, the researchers also look
at the effects of these childhood circumstances on schooling, geographical
mobility (to different parts of the country), when (and if) they marry, and at
what age they have children in their adult lives. The combined information that
is developed, including the data, can be used by other researchers for analysis
of policies based on evidence. The results of this research will strengthen the
U.S. economy by providing policy guidance on improving intergenerational
mobility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports the PIs ongoing development
and analysis of data infrastructure that merges national survey and
administrative data - - especially LEHD data with Census micro data - - that
enables them to study the impact of childhood socioeconomic circumstances on
adult outcomes such as educational attainment, labor market performance,
fertility, and incarceration. The merged data set provides detailed (in terms of
both scale and longitudinal scope) information on employment and earnings,
demographics and household characteristics, residential location and
neighborhood, and program participation, for millions of individuals across the
United States. The PIs will the use these data to explore and make causal
inferences of the effects of childhood circumstances on intergenerational
economic mobility (IEM), including using data on siblings to estimate of the
exposure to subsidized housing when young. For the broader population, the PIs
will explore how individual, household, and spatial factors interact with
parental characteristics to determine the observed distribution of IEM, adult
incarceration, educational attainment, and fertility. The data allow the PIs to
explore the mechanisms at work using a variety of quasi-experimental approaches
employed in the recent literature to identify causal associations. In another
approach to identification, the PIs examine the effects of "forced-moves"
stemming from public housing demolitions under the Hope IV program---providing
another quasi-experimental variation relating housing for children to adult
outcomes. Because selected demolitions were in different neighborhoods and metro
areas, the PIs can explore the spatial variation in the long-term effect of
public housing demolitions on the youth. This treatment effect of heterogeneity,
not previously exploited, will help us to better understand how childhood
circumstances interact with residential experiences to affect adult well-being.
The method used to combine these data sets will provide a guide for other
researchers who may need to combine Census and other data sets to create more
comprehensive data sets.