* 1730079
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Where Does Innovation Come From? Exploring the Dynamic Processes of Organizing and Managing Social Entrepreneurship and Innovation
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2019
* Michelle Shumate, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jeryl Mumpower
* 04/30/2019
* USD 28,373.00

The past several decades have witnessed a significant rise in social
entrepreneurship (SE) activities aimed at solving complex social problems like
poverty and educational inequality. This Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement Grant (DDRIG) will use large-scale datasets to systematically
summarize the current state of SE in the United States and identify mechanisms
underlying innovative social ventures. Best practices identified in the research
will offer tangible solutions to help practitioners make marked improvement in
creating scalable and sustainable social innovations. The research will also
identify the role public policy may play in encouraging social ventures to adopt
appropriate business models, employ information and communication technologies
(ICTs), and engage in collaboration networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will involve surveying 3,000 social ventures across the United States to examine
how market logics and community logics enable or constrain the type, degree, and
quality of social innovations created by social ventures. Market logics suggest
that social ventures may act like for-profit businesses and compete in capital
markets to earn profits. At the same time, social ventures may also follow
community logics by adopting the key principles of nonprofit organizing. The
data will also be used to understand how market logics and community logics
influence social ventures' use of information and communication technologies
(ICTs) and inter-organizational networks to create social innovations.