* 1730660
* The Development of Structural Thinking about Social Categories
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Alison Gopnik, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 12/31/2019
* USD 578,581.00

One way children make sense of the social world is by forming mental
representations of categories of people, such as "girls" and "boys" or
"children" and "adults." Forming such categories is a useful way to summarize
information and to support novel inferences. For instance, if you learn that a
person belongs to the category "child," you can infer that the person is young.
This work investigates what children's social categories look like, and how
their categories affect the way they explain and reason about aspects of the
social world. In particular, the experiments focus on whether and when children
are able to appreciate that members of a social category can be associated with
a property not only because of shared intrinsic characteristics or preferences,
but also as a consequence of the larger social structure in which the category
members are situated. For instance, girls could be associated with pink clothing
because they have an intrinsic preference for pink, or instead because they are
embedded in a social structure that increases the probability that they will
select pink, perhaps due to external constraints such as availability and social
acceptability. Reasoning about social categories in this way requires
"structural thinking." The proposed work will chart the development and
consequences of structural thinking from preschool through early
childhood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the nature and development of
social categories is important for a variety of reasons. At a theoretical level,
structural thinking challenges dominant approaches to the representation of
social categories, and therefore opens up new theoretical possibilities. At a
practical level, understanding how children learn and reason about social
categories is crucial for developing effective ways to mitigate the effects of
harmful stereotypes, which could negatively affect not only a child's
interactions with others, but also how the child thinks about him- or herself.
More generally, structural thinking plays an important role in our ability to
reason effectively about most complex systems: people embedded in social
structures, individual species operating within ecosystems, or cities operating
within state and federal guidelines, to name just a few. Understanding when and
how structural thinking emerges can inform the development of educational
efforts in childhood and support better decision-making in adulthood.