* 1730250
* CyberTraining: DSE: Cross-Training of Researchers in Computing, Applied Mathematics and Atmospheric Sciences using Advanced Cyberinfrastructure Resources
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Zhibo Zhang, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 547,970.00

This project will develop a training program for cross-training of participants,
including graduate students, postdocs, as well as junior faculty, from three
disciplines (Computing, Mathematics, and Atmospheric Sciences) to foster
multidisciplinary research and education using advanced cyberinfrastructure (CI)
resources and techniques. The training focus will be Atmospheric Sciences topics
that require knowledge and skills of high performance computing (HPC) and Big
Data. The impacts of this "Data + Computing + Atmospheric Sciences" training
program include 1) prepare a better scientific workforce for advanced CI; 2)
broaden CI adoption and accessibility for trainees recruited nationwide; 3)
complement curricular offerings through multidisciplinary research training and
team-based projects. The project, thus, serves the national interest, as stated
by NSF's mission, by promoting the progress of science and advancing the
national prosperity and welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The training program will
focus on modeling and analysis of atmospheric radiation budget. Clouds play an
important role in Earth's climate system, particularly its radiative energy
budget. New technical advances of cloud simulation in numerical global climate
models (GCM) usually come with high computational cost, which makes HPC an
indispensable tool. The advances of satellite-based remote sensing techniques
have made a significant change in our way to observe the state of the atmosphere
and evaluate GCM, and have led to growing amount of large datasets. Because of
these advances and changes, more than ever, HPC and Big Data have become parts
of essential knowledge and skills to tackle some of the most challenging
questions in Atmospheric Sciences. The project will conduct cross-training of
participants on a wide range of levels, including graduate students, postdocs,
as well as junior faculty from the areas of Computing, Applied Mathematics, and
Atmospheric Sciences. The goal of the project is to foster multidisciplinary
workforce development and collaboration using advanced CI resources and
techniques. The training program includes 1) customized course design for three
disciplines with commonalities and differences; 2) online instruction on
selected topics in HPC, Big Data, Applied Mathematics, and Atmospheric Sciences;
3) faculty-assisted team-based research projects.