* 1730082
* Collaborative Research: EPiQC: Enabling Practical-Scale Quantum Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Margaret Martonosi, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

Quantum computing sits poised at the verge of a revolution. Quantum machines may
soon be capable of performing calculations in machine learning, computer
security, chemistry, and other fields that are extremely difficult or even
impossible for today's computers. Few of these limitless possibilities on the
horizon that quantum computing could lead to are better drug discovery, more
efficient photovoltaics, new nanoscale materials, and perhaps even more
efficient food production. These benefits will be enabled by substantially
improving the ability to solve computational problems in quantum chemistry,
quantum simulation, and optimization. These dramatic improvements arise because
each additional quantum bit doubles the potential computing power of a machine,
accumulating exponential gains that could eventually eclipse the world's largest
supercomputers. Quantum computing will also drive a new segment of the computing
industry, providing new strategies for specific applications that increase
computational power even as physical limits slow improvements in classical
silicon-chip technology. This multi-institutional project, Enabling Practical-
scale Quantum Computing (EPiQC) Expedition, will help bring the great potential
of this new paradigm into reality by reducing the current gap between existing
theoretical algorithms and practical quantum computing architectures. Over five
years, the EPiQC Expedition will collectively develop new algorithms, software,
and machine designs tailored to key properties of quantum device technologies
with 100 to 1000 quantum bits. This work will facilitate profound new scientific
discoveries and also broadly impact the state of high-performance computing. To
prepare the U.S. workforce for this revolution in computing, we need to educate
citizens to think about computing from a quantum perspective, integrating
concepts such as probability and uncertainty into the digital lexicon. The EPiQC
Expedition will design teaching curricula and distribute exemplar materials for
students ranging from primary school to engineers in industry. EPiQC will also
establish an academic-industry consortium which will share educational and
research products and accelerate the pace of quantum computing design and
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because quantum computing is a new branch of
computer science, it will require entirely new types of algorithms and software.
In order to produce practical quantum computation in the near future, these
elements cannot be developed in isolation. Instead, researchers must increase
the efficiency of quantum algorithms running on quantum machines through the
simultaneous design and optimization of algorithms, software and machines. New
algorithms and software need to know what specific machine operations are easy
or difficult in a given quantum technology and must be prepared to produce
useful answers from imperfect results from imperfect machines. Software also
needs to verify that the computation executed correctly as expected, an
especially difficult task given that conventional machines cannot simulate even
a modest-size quantum machine. The EPiQC Expedition unites experts on
algorithms, software, architecture, and education to develop these elements in
parallel. Overall, EPiQC will increase the efficiency of practical quantum
computations by 100 to 1000 times, effectively bringing quantum computing out of
the laboratory and into practical use 10-20 years sooner than through technology
advances alone. The project identifies 4 thrusts: algorithmic innovations,
compiler development, verification, and the broader impact tasks of developing
education modules. The algorithmic tasks are organized into the subdomains of
optimization, computational chemistry, and the discovery of separations between
quantum and classical speedup. The compiler tasks are more milestone driven -
development of technology libraries, development of various compilation
techniques which leverages these libraries, as well as novel error correction
schemes. The project will tie the tool chain closely to the underlying hardware
and fault-tolerance mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.