* 1730587
* RCN-UBE Incubator: Engaging Novice Undergraduates in Scientific Discovery Through Research Deconstruction
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Utpal Banerjee, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

This RCN-UBE incubator project will begin building a network of STEM educators
at 2- and 4-year colleges employing research deconstruction, a pedagogical
strategy developed by the investigators to teach undergraduate students the
process of scientific inquiry. As research deconstruction requires no laboratory
infrastructure, it offers a low-cost, scalable approach that may be accessible
to a wide variety of institutions, including community colleges. Engaging
students in scientific inquiry is an important strategy for reducing attrition
of students from STEM majors, a national problem that threatens the future of
the U.S. as a global leader in science and technology. Providing educators with
sustainable options for inquiry-based instruction, particularly at 2-year
colleges, may help to increase the number and diversity of future STEM
professionals.

External assessment and STEM retention data from implementation over a 10-year
period at suggest the approach is effective in teaching students the process of
science and increasing persistence in STEM. To determine the extent to which
these educational benefits can be reproduced at a 2-year campus and identify
adaptations necessary for implementation in a community college setting, the
investigators will work with partner community colleges to develop a pilot
research deconstruction course. Formative assessment will be used to evaluate
affective and cognitive learning gains and, in consultation with an advisory
team of community college faculty, identify necessary adaptations for a second
course offering. These findings and those of network participants implementing
research deconstruction at research universities will be shared at a workshop to
identify best practices. To increase awareness of the pedagogy, local STEM
faculty will be invited to the workshop, and video recordings of the
presentations will be posted on a website for distribution to the broader
education community. Outcomes from this incubator will inform future efforts as
the network is expanded to include more 2- and 4-year colleges.

This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences
(BIO), Division of Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education
and Human Resources (EHR), Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their
efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate
Biology Education: A Call to Action (http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/).