* 1730657
* CI-P:Collaborative Research:  Open-Source Mobile Underwater Acoustic Network Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Xiaoyan Hong, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 03/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

The capability to explore and monitor our aquatic environments, such as the
ocean, lakes, and seaports, is vital to science advancements and societal needs.
Examples of applications include environmental monitoring, geophysical surveys,
ocean resource management, and more. The next technological breakthrough is to
use a fleet of aquatic robots as a mobile underwater acoustic network that
autonomously collect and transmit information while navigating in the aquatic
environment. Although recent years have seen many new advancements in related
fields, the much-needed underwater network technologies still have not
materialized. There is a need within the research community for an at-scale
community testing infrastructure for underwater networks that can support a wide
array of research to enable this future. This project seeks to identify the
fundamental research challenges that the community would like to explore in such
a testbed, and also have the community define and specify the type of
infrastructure that will be most conducive for such wide-ranging
experimentation. To this end, the project aims to organize two workshops to
engage personnel from the scientific, federal, and commercial sectors in order
to develop an infrastructure blueprint to advance the field of underwater mobile
communications and networking. The project advances the progress of science by
bringing together resources and facilitating development of a research vision
for multiple technical fields, including underwater communications and
networking, marine robotics, and ocean monitoring. It incubates innovation to
address multiple societal challenges, for example, disaster response in the
ocean or water quality monitoring in waterways. The workshops aim to broaden the
impact by engaging K-12 educators, for example science teachers and aquarium
curators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main contributions of the project are a
research workshop and an infrastructure workshop. The research workshop engages
scientists and practitioners from multiple sectors, domestic and international,
including: 1) scholars from diverse technical fields in academia with interest
or stake in the ocean/underwater ecosystems; 2) scientific staff from various
federal funding agencies; 3) scientists from naval research centers; 4)
scientists and practitioners from sub-sea industries. The goal of the research
workshop is to identify emerging trends, urgent needs, potential users and
innovative technologies that will require the services of a large-scale test
infrastructure. The goals of the infrastructure workshop are to generate an
infrastructure blueprint and to form an able research team to develop, deploy
and maintain the community infrastructure. Through these two workshops, the
project fosters collaboration among workshop participants from diverse sectors.
The envisioned infrastructure is an open-source mobile underwater acoustic
network testbed that provides easy access and shared use by the communities of
acoustic communications, underwater networking and systems, marine robotics, and
data sciences. It seeks to lower the threshold for the research community to
utilize underwater mobile communications and, thus, fosters interdisciplinary
research.