* 1730488
* CRI: II-NEW: A Big Data Professing Infrastructure for Smart Energy Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Mohammad Shahidehpour, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT) has built the first-ever fully-functional
campus microgrid on its Chicago Main Campus. Massive and rich data produced by
this unique live laboratory are invaluable assets for the research community to
enable further innovation in critical energy systems. However, data science in
the energy systems faces demanding challenges, such as inadequate data
processing speed, heterogeneous and error-prone data source, and strong real-
time performance requirement. To enable research to address those challenges,
this project will build a research infrastructure IDES (Integrated Data
analytics for Energy Systems) to integrate high-performance computing power, in
terms of both hardware and software, with the existing campus microgrid facility
to meet the requirements of big data processing and analytics in energy
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IDES will be the first big data research
infrastructure that integrates with a functioning smart microgrid. IDES consists
of network devices, an integrated computer/file server cluster for high-
performance data processing and storage, as well as a software-defined
networking-based microgrid communication cyber-infrastructure. The project will
enable the IIT microgrid to serve as a living laboratory, not only to advance
power grid technologies but also to advance the big data analytics and cyber-
security technologies. The project will also establish a partnership among power
system researchers, computer scientists, electric utilities, IT support
organizations, and other industrial partners to build a high-performance
infrastructure for big data analytics in energy systems. In addition, the
project will train students with the much-needed skills in high-performance data
processing, microgrid, networking and cyber-security. The team will disseminate
the research outcomes of this project to the research community, students,
educators, industry professionals and the public through collaboration with the
DoE-funded Smart Grid Education and Workforce Training Center at IIT.