* 1730122
* RCN-UBE Incubator: Designing an Infrastructure and Sustainable Learning Community for Integrating Data-Centric Teaching Resources in Undergraduate Biology Education
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Arietta Fleming-Davies, St. John Fisher College
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 08/31/2020
* USD 49,965.00

This RCN-UBE incubator network seeks to address challenges facing the valuable
use of authentic research data to teach biological concepts. Exploring real
scientific data helps students develop quantitative skills and understand the
real-world context for core biological concepts. These methods provide high-
impact learning experiences in undergraduate STEM education, which can increase
retention and academic achievement for all students, including those from
underrepresented and underserved groups. A great deal of progress has been made
in the collection, sharing, and discoverability of biological research data as a
public resource. However, limitations in sharing and adapting these resources to
formats for teaching remains a barrier to wide dissemination and adoption in the
classroom. The development and publication of these resources represent the
first step in the open educational resources (OER) life cycle, where instructors
then find, implement, and enrich these resources based on the context of their
classrooms. This network will identify causes and mechanisms to overcome the gap
in the curriculum cycle after the development stage by designing a community
framework for the large-scale sharing and adaptation of data-centric
collections. There is an emerging need to address this gap given the rapid
increase and availability of diverse research and monitoring datasets.
Increasing the availability of data-centric resources will also promote critical
thinking, communication, and quantitative skills, which are key skills for
classroom success, for the STEM workforce, and for science literacy in an
informed citizenry.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The network will be composed of
experts in information science and the OER model, experienced educational
resource developers, leaders in faculty development, diversity, and inclusion
efforts, and undergraduate instructors with interests in applying teaching
approaches with data in the classroom. These diverse stakeholders will
collaborate to build a working model for sustaining a technological and social
community focused on emerging approaches and resources for biology data-centric
teaching. Through a workshop and a series of online meetings this network will
(1) define the needs and challenges of different stakeholders associated with
data-centric pedagogy, (2) explore social-technological solutions in order to
create a vision of a virtual space that would promote the OER model, and to
identify necessary incentives for sustained investment by faculty and module
providers in the virtual space, and (3) conceptually synthesize discussions into
a report which will serve as the framework for an expanding and evolving
network. The goal of this network is to further elucidate barriers and generate
mechanisms to overcome these barriers to wide-dissemination of high-impact data-
centric teaching pedagogies in biology. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is
being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO), Division
of Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources (EHR), Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action (http://visionandchange/finalreport/).