* 1730636
* Operationalizing Pseudo-Market Mechanisms: School Choice and Shared Office Allocation
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Jeremy Fox, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 443,678.00

Market design methods have been increasingly used in important applications like
school choice. Most existing methods ask participants to rank their alternatives
in order. In contrast, this project studies a class of methods that elicits
numerical scores for each alternative. Such preference intensities provide more
information than just the ordering over the items, and therefore the methods
developed in this project can generate better assignments of the scarce items.
By soliciting numerical preferences, the placement of students in schools, for
example, can be more efficient, and priorities in school choice can be also
allowed. In addition, the assignment methods developed in this project can be
used when agents care about how other agents are assigned. Such allocations with
peer effects also have important applications in college dormitories or shared
offices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the submitted intensities of
preferences are used to operate a pseudo-market on a computer, without using
real money. Methods computing competitive equilibria to pseudo-markets have been
used less in practice and many hurdles need to be overcome. This project studies
theoretical, computational, lab experimental, field test and structural
empirical work on pseudo-market mechanisms, with key applications being school
choice and the allocation of shared offices. The investigators develop a new
computational algorithm to compute a competitive equilibrium to a pseudo-market.
Given the multiplicity of equilibria, equilibrium selection is carefully
addressed. Lab experiments investigate the concerns that agents may have non-
expected-utility preferences and can manipulate the mechanism by colluding in
groups. A variety of research methodologies are combined to implement and
evaluate pseudo-market mechanisms in school choice, where students have
priorities at each school that must be respected.