* 1730417
* CyberTraining: CDL: iPDC - Summer Institute for Integrating Parallel and Distributed Computing in Introductory Programming Classes
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* David Brown, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2023
* USD 499,988.00

The computing landscape has been changed in recent years due to the pervasive
shift to multicore and GPU-based computer architectures. The current and future
generations of our computing workforce will require the acquisition of a broad
parallel and distributed computing (PDC) skill set, to enable the effective
utilization of existing and emerging computing devices and cyber
infrastructures. The current undergraduate computer science (CS) and computing
engineering (CE) curricula, in most cases, do not integrate PDC concepts as
required topics. The overall goal of the project is to prepare CS, CE, and
Engineering undergraduate students for their future careers in light of this
technological shift towards parallelism by improving faculty expertise in PDC
through a series of week-long training workshops and by providing them with the
resources to integrate PDC topics into introductory programming classes. This
will enable the future workforce to contribute effectively in the emerging
technological ecosystem, promoting the progress of science and advancing the
national health, prosperity and welfare, which serves the national interest, as
stated by NSF's mission. &lt;br/&gt;Based on the training of the trainer model,
this project will be conducting a series of week-long workshops for non PDC CS1
and CS2 instructors through whom the project will be able to reach a larger
audience of CS and CE undergraduates. The project will leverage existing PDC
educational resources to enact a two-phase plan. The first phase is to conduct a
preliminary planning workshop to plan and develop a faculty development workshop
and the IPDC toolkit. The IPDC toolkit will be an all-inclusive resource
repository for the easy integration of PDC topics in introductory programming
class without much effort required from the instructor. In the second phase a
series five training workshops will be conducted over three years. These
intensive faculty development workshops will include: 1) introduction to PDC
concepts, 2) developing parallel programs using libraries and tools like Open
MP, Java, and Mat lab, 3) PDC concepts through unplugged activities, 4) hands-on
programming modules, 5) access to tools and information beyond the scope of
IPDC. Continuous improvement through assessment and evaluation will be an
integral part of the project. The projects goal is to reach seventy-five faculty
over 3 years period who in turn will introduce PDC concepts and topics to over
four thousand undergraduates per year. The participants selected for the project
will come from institutions primarily involved in teaching but lack research
infrastructure and PDC resources. Beyond the NSF funding cycle, the project will
continue to provide online faculty development workshops and mini-workshops,
using the IPDC toolkit, at CS and CE education conferences.