* 1730586
* I-Corps: Algal-bacterial Wastewater Treatment Technology
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Sarina Ergas, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 08/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to
potentially enable an innovative wastewater treatment technology to lower costs
and improve the sustainability of wastewater treatment. By taking advantage of
advances in microbial ecology and natural light fluctuations over the course of
the day, the algal-bacterial shortcut nitrogen removal process can provide
complete nitrogen removal with very low chemical and energy inputs. The
technology will potentially reduce nutrient pollutant discharges to the
environment, allowing wastewater facilities to economically comply with existing
and future environmental regulations. Application of this technology will help
reduce eutrophication (overgrowth of algae) of surface waters and nitrate
contamination of groundwater.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will
focus on customer discovery to investigate how the innovative algal-bacterial
shortcut nitrogen removal technology can be potentially integrated into existing
wastewater treatment processes. High ammonia strength wastewaters are
challenging and costly to treat in conventional biological nitrogen removal
systems due to their toxicity and high aeration and chemical requirements.
Laboratory research has demonstrated that complete ammonium removal can be
achieved in a sequencing batch photoreactor with alternating light and dark
periods (day and night). During the light period, oxygen produced through
photosynthesis stimulates nitrite production by ammonia oxidizing bacteria.
During the dark period, dissolved oxygen is quickly consumed, promoting nitrogen
removal from the wastewater. This innovative technology can be applied to the
treatment of domestic wastewater sidestreams and agricultural wastewater to
reduce the costs, energy requirements and greenhouse gas emissions associated
with nitrogen removal from wastewaters.