* 1730553
* RCN-UBE: Midwest and Great Plains PULSE Network - Building Institutional Capacity for Inclusive Excellence in Undergraduate Biology Education
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Kathleen Marrs, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2023
* USD 483,759.00

The Partnership for Undergraduate Life Science Education (PULSE) originated as
an initiative launched in 2012 by the National Science Foundation (NSF), the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI), and the National Institute for General
Medical Sciences (NIGMS/NIH) as an effort to stimulate life science departments
to undertake the type of transformative changes recommended in the Vision and
Change report. Department leaders from two-year colleges, liberal arts colleges,
comprehensive universities and research universities were selected as PULSE
Leadership Fellows. Such improvements in how biology is taught at all types of
undergraduate institutions are expected to enhance students' understanding of
core concepts in the life sciences, increase retention rates for students in the
life sciences, and improve preparation for all students to be more curious and
scientifically literate citizens. This project will establish an educational
network across twelve states in the Great Plains and Midwest focused on spurring
the organizational, department-level change needed for heightening alignment of
undergraduate life sciences programs with evidence-based practices outlined in
Vision and Change. In so doing, the network will increase the number of persons
equipped with the scientific and technical skills to meet the nation's need for
a technically skilled workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this projects rests on two aims of the Great Plains and Midwest PULSE network
to: 1) expand the network membership to reach a critical mass of effective
change leaders who can motivate and guide colleagues at their home institutions
toward curricular, pedagogical, and organizational transformation; and 2)
coordinate, standardize, and synthesize evaluation efforts that ask whether the
change processes initiated and led by network members support departmental
adoption of evidence-based practices and the recommendations in Vision and
Change. The major activities will involve workshops to support the growth of
communities of practice. Additional activities include formative and summative
evaluation of the network, coupled with systems analysis to comprehend the
structure and dynamics of change within the complex systems of STEM higher
education. Through these activities, the network will: (i) empower faculty
members in the process of building institutional capacity for inclusive
excellence in undergraduate education; (ii) deepen participants' understanding
of strategies for leading organizational change and provide information,
opportunities for collaboration, and mutual support across the network; and
(iii) contribute to knowledge on effective ways to promote organizational change
in undergraduate STEM education. Network activities will reach approximately 100
institutions, serving approximately 70,000 students annually in introductory
biology courses. This project directly impacts community colleges as almost 50%
of the undergraduate students in the U.S. attend two-year degree granting
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded jointly by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Directorate of Education and Human
Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education in support of efforts to address
the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A
Call to Action http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/.