* 1730060
* The Effect of Pictures in Books for Beginning Readers: Attention Allocation, Reading Fluency, and Reading Comprehension in K-2 Students
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Erik Thiessen, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 07/31/2023
* USD 809,806.00

The practice of using illustrations in materials for teaching children to read
dates back over 250 years. In recent years, illustrations in books for beginning
readers have become increasingly more colorful and engaging than in the past.
Yet, there is virtually no research evaluating the effect of close proximity of
text to colorful engaging illustrations on emerging literacy skills. However,
there are theoretical and empirical reasons to believe that engaging colorful
illustrations placed in close proximity to text in books for beginning readers
may interfere with (rather that aid) emerging literacy skills. This research
will examine (1) whether close proximity of text to illustrations, a typical
layout in books for beginning readers, creates competition for attentional
resources, thus interfering with reading fluency and comprehension; and (2) how
the layout of books for beginning readers can be optimized to reduce competition
for attentional resources and thus improve fluency and comprehension in
beginning readers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these questions, this
project will use portable eye tracking devices to examine the patterns of
attention allocation as children in kindergarten through second grade read books
designed for beginning readers. Specifically, researchers will measure the
number of gaze shifts from text to illustrations and the total time children
spend looking at text and illustrations. It is hypothesized that frequent gaze
shifts from text to illustrations are indicative of children being distracted by
illustrations. Additionally, researchers will collect measures of reading
fluency and reading comprehension. In a series of six studies, researchers will
compare performance on measures of attention and reading when children read
commercially available books to modified versions of the same books. The
modifications to commercially available books will be aimed at optimizing the
layout of text and illustrations to reduce competition for attentional
resources. It is predicted that modified book layouts will lead to decreased
frequency of gaze shifts from text to illustrations, and increased reading
fluency and comprehension. Overall, this project has potential to uncover low-
cost and easy to scale basic principles to achieve optimal design of reading
materials to improve literacy skills of beginning readers.