* 1730822
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Plantigrady in the Primate Foot
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,10/31/2019
* Jeremy DeSilva, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 10/31/2019
* USD 21,705.00

Bipedalism (walking on two legs) is one of the earliest and most critical
adaptions that separates humans from other mammals, but there is a lack of
consensus about the type of locomotion that preceded it. This doctoral
dissertation project will investigate and quantify the structural changes that
took place in the ape heel as they relate to plantigrade (heel-striking)
adaptations, a critical precursor to becoming bipedal. Locomotor and skeletal
data from living animals will be analyzed to better understand the relationship
between form and function in our primate and hominin ancestors. This research
will contribute to improved science literacy and access within the general
public through a combination of public talks, the use of social media to
highlight new and engaging research, a commitment to publishing in open access
journals, and by providing place-based learning opportunities to connect
students living near field sites with local research objectives. This project
will also support the mentoring and scientific training of female undergraduates
at Dartmouth College and local high school students, as well as the career of a
female graduate researcher in a field where women are underrepresented.

This project tests the relationship between bone shape and behavior using a
multifaceted approach. Kinematic walking data will be collected, using a plantar
pressure mat, for semi-wild primates and comparative species, to describe
differences in gait with and without plantigrady. Analyses will also include the
use of geometric morphometrics and high definition micro-computed tomography
(micro-CT) imaging. These data will be used to assess and interpret calcanei
across the human lineage and Miocene primate fossil record. By reconstructing
the locomotor capabilities of fossil primates, this research will test
hypotheses about the polarity of plantigrady within the ape lineage, determine
potential selection pressures driving the shift to plantigrady, and use
plantigrade behavior to better understand phylogenetic relationships among the
many Miocene ape genera and their relation to primates alive today. The project
will contribute to our understanding of hominin bipedalism by revealing trends
in the locomotor patterns observed just before the advent of the hominin
lineage.