* 1730090
* 2017 Graybill Conference on Statistical Genomics and Genetics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Jay Breidt, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 05/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

This award supports participation in the 2017 Graybill Conference on Statistical
Genomics and Genetics, held June 5-7, 2017 on the campus of Colorado State
University, Fort Collins, Colorado. The conference is co-sponsored by the
American Statistical Association Section on Statistics in Genomics and Genetics.
The program consists of invited talks, a contributed poster session, and a
student poster competition. The goal of the conference is to provide an
opportunity for quantitative scientists and practitioners in the biological
sciences to generate and share ideas for new creative research in statistics and
genomics or genetics; to exchange knowledge on frontier statistical
methodologies for problems rising from genomics and genetics; to stimulate
professional networking opportunities; and to provide young researchers with
exposure for their work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The last decade has witnessed the
rapid advancement of high-throughput technologies and the generation and storage
of massive data sets. A huge number of new challenges in analyzing, modeling,
and interpreting these massive data have arisen, forcing transformative change
on research in biological and medical sciences in general, and genomics and
genetics in particular. To meet those challenges and provide reliable
approaches, statistical genomics and genetics have emerged from traditional
statistics and have become indispensable tools for modern research in the
biological and medical sciences, also paving the road to many important
biological and medical discoveries in the last few years. On the other hand,
novel problems arising in genomics and genetics have also motivated many new
statistical concepts, models, and methodologies. Statistical genomics and
genetics have been growing remarkably fast and apply to an increasing number of
topics in both fields. They are now essential parts of modern biological and
medical research and also generate important research topics within statistics.
Exposure and understanding of the motivating problems, newly-developed models
and methods, and working protocols are extremely useful for researchers in the
quantitative sciences, including bioinformatics, computer science, and
statistics. For more information, see the conference website at
http://graybill.wolpe2.natsci.colostate.edu/