* 1730170
* CyberTraining: DSE. The Code Maker: Computational Thinking for Engineers with Interactive, Contextual Learning
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Ryan Watkins, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 499,965.00

The Code Maker is a new vision for educating engineers who can apply
computational thinking to many endeavors. It is a program that embeds
computational skills in the curriculum using learner-centered design, informed
by the latest research in how people learn. The project will develop the
curriculum and materials for interactive learning of computing, in context. The
philosophy is to move from "learning to code" toward "coding to learn," so that
computing becomes a natural tool for the new engineer to solve problems,
investigate nature, design and build projects. The Code Maker serves the
national interest by training engineers that are effective users of
cyberinfrastructure. It serves NSF's mission - to promote the progress of
science; to advance the national health, prosperity and welfare; to secure the
national defense - by delivering needed intellectual infrastructure. The project
is open source and open access. Locally, it builds community via maker-inspired
activities and student support via learning assistants at the new George
Washington (GW) STEM Works Lab. Outward-looking, the project will use an online
platform to share the training widely, and will coach a close group of
collaborators who bring the program to their respective institutions. The NSF
funding will also support a thorough assessment of the program, continuous
improvement, and dissemination of the results. The Code Maker will train
computationally skilled engineers who are prepared to enter the workforce
competitively, and ready to use computing effectively as a research tool if
joining a graduate program in computational science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Code Maker project will deliver eight or
more learning modules, each consisting of a series of four or more lessons,
written as a Jupyter Notebook. The modules will be available online and can be
completed asynchronously or assigned as a graded course component. They will
embed the learning in the existing courses of the engineering curriculum:
mechanics, statistics, heat and mass transfer, and so on. Short term, the
program will train 50 to 100 students at GW, impact similar numbers at partner
institutions, and potentially reach hundreds via the online dissemination. The
modules adopt a mastery-learning approach. The program will be supported by
learning assistants and a program of maker-inspired events at a newly created
space in the GW Library, the STEM Works Lab. It will use cloud infrastructure,
both public and private: an instance of the Open edX learning platform on Amazon
AWS that effectively allows running the program publicly as a MOOC; and a local
JupyterHub server to eliminate installation friction and ensure a consistent
compute environment for local students. The evaluation will apply a combination
of 4-level training evaluation and a Technology Acceptance model.