* 1730247
* Collaborative Research: Institutional capacity as an organizational challenge: a field experiment in Pakistan
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Erica Field, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2022
* USD 474,406.00

Abstract Vyborny&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: Institutional
Capacity as an Organizational Challenge: A Field
Experiment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efficient management of organizations---
businesses, governments or non-profits--is central to economic growth and
development. Although there have been some studies of organizational efficiency
in businesses, few have studied organizational efficiency in the public and non-
governmental sectors---sectors that are becoming increasingly large shares of
modern economies. This research will use a unique field experiment, involving a
large donor organization and over 800 recipient community organizations, to
study the efficiency in large, multitiered and complex organizations with
emphasis on how information flowing through the organization is used, and how to
effectively incentivize agents to achieve the organization's goals. This
research will seek to answer three major questions: (i) can a transparent self-
reporting tool and non-monetary incentive scheme motivate community
organizations to achieve their goals; (ii) how do parts of a large complex
organization respond to and use new information they receive; and (iii) how does
the response to new information depend on the characteristics of the
organization? The results of this research will lead to improvement in the
performance of large, complex organizations generally. Efficiency in these
organizations will improve the performance of economies worldwide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large organizations face challenges in managing
information, setting incentives and delegating decision-making power to the
relevant personnel. Existing empirical work investigate incentive problems in
private organizations. However, limited attention has been paid to the
performance of large non-profit and government organizations. This project will
use a unique field experiment to address three issues---information and
communication within organizations, divergent preferences within organizations,
and performance of non-government organizations. The experimental design will
allow the PIs to test three main ideas: (i) Can community organizations be
incentivized through self-reporting and non-financial rewards to improve their
performance; (ii) How does each part of a large, complex organization respond to
new information on performance indicators; (iii) Do the responses of management
and workers to the receipt of new information and incentives depend on
organizational characteristics of the organization, communication costs between
parts of the organization, and decentralization of decision making authority? To
answer the first question, over 800 recipient community organizations will be
surveyed and then randomized into different self-reporting schemes using a two-
by-two factorial design with controls. This design allows the PIs to test for
the impact of self-reporting on service delivery or governance. To answer the
second and third questions, the PIs will carry out a novel revealed-preference
ranking experiment involving both junior and senior management staff members.
The results of this research will strengthen our understanding of the
determinants of efficiency in organizations and in the process, contribute to
increased efficiency of economies worldwide.