* 1730043
* II-EN: Collaborative Research: Enhancing the Parasol Experimental Testbed for Sustainable Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Ulrich Kremer, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2022
* USD 701,713.00

This project will enhance an experimental datacenter for sustainable computing.
Datacenters consume vast amounts of energy, totaling about 1.8% of the US
electricity usage in 2014. Thus, the energy efficiency, energy-related costs,
and overall sustainability of datacenters are critical concerns. NSF funded an
experimental green datacenter called Parasol, which has previously demonstrated
that the combination of green design and intelligent software management systems
can lead to significant reductions in energy consumption, carbon emission, and
cost. The enhanced version of this project will update energy sources, network
technologies and management software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Running real
experiments in live conditions using Parasol led to findings that were not
possible in simulation. This proposal seeks to update and enhance Parasol with
current and next generation power-efficient servers, improve network
connectivity and integrate software-defined networking (SDN) and Wi-Fi
capabilities, increase solar energy generation capacity, add a low emission fuel
cell power source, diversify energy storage, and improve the cooling system to
advance green computing. The investigators will update and enhance Parasol's
current software stack for monitoring, programmatic control, and remote access
for the new hardware enhancements. Specific research goals are resource
management in green datacenters, including coordinated workload, cooling, and
energy scheduling against environmental and load variability to maximize the
benefits of green datacenters and to help improve grid power management. A
specific goal is to leverage accelerators such as GPUs and deep learning
hardware, which promise excellent performance/watt ratios.