* 1730661
* CI-SUSTAIN: Sustainable Tools for Analysis and Research on Darknet Unsolicited Traffic (STARDUST).
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Alistair King, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2021
* USD 780,459.00

The Internet is a vast enterprise carrying information to people and devices all
over the world. The University of California San Diego Network Telescope (UCSD-
NT) is a unique monitoring system which, for over a decade, has enabled global
visibility into Internet behavior that few other data sources can offer. It has
provided relevant data used in a broad set of sub-disciplines in Computer &amp;
Information Science &amp; Engineering (CISE) and beyond, from network and
systems security and stability, to machine learning and big data processing
techniques, and, most recently, for studies of cyberwarfare. The STARDUST
project will help sustain operation and extend the applicability of the UCSD-NT
infrastructure. The stabilized and enhanced infrastructure capabilities will
serve a diverse range of academic researchers, the vast majority of whom have no
access to any other source of global Internet traffic data. In addition, the
proposed enhancements will support invaluable hands-on experience in
operationally relevant network security and traffic analysis research for a wide
audience of computer science students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STARDUST aims at
maintaining continued operation of the UCSD-NT infrastructure while maximizing
its utility to researchers from various disciplines. The scope of work includes
upgrading and modernizing the current infrastructure to handle the predicted
growth in traffic, leveraging virtualization and NSF-funded High-Performance
Computing (HPC) platforms at the San Diego Supercomputer Center for
computational data analysis, and introducing meta-data semantics to simplify
many tasks researchers typically want to do with UCSD-NT data. The proposed
modifications will leave researchers more time (and available HPC resources) to
focus on their specific scientific questions. Moreover, the project will forge
an interdisciplinary collaboration between researchers from the field of
computer networks and HPC scientists and engineers to experiment with novel
approaches for research on live traffic analysis. Project results will
contribute to advancing knowledge in diverse CISE disciplines, e.g.,
facilitating the development of efficient strategies for early detection and
mitigation of cyber attacks, supporting macroscopic Internet performance and
reliability assessments, and opening a new domain for the application of live
streaming big data analysis techniques.