* 1730756
* RCN-UBE: Building capacity for evidence-based undergraduate field experiences
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Alan Berkowitz, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2023
* USD 551,148.00

Because of the tremendous investment in field stations and marine labs and the
potential for reaching a broad range of undergraduates across the U.S. and the
world, it is critical to consider how to best provide effective educational
experiences at these venues and other extended field programs. These programs
often provide specific types of training not provided anywhere else in the
undergraduate education system. The Undergraduate Field Experiences in Research
Network (U-FERN) seeks to understand the impacts of these types of experiences
and to build a community of practitioners working together with education
researchers to share and develop effective practices that are inclusive of all
students. The network will connect current knowledge about persistence of
underrepresented students in Science Technology Engineering Math (STEM) with
practitioners of undergraduate field experiences to harness the power of active
learning as a potential for increasing participation and persistence in the
field-based sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;U-FERN seeks to build a vibrant,
supportive, and sustainable collaborative network that fosters effective
undergraduate field experiences by: 1) identifying and sharing evidence-based
models and practices for engaging a diverse range of undergraduates in effective
field and marine learning experiences, 2) identifying, modifying, developing,
and sharing assessment tools for understanding the impact of field and marine
learning experiences on undergraduate student learning, STEM identity, and
career trajectories, 3) investigating how undergraduate field experiences may
help broaden the participation and retention of underrepresented and underserved
students in field-based sciences such as marine ecology, ecology and
geosciences, and 4) establishing undergraduate learning experiences at field
stations and marine labs as "interdisciplinary laboratories" for researching
evidence-based practices in undergraduate research, service learning, and place-
based education. U-FERN will build capacity of field station and marine labs
(FSMLs) and others including undergraduates in field experiences while engaging
new collaborators from the social and learning sciences in program assessment
and research into student learning, effective practices, and broad engagement.
The wide diversity of practices implemented at field stations and marine labs
creates a unique opportunity to test models of effective training in order to
generate insights that can inform educational practices beyond the FSML
community. The proposed network will explore how insights from undergraduate
experiences at field stations and marine labs can help improve undergraduate
STEM teaching and learning in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO), Division
of Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources (EHR), Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action (http://visionandchange.or/finalreport/). This
project is also co-funded by the Division of Environmental Biology (DEB) in the
BIO directorate.