* 1730317
* RCN-UBE: HITS: High-throughput Discovery Science &amp; Inquiry-based Case Studies for Today's Students
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Carlos Goller, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 499,901.00

This RCN-UBE network project seeks to increase opportunities for undergraduate
students to develop quantitative skills and participate in high-throughput
discovery research. This network addresses the need to educate undergraduates,
graduate students, researchers, and faculty in massively-parallel and high-
throughput (HT) approaches that are becoming increasingly common in research and
industry. Educators committed to increasing exposure of students to new
techniques and datasets will work with researchers to develop educational case
studies using a series of resources developed by experts in high-throughput
research and case-based learning. Researchers using HT techniques will learn at
the workshops from experts in academia and industry. This collaboration will
empower faculty to develop and implement case HT studies in undergraduate
education and promote applied quantitative skills including descriptive
statistics and use of online 'big data' databases and tools. The network will
disseminate these case studies broadly and work with other RCN-UBE programs to
integrate the resources created in STEM courses and curricula across the country
and world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The network team will use a series of workshop
meetings to bring together the STEM education community, with a focus on faculty
from diverse institutions and researchers using or learning HT approaches. The
workshops will foster the exchange of ideas and increase awareness of the
importance of HT techniques in scientific research and the STEM education
community. This research and educational network includes primarily
undergraduate institutions, early career teaching faculty, and national and
international researchers to create impactful educational materials to
demonstrate the transformative power of HT approaches and teach underlying
quantitative skills. The resulting inquiry-based case studies will engage
students in authentic research and better train future scientists and engineers
for jobs in modern molecular biology. Undergraduate students will analyze novel
data sets and develop quantitative skills, while network participants will
enhance their research and teaching through provided HT technical workshops and
the development of case studies with teams of network-trained faculty and
postdoctoral "Case Fellows". This project provides training opportunities for a
diverse group of undergraduates, graduate students, postdoctoral fellows,
researchers, and educators. The products of the HITS RCN-UBE will be widely
disseminated and available on the web to encourage faculty to adopt, adapt,
assess, improve and create case studies that demystify high-throughput
approaches and data sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly
funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO), Division of Biological
Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources (EHR),
Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to address the
challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call
to Action (http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/). This project is also co-
funded by the Division Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB) in the BIO
directorate.