* 1730655
* CyberTraining: DSE: Self-Service Training Modules for Data-Intensive Neuroscience Learning and Research
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Amitava Majumdar, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 494,651.00

This project will develop cyberinfrastructure-based training modules that
advance the existing training methods used for learning and research in data-
intensive neuroscience communities. The project outcomes will enhance research
into our understanding of both normal and abnormal brains, contributing to NSF's
mission of advancing progress in both science and health. The project activities
will address important gaps in existing training methods that arise because
neuroscience research and education activities are increasingly becoming data-
intensive. There is a growing need to integrate and analyze voluminous data
being generated at multiple levels to explore the functioning of normal and
abnormal brains. Consequently, research and training in the area now
necessitates access to distributed resources, including multiple software
packages, high-performance computing with large numbers of cores, virtual
desktops with data sharing/collaboration capabilities, neuro-data archives, and
also requires multi-disciplinary expertise (e.g., engineering, biology,
psychology). Computational neuroscience researchers, undergraduate and graduate
students and teachers (three targeted communities in this project) face
challenges in accessing such resources and expertise in a scalable and extensive
manner. Further, they lack the necessary training in the use of advanced
cyberinfrastructure (CI) technologies and distributed resources to improve their
scientific productivity and to pursue large-scale data-enabled
investigations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The transformative nature of project's
training modules is in the "self-service" nature planned for the modules that
make them accessible to neuroscience users in an "on-demand" and "personalized"
manner. The training modules development will be based on survey of training
needs, and will be focused on having students/teachers/multi-disciplinary
researchers use, apply and create hands-on laboratory exercises and tools that
can be deployed locally (i.e., within institutional CI) and be supplemented with
publicly accessible national resources such as the NSF-funded Neuroscience
Gateway (NSG). The training modules will considerably enhance existing
traditional neuroscience courses covering foundational concepts at
undergraduate, graduate and teacher-training levels with hands-on laboratory
exercises related to managing scientific workflows, CI middleware and
application programming interfaces (APIs) to integrate geographically
distributed resources. The proposed activities will leverage existing active
training programs in cloud computing and in neuroscience, and will use NSF-
supported advanced CI resources that are available locally at University of
Missouri and at NSG. Project outcomes will be integrated into on-going courses
(with its 50+ neuroscience faculty spanning 10 departments, and 5 colleges),
into on-going NSF and NIH summer training programs, which recruit diverse
participants including under-served and under-represented students, and into an
on-going K-12 outreach program in neuro-robotics. The summer trainees that are
being recruited in this project include over 50 students, neuroscience faculty
and cyberinfrastructure engineers interested in advanced cyberinfrastructure
capabilities for diverse research and education efforts. In addition, over 80
students will benefit from the training modules within formal classroom courses
in existing neuroscience and cyberinfrastructure courses at the University of
Missouri, and over 150 students will benefit from outreach activities that
include webinars and tutorials at conferences.