* 1730651
* Broadening participation in Economics through professional mentoring
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2017,03/31/2020
* Marie Mora, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2020
* USD 499,352.00

This award funds a graduate student mentoring program that is part of a broader
suite of efforts that work to broaden participation in Economics. The mentoring
program is conducted by the investigator in collaboration with the American
Economic Association's Committee on the Status of Minority Groups in the
Economics Profession. The mentoring program helps students from under-
represented groups navigate a number of critical stages in their development as
scientists as they go from the early stages of graduate study through completing
dissertation research and starting their first post-doctoral position. Students
meet regularly with their program mentors at a variety of professional
conferences around the country. An annual workshop brings all participants
together for research presentations; this workshop is held in conjunction with a
summer program aimed at undergraduate students who are interested in careers in
Social and Economic Science. The graduate students benefit from both working
with their own mentors and are able to serve as mentors in turn to more junior
students. The mentoring program also promotes the research and professional
development of the student participants by funding travel to other professional
conferences, travel to work with mentors or access data, and funds for other
research expenses. Increasing the number of graduate-trained economists is in
the national interest for multiple reasons. The Office of Personnel Management
(OPM) in 2016 called for continued work to close the skill gap in the Economics
profession, which is a Government-wide high-risk mission critical occupation
(MCO). Experience demonstrates that some graduates of the mentoring program will
go on to government service. Others will contribute by working as professors to
train future generations of economists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Program
participants will be followed over time to help evaluate program success; this
evaluation will include the full group of efforts to broaden participation by
Hispanics, Blacks, and Native Americans in the Economics profession. Evaluation
results will be used to develop new ideas and methods for future mentoring
efforts.