* 1730568
* IUSE/PFE:RED: PPSE - Transforming Programmers to Professional Software Engineers through Curricular Innovation, Inclusive Pedagogy, and Faculty Development
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Venkat Gudivada, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,000,000.00

Many computer science departments in general, and less-research-intensive
departments in particular, experience high dropout of undergraduate students.
This is particularly worrisome given that the US Bureau of Labor Statistics
predicts that by 2020, half of all STEM jobs will be in computing. Several
research advances and technological innovations have fundamentally changed the
computing discipline in recent years. Such advances include cloud and mobile
computing, web technologies, high-performance computing, social media, big data,
and machine learning. Similar advances have also occurred in learning science
and educational technologies. Learning science informs how students actually
learn and educational technologies leverage mobile computing and learning
analytics to enable formal and informal learning. Millennial students learn
differently and the above advances provide unprecedented opportunities to
enhance student learning. This project seeks to dramatically improve computer
science students' retention and graduation rates through a transformational
process that involves curricular innovations, design and development of
inclusive pedagogy, and faculty development. Both technical and professional
skills will be interspersed throughout the curriculum to better prepare them for
industry careers. The project addresses diversity in student learning through
personalization and enables a significant increase in the participation of
underrepresented groups in computing education and careers. Lastly, the project
strives to increase the number of transfer students from community colleges and
early college high schools completing undergraduate computing degrees in
universities. The results of the project will be widely disseminated across the
country to help other computer science departments improve their students'
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are (1) transform the
programming-centric computer science education approach to a systems-oriented
and software engineering-centric one, (2) infuse professional skills development
process into the entire curriculum, (3) dramatically increase retention and
graduation rates, (4) recruit significantly more students from underrepresented
groups (5) personalize teaching and learning in both formal and informal
settings, and (6) work with community colleges and early college high schools in
the region to increase the number of transfer students and enhance their success
in college. The project is both innovative and revolutionary. The project will
design a non-course-centric curriculum, develop an innovative and inclusive
pedagogy, use free and open-source software to provide a compelling and
contextualized teaching and learning environment. Professional skills
development will be interspersed throughout the curriculum through team
projects, internship and co-op opportunities, undergraduate research and
entrepreneurship, and professional networking. The project will improve
retention and graduation rates by employing research-based approaches such as
providing motivating and inviting academic environment, proactive efforts in
student advising and degree planning, and fostering positive faculty-student
relationships. Participation of underrepresented groups will be significantly
increased through collaborative partnerships with community colleges and early
college high schools. Personalization of teaching and learning materials will be
achieved through structuring and development of materials through fine-granular
authoring and semantic markup. To overcome faculty resistance barriers, the
project employs a change model which is based on Appreciative Inquiry, which
reflects local context and constraints. The change model drives the research
questions we investigate in the project. It takes an unprecedented, bold, and
systemic approach to the professional formation of software engineers.