* 1730576
* IUSE/PFE:RED: Clemson University: Learning Teams and Innovation Ventures for Adaptable Training in Engineering (CULTIVATE)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2017,09/30/2023
* Jesus de la Garza, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,999,289.00

Academic departments are complex, knowledge-intensive social systems of
interacting and interdependent agents (e.g., students, faculty, and staff).
Complexity theorists describe such systems as social networks that are
continuously reconstructed as agents within the network interact and influence
one another. Complexity leadership theorists develop strategies for managing
such social systems to guide this dynamic and to improve the social network and
its agents. When effectively led, these social systems can create a shared
vision and collective impetus for action, producing new patterns of behavior or
new modes of operating. Guided by these principles, this NSF IUSE/PFE:RED
project aims to transform the academic culture of the Glenn Department of Civil
Engineering at Clemson University so that the faculty and students of the
program can better meet the changing societal needs of the 21st century. Few, if
any, studies have explored emergent behavior in complex, dynamic social networks
and the capacity of these networks to initiate and sustain change in
departmental cultures; informed research on the emergence of innovative ideas
toward change; evaluated the influence of social networks on innovative capacity
of individual members; or provided a useful case for academic departments
looking to make similar transformations. Therefore, this study has the potential
to make a significant contribution to the literature as it focuses on
understanding and communicating the underlying dynamics that explain why and how
change occurs in a social system, how continuous change can be sustained, and
how similar change strategies can be implemented elsewhere. Validated at
Clemson, this change framework is to be disseminated to other engineering
departments nationwide, including 60 ABET-accredited civil engineering
departments. Hence, the potential societal impacts of the project include a
cultural shift in civil engineering education across the nation to produce a new
breed of civil engineers capable of creating solutions for 21st-century problems
that are posing unprecedented threats to our society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
the aim of creating a low-cost, scalable, replicable academic change framework
informed by complexity leadership theory, this project undertakes three tactics.
Tactic 1 involves transforming our curriculum to create new faculty/student
interactions and interdependencies via heterogeneous teams to create an
environment ripe for the emergence of innovative ideas. This tactic aims to
create a curricular scaffold that weaves the coursework both vertically and
horizontally through carefully designed, socially-relevant, practically
meaningful problem statements with input from project stakeholders and oversight
from government partners. This tactic is envisioned to disrupt the status quo
and facilitate new forms of interaction among students, faculty, and
professionals. Tactic 2 involves transforming the departmental structure and
culture to promote innovation through a collective impetus for change resulting
from new faculty-faculty interactions and dependencies. The project team uses a
soft-wired organizational structure to create conditions conducive for the
emergence of complex, dynamic collaborations among faculty to enable innovation
and rapid adaptation. Rather than organizing around the solutions faculty can
offer, soft-wiring enables the faculty to organize around the societal problems
they can solve, leading to flexible, hybrid teaching formats. Tactic 3 involves
tactful utilization of discomfort and tension in Discomfort Zone gatherings to
create a shared vision for transformation among all engineering departments at
Clemson. The intellectual merit of this project focuses on creating an academic
culture of innovation and adaptability, which is a prerequisite for sustainable
change. The use of complexity leadership theory in an academic setting and the
collection of longitudinal data on the emergent outcomes it predicts fill an
important knowledge gap in the pertinent literature. This project is jointly
funded by the Division of Undergraduate Education; the Division of Engineering
Education and Centers, the Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing
Innovation; the Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems; and
the Division of Industrial Innovation and Partnerships; reflecting the alignment
of this project with the respective goals of the divisions and their programs.