* 1730275
* II-EN: IoT Event Emulation Environment (IoTE^3) based on Cyber-Physical Integration
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Douglas Jacobson, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 07/31/2022
* USD 498,077.00

The emerging Internet of Things (IoT) has tremendous potential to allow people
to communicate with and remotely control, monitor, and manage an unprecedented
multitude of physical devices and systems for applications like healthcare,
smart cities, manufacturing, transportation, etc. IoT devices will generate
large amounts of information-rich data, and the associated security risks are
far beyond what people have previously seen and experienced. Researchers need an
IoT research infrastructure that allows them to address the challenges
associated with the IoT. IoTE^3 (IoT Event Emulation Environment) is a new
research infrastructure proposed for this purpose. It will leverage an existing
research platform at Iowa State University (ISU) to support a variety of IoT
research, ranging from IoT Informatics to IoT-based Intelligent Physical Systems
to IoT Security Attacks and Prevention. It will be freely available to the
general public upon completion, so that experimenters can undertake hands-on
activities with IoT networking and cyber security. In addition, IoTE^3 will be
integrated with ISU's Cyber Defense Competition (CDC) platform, exposing
students and faculty to the security challenges specific to the IoT.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IoTE^3 will be built upon the existing ISEAGE (Internet
Scale Event and Attack Generation Environment), which creates a virtual Internet
for the purpose of researching, designing, and testing cyber defense mechanisms.
In the controlled ISEAGE environment, real-world events and attacks can be
tested against different configurations of the environment, unlike computer-
based simulations. Currently, ISEAGE is limited to emulation of events and
attacks on the traditional Internet. IoTE^3 is proposed to enhance and expand
ISEAGE for IoT research. IoTE^3 provides a unique emulation environment based on
the integration of physical and cyber environment that is scalable, flexible and
realistic. The physical environment will consist of physical networks of actual
IoT devices. Each of these physical IoT networks can host small-scale localized
experiments by itself. They also can be connected to the ISEAGE to host larger-
scale experiments. The cyber environment will consist of multiple high-end
servers (IoT emulators) to host a configurable number of virtual IoT networks.
Each virtual network can be configured as either a trace-based emulation to
replay IoT traffic captured from the physical environment, or a model-based
emulation to generate synthetic traffic based on models learned from the
captured IoT traffic. The cyber and physical environments will be connected and
interact with each other through ISEAGE.