* 1730309
* II-New: RICARDO:  Research Infrastructure for Circuit and Architecture Design with Emerging Technologies
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Malgorzata Marek-Sadowska, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Aggressive technology scaling into the deep sub-micron (DSM) regime has been
accompanied by a dramatic increase in transistor densities with shrinking
transistor feature size that approaches the physical limits, resulting in major
economic and technical challenges that are expected to hinder the continued
scaling of traditional Complimentary Metal-Oxide Semiconductor (CMOS)
technology. This has resulted in the trends of searching for alternative
emerging technologies that can continue the performance/power improvement for
computing systems. As the underlying emerging technologies continue to evolve,
it has become imperative for computer engineers to translate the potential of
such emerging devices into circuits and architecture designs. Such new circuits
and architecture designs will face multiple challenges ranging from the
modeling/abstraction and simulation of such emerging technologies, to the
complexity due to the sheer volume of nanodevices that will have to be
integrated for complex functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposing team is
exploring multiple emerging technologies (including three-dimensional
integration, emerging non-volatile memory, and nanophotonics) with a
comprehensive coverage of innovative work in the modeling, design analysis,
simulation, verification, testing, and evaluation of circuits and architectures
constructed out of emerging technologies, to overcome all the CMOS scaling
limits. Efficient design and use of future system architectures using emerging
technologies will be vital to the future of computing. The acquired equipment
and the chip prototyping will be used to train graduate students and
undergraduate students including those from under-represented groups advised by
the PIs (women and minority students) to gain expertise in the area of computer
architecture, Very Large-Scale Integration (VLSI), and device fabrication.
Teaching material and lab modules will be developed for several courses and made
available on the web for wider dissemination. Ongoing collaborations with
industry partners and national labs in current NSF-funded research will be used
for transfer of technology.