* 1730297
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Intergenerational Effects of Maternal Stress
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Johanna Jahnke, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2020
* USD 25,194.00

Research on the developmental origins of health and disease (DOHaD) has shown
that the prenatal environment can be associated with long-term risks for chronic
and metabolic disorders, including obesity, cardiovascular disease,
hypertension, and diabetes. This biocultural doctoral dissertation project
investigates how maternal stress during the perinatal period shapes the
development of the central stress response system in infants, in a population
undergoing rapid social and economic change. This work will contribute to our
understanding of the factors shaping fetal development from an evolutionary life
history perspective, and offer insights into the social and biological
underpinnings of the rising rates of metabolic diseases around the world. The
research findings may inform policy on maternal care during pregnancy. The
project will also support graduate student training and international
collaborations and research capacity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fetal origins
framework has shown that maternal psychosocial stress can modify fetal
development, programming a fetus's HPA axis with permanent consequences on a
variety of systems, leading to increased risk of metabolic disease. While
previous research has examined isolated mechanisms linking maternal stress to
infant HPA axis dysregulation, largely in wealthy, biomedical settings, the
proposed research investigates how multiple pathways work in tandem from the
second trimester through early infancy to shape HPA axis development in a
middle-income, ecological setting. Through twelve months of mixed methods data
collection, including semi-structured interviews, stress scales, and biomarker
testing, this project seeks to contribute to anthropology not only as an
important case study on maternal stress in a nation undergoing dramatic change,
but also as an investigation that will add a critical component to the
understanding of DOHaD as a larger phenomenon shaping health. Specifically, the
researchers will investigate: the role of prenatal maternal stress, the role of
placental 11ß-HSD2 expression, and the role of postnatal maternal stress in the
development of the infant HPA axis. The proposed work emphasizes the continuum
of early development from the prenatal into the postnatal period. In addition to
investigating maternal stress at multiple time points during pregnancy, the work
adds the examination of placental 11ß-HSD2 expression and of stress in the
postnatal period as integrated pathways through which the HPA axis can be
modified in offspring.