* 1730693
* IUSE/PFE: RED: REvolutionizing Diversity Of Engineering (REDO-E)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2017,09/30/2023
* Jeffrey Froyd, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,999,999.00

Numerous national reports assert improving diversity of students in key
engineering majors, such as aerospace, mechanical, electrical, and computer
engineering, are national priorities. While lack of diversity in aerospace
engineering has been acknowledged as a problem for over 20 years, past and
current initiatives have not achieved substantial progress. Through the
REvolutionizing Diversity Of Engineering project, the Department of Aerospace
Engineering at Texas A&amp;M University will dramatically improve the diversity,
inclusion, and quality of undergraduate students, graduate students, and faculty
members. The transformation will be achieved through three strategies: (a)
Increasing department activity and visibility of non-traditional applications of
fundamental aerospace engineering content, such as a shifting from an almost
exclusive focus on airplanes and spacecraft to emphasizing more modern
applications, including energy systems, the environment, healthcare, and quality
of life; (b) Supporting student success through widespread use of student-
engaged instructional strategies to address more diverse learners and learning
styles, faculty development programs to improve student-team dynamics and
student-instructor relationships, and self-paced, competency-based modules to
complement existing curricula for all undergraduate aerospace students; and (c)
Increasing diversity and excellence of departmental faculty through changes in
faculty hiring practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project applies the
literature on organizational change, faculty development, student engagement,
microaggressions, implicit bias, and student success to design and enact a
comprehensive departmental transformation. The project will (a) create and
annually update self-paced, competency-based online modules to remediate
barriers faced by aerospace engineering students with non-traditional
demographic characteristics, backgrounds, and learning styles; (b) include non-
traditional applications in the curriculum; (c) train faculty to use
instructional strategies to address and remediate microaggressions and implicit
biases and incorporate active learning pedagogical techniques in their
classrooms; and (d) improve breadth of recruitment and retention efforts to
support increased diversity and success of students. Addressing the issue of
diversity from multiple dimensions (including recruitment, curriculum redesign,
student-engaged instructional approaches, faculty development, and interventions
to improve faculty diversity) increases the likelihood that project goals will
be achieved. The REDO-E project has prepared extensive research and evaluation
plans to determine the extent to which these initiatives are achieving
transformation goals. Research initiatives will address each of the above goals
through four research questions: 1) How will incorporating non-traditional
applications of aerospace into the core curriculum affect diversity? 2) To what
extent will an intensive faculty development program affect diversity, classroom
climate, and department climate? 3) How will use of online, self-paced,
competency-based modules affect diversity? 4) To what extent do the proposed set
of interventions impact the diversity of an aerospace department over time? This
project aligns with college goals for improving diversity and college
administration support for groundbreaking project approaches. The department,
which is part of a university system that has nine engineering programs, will
further team with department heads from highly ranked peer institutions and
participate in a yearly forum of aerospace engineering department heads from
across the nation. These resources will be engaged to support discussions on
adaptability and scalability that can lead to larger impacts and revolutionize
engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
the Division of Undergraduate Education; the Division of Engineering Education
and Centers; the Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation; the
Division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems; and the Division of
Industrial Innovation and Partnerships; reflecting the alignment of this project
with the respective goals of the divisions and their programs.