* 1730307
* CI-New: Collaborative Research: An Infrastructure that Combines Eye Tracking into Integrated Development Environments to Study Software Development and Program Comprehension
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2017,04/30/2019
* Bonita Sharif, Youngstown State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 04/30/2019
* USD 245,196.00

The software engineering research community is now using eye trackers to study
how developers comprehend and develop software. Unfortunately, eye trackers have
limited features and functionality, which need to be augmented to effectively
study the behavior of software developers performing programming and contextual
tasks. Eye tracking devices only allow scientists to study fixed, limited-size,
stimuli (e.g., block of text or image). Studies normally require that the text
fit on one screen (or page). There is very limited or no support to allow such
things as scrolling through longer documents or switching back and forth between
documents on a computer. While this is sufficient to study how people read one
line of code or a sentence it is wholly inadequate to study how programmers
attempt to comprehend or develop a large software
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the research is to address this
limitation and drastically expand the types and size of stimuli that can be
studied using an eye tracking device. In addition to supporting source code
artifacts, it also supports artifacts such as stack overflow documents, bug
reports, testing documents, and requirements. This enables software engineering
researchers to conduct large-scale realistic eye-tracking studies seamlessly
within a software development environment. This eye-tracking-enabled
infrastructure for studying program comprehension has the potential to transform
the way lab studies and field studies are designed and executed as it advances
the state of the art in conducting eye tracking studies in software engineering.
The infrastructure directly impacts society by paving the way to further improve
IDEs to support the developer in various software engineering tasks through the
various research projects it facilitates. The immediate impact is to facilitate
controlled laboratory and field environments for a community of researchers. The
research may lead to software development tools that incorporate eye-tracking as
part of a more productive programming environment leading to higher quality
software.