* 1730650
* II-New: TurboRAN: Testbed for Ultra-Dense- Multi-Band Control and Data Plane Split Radio Access Networks of the Future
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Thordur Runolfsson, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,000,000.00

A key requirement from emerging next-generation (5G) cellular networks is that
they must be rapidly adaptable to a broad range of use cases. This problem calls
for a big shift in the way cellular radio access network architectures are
designed and operated. One way forward is to explore novel radio access
architectures such as Control and Data Plane Split Architecture (CDSA), and
equip them with next generation Pro-active Self-Organizing Network functions
(P-SON). Under this approach, small cells may operate on millimeter wave bands
and provide high data rates to users on demand. Overlaid macro-cells that
operate on sub-6 Gigahertz (GHz) frequency bands provide control functions to
support these users while providing lower data rates. To translate this approach
into pragmatic architectures and solutions, there is a need for a purpose-built
testbed, as most existing testbeds don't have the flexibility and end-to-end
programmability to investigate CDSA and P-SON. This project will develop
TurboRAN: Testbed for Ultra-Dense-Multi-Band Control and Data Plane Split Radio
Access Networks of the Future that aims to meet these needs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impacts of TurboRAN include: 1) Enabling experimental
research on P-SON, CDSA, and its variants, among various other system-level
aspects of 5G wireless systems and beyond, with reproducible results; 2)
Validating theoretical- and simulation-based systems research conducted by the
wireless community; 3) Providing open access to cellular system control and user
planes in a multi-tier cellular network; 4) Training a generation of wireless
engineers leveraging innovative and experimental teaching; 5) Testing novel
approaches and protocols for developing prototypes and shortening the research
cycle towards rapid commercialization trajectory; 6) Developing joint academic-
industry programs for conducting research aimed at rapid production uptake and
promoting standards and thus acting as an innovation gateway. The proposed
project is led by the team at The University of Oklahoma in conjunction with a
number of domestic and international academic and industry partners interested
in facilitating experimental investigation on future cellular
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TurboRAN will comprise three layers of cells,
supporting operation in sub-6GHz bands as well as in millimeter wave bands, with
conventional heterogeneous as well as C-RAN implementation. It will support
MIMO, mobile access points and diversity of user devices. In addition to end-to-
end programmability and flexibility for modelling a variety of futuristic
heterogeneous cellular system scenarios, another unique feature of the TurboRAN
project will be the integrated big data processing capability to explore the
potential of untapped cellular control and user plane data for designing a
proactive next-generation self-organizing network.