* 1730140
* II-NEW: Scalable Software Defined Radio Network Testbed for Hybrid Measurement and Emulation
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Kapil Dandekar, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 07/31/2022
* USD 949,999.00

Recent advancements in wireless network protocols offer opportunities in new
research areas including algorithm design, spectrum optimization, throughput
maximization, and wireless security. Each time wireless technologies evolve,
additional testing and certification steps are required, and, in most cases,
several rounds of such verification are needed. These steps are crucial to
ensure the final product is indeed ready for public use. Wireless protocol and
algorithm developers leverage highly-customizable software defined radio (SDR)
nodes to create and improve their design. Although SDRs offer an ideal
environment for testing using point-to-point wireless links, they incur an
increased overhead to the user for when a large-scale network measurements
involving multiple radios are required. At present, there does not exist, a
remotely accessible testbed that would allow users to customize SDR applications
and test their radios with controllable radio propagation (emulated, simulated,
and over-the-air) channels. The testbed resulting from this project will achieve
this goal, and in doing so, establish Drexel University as a leader in
cybersecurity and telecommunication systems research. Upon completion of the
project, the equipment will be locally and remotely shared with faculty, staff,
and students in the research community for educational
purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The testbed will consist of Ettus USRP SDR nodes
(i.e. N210, X310) connected to an RFNest 16-port Wireless Channel Emulator from
Intelligent Automation, Inc., which offers capabilities of providing highly
controlled wireless environments for repeatable experiments. A hardware
infrastructure will be developed to distribute radio frequency and timing
cabling as well as to install these nodes on a ceiling scaffolding grid
structure in Drexel's new laboratory space. A software infrastructure will be
developed to allow for researchers to utilize the testbed for customized
experiments involving emulated, simulated, and over-the-air wireless channels,
where this unique combination of features have never been offered before. This
infrastructure will require custom application programming interfaces (for
interfacing with the SDRs, RFNest, host computers, and switches) and remote
access interfaces (web GUI, ssh) to allow users to upload their custom hardware
and software designs. By leveraging existing software platforms, the project
will offer sophisticated experiment setup, measurement and data management tools
as well as emulated network options. To add to the unique features of the
testbed, Drexel's software defined communications (SDC) testbed, which offers
on-the-fly scalability, will be ported to X310s and made available as a part of
the project.