* 1730526
* RCN-UBE: Biodiversity Literacy in Undergraduate Education - Data Initiative (BLUE Data Network)
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Anna Monfils, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,941.00

Rapid advances in data research and technology are transforming science
methodologies. The volume and variety of data being generated, the increased
accessibility of data for aggregation, the improved discoverability of data, and
the increasingly collaborative and interdisciplinary nature of scientific
research are driving the need for new skill sets to address scientific issues of
critical national and global importance. The biodiversity sciences have
experienced a rapid mobilization of data that has increased capacity to
investigate large-scale issues of critical importance in the 21st century (e.g.,
climate change and its impacts, zoonotic disease transmission, sustainable
resource management, impacts of invasive species, and biodiversity loss). The
volume, complexity, and variability in biodiversity data requires sophisticated
data skills to ensure accurate and reproducible science. The RCN-UBE
Biodiversity Literacy in Undergraduate Education - Data Initiative (BLUE Data)
will bring together communities of biodiversity, data, and education specialists
to identify core biodiversity data competencies for undergraduates, develop
strategies for integrating these competencies into the introductory biology
curriculum, and build capacity for sustained development and implementation of
biodiversity and data literacy education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BLUE Data
Network has four goals: 1) Cultivate a diverse and inclusive network of
biodiversity researchers, data scientists, and biology educators focused on
undergraduate data-centric biodiversity education, 2) Build community consensus
on core biodiversity data literacy competencies, 3) Develop strategies and
exemplar materials to guide the integration of biodiversity data literacy
competencies into introductory undergraduate biology curricula, and 4) Extend
the network to engage a broader community of undergraduate educators in
biodiversity data literacy efforts. Beginning with targeted community assessment
(e.g., focus groups, surveys, needs assessment), and followed by dedicated
workshops and symposia, thematic working groups, sessions at society
conferences, and online virtual networking, BLUE Data brings together an
interdisciplinary community to translate emerging tools and resources for
biodiversity data access and analysis to the core undergraduate biology
curriculum. BLUE Data will work as a community to develop competencies,
materials, and strategies to infuse biodiversity data into the curriculum and
facilitate broad-scale adoption of transferrable data literacy competencies that
can improve undergraduate biology training to meet increasing workforce demands
in both data and biodiversity sciences. A more data literate workforce will
result in a broader data-enabled community of researchers, educators and
engineers prepared to address emerging issues, ask data-intensive questions, and
promote data driven innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being
jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO), Division of
Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources
(EHR), Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to address
the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A
Call to Action (http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/). This project is also
co-funded by the Division of Environmental Biology (DEB) in the BIO directorate.