* 1730233
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Investigation of Change and Continuity in Household Consumption in the Hinterlands of Early Nineteenth-Century Hawaii
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Jennifer Kahn, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2018
* USD 27,586.00

Summer Moore will investigate the effects of colonial expansion and, in
particular, the market economy on Hawaiian households in the daily lives of
indigenous families living in remote regions. Researchers have long studied the
processes by which culture contact in colonial settings drives social and
cultural shifts at the micro-scale, or household, level. It has often been
assumed that social change stemming from colonial interaction, such as adopting
new forms of household economic organization, spreads uniformly through
indigenous societies. In recent years, scholars have placed increasing emphasis
on understanding how individuals and social groups shaped their participation in
large-scale social and economic trends initiated by high-status elites in unique
and independent ways. This research focuses specifically on colonial-era
Hawai'i, examining how groups in isolated areas of the island chain chose to
accept, reject, or modify newly introduced household practices based on local
needs and concerns. Investigating small-scale, local responses to "top-down"
social forces will provide a better understanding of processes of social change
in both ancient societies and in the present. Hawaiian and Hawai'i-based
students will take part in all phases of work, offering crucial training
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate archaeology students in both
excavation and laboratory techniques. Such instruction will help increase the
representation of Hawaiian archaeologists working in Hawai'i, an under-
represented minority group in the field. William &amp; Mary students will assist
with the laboratory analysis phase, which will also provide an important
opportunity for applied training in archaeological research techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will explore how inhabitants of remote,
outlying regions under nominal colonial control responded to large-scale social
transformations, as well as how these responses may have shifted through time.
Using a theoretical framework highlighting the self-determination of local
communities, this research focuses on three communities on the N창 Pali Coast of
Kaua'i Island, Hawai'i, a remote region located far from Hawai'i's political
centers. The N창 Pali Coast is separated from the rest of the island by high
cliffs that restrict overland access to the region. Lying in an isolated region
at the margins of the newly emerging Hawaiian Kingdom, these sites provide a
unique case study to explore responses to nineteenth-century colonialism. This
project uses multiple lines of evidence, including household archaeology and
information from historical documents, to compare consumption practices on
Kaua'i Island's remote N창 Pali Coast to patterns seen in more central parts of
the archipelago. If early nineteenth-century N창 Pali Coast households did pursue
distinctive economic strategies, it will be compelling evidence that nineteenth-
century social and cultural transformations were not progressive and inevitable,
as now understood, but instead subject to local negotiation and contestation.
This research has implications for understanding local responses not only to
European colonialism in the modern era but also to large-scale patterns of
social change in historical contexts world-wide.