* 1730096
* II-New: Laboratory for Studying Next Generation Computer-Mediated Teamwork
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Geraldine Gay, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 05/31/2020
* USD 225,010.00

The goal of this project is to provide Cornell researchers with equipment that
tracks people's physiological responses, eye gaze and body movements as they use
communication and collaboration tools. This equipment can help researchers
better understand how the use of these tools affects people's stress levels and
task performance and will lead to the design of future tools that help people
work more effectively. The proposed infrastructure will enhance education at
Cornell and other locations. Cornell professors will be able to integrate the
equipment into their classes to create novel and engaging learning experiences,
and students will be able to use the equipment to explore their own ideas in
class projects. The infrastructure will also be used as part of outreach
activities aimed at increasing diversity in STEM disciplines, including two
programs for junior and senior high school girls. The results of studies using
this equipment will help businesses and organizations make informed decisions
about what communication and collaboration tools will best support their
mission. The results will also lead to new tools that individuals can use to
manage their own stress levels and maximize their
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a laboratory for
research on next generation computer-mediated and computer-enhanced teamwork and
group interaction that will allow investigators to capture complex relationships
among technology, individual cognitive and affective states, and team dynamics.
The infrastructure will support a broad range of forward-looking research
activities by Cornell faculty and students working in areas such as human
computer interaction, computer-mediated communication, computer-supported
cooperative work, virtual and augmented reality, social computing, and human-
robot interaction. The infrastructure will support both the fine-grained
measurement of human responses (e.g., heart rate, eye gaze, body movement) and
the development and evaluation of new social computing tools that draw on these
fine grained measures, such as 'just in time' interventions. It will allow
investigators to ask new research questions that can only be answered by
capturing complex interrelationships among technology, individual cognitive and
affective states, and team dynamics. Investigators will also be able to design
and test new types of computational tools that draw on the psychophysiological,
gaze and body position data provided by the infrastructure.