* 1730390
* CyberTraining: DSE: Cyber Carpentry:  Data Life-Cycle Training using the Datanet Federation Consortium Platform
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2021
* Hao Xu, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 10/31/2021
* USD 499,641.00

The emergence of massive data collections has ushered a paradigm shift in the
way scientific research is conducted and new knowledge is discovered. This shift
necessitates students to be trained in team-based, interdisciplinary, complex
data-oriented approaches designed to translate scientific data into new
solutions in order to promote the progress of science; to advance the national
health, prosperity and welfare, and to secure the national defense. The
proliferation of cyberinfrastructure (CI) tools necessitate addressing the needs
of domain scientists from multiple angles, including data access, metadata
management, large-scale analytics and workflows, data and application discovery
and sharing, and data preservation. Training with such a holistic perspective is
indeed daunting with a tool and solution landscape that is still fragmented.
Integrated solutions, such as the Datanet Federation Consortium (DFC) Platform,
provide a way to ease this overload and help touch upon all of these needed
functionalities. The aim of this project is to make it easier for next
generation workforce in STEM disciplines to learn all aspects of data-intensive
computing environment and, more importantly, to work together with other
researchers with complementary expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students in STEM
disciplines need to be educated in (i) practices of data organization, (ii)
importance of provenance, metadata and ontology, (iii) conformance to
authentication, authorization and access control protocols, (iv) models for data
sharing, discovery and curation, (v) necessity for reproducible data science
workflows, (vi) practices in dealing with large-scale data computation using
super computers and cloud computing, and (vii) distributed data management
practices. The Datanet Federation Consortium (DFC) is an NSF-funded project that
has implemented a data-centered cyber platform that has integrated tools for
end-to-end data life-cycle management and data-intensive high performance
computation. This project aims to use the DFC Platform to provide training for
STEM graduate students in leading-edge data-intensive practices, in all aspects
of data-intensive computing environments. Their training workshops will be
multi-disciplinary, including earth system sciences, biological sciences, social
and information sciences, marine sciences and engineering. The short term goal
of the project is to provide intensive, short duration training discipline-
centric workshops, called Cyber Carpentries. These workshops will lead to
Certificates in Data Science, preparing a better scientific workforce with
advanced data-intensive CI capabilities. For the long-term, project plans to
develop self-paced tutorials and a sequence of courses that can be adapted in
different STEM disciplines with concentration in data life-cycle management and
data-intensive computing. The practicums will involve large datasets from
multiple science data repositories including several NSF-funded large-scale
cyberinfrastructure such as iRODS, CyVerse, DataONE, SEAD, TerraPop, DataVerse
and HydroShare - all of which are integrated through the DFC Platform. Project
will recruit students from HBCUs and MSIs for its workshops and will work
closely with faculty from these universities to help them adopt the courses
developed through this project. All material developed as part of the project
will be made available as open course material.