* 1730273
* RCN-UBE: Course-based Undergraduate Research Network 2
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Erin Dolan, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2023
* USD 599,908.00

National calls to improve undergraduate biology education have advocated for
widespread engagement of students in research. Undergraduate researchers report
gains in their ability to think and work like scientists and increased interest
in and enjoyment of science. They are also more likely to pursue further
education and careers in science and research, which drive the nation's progress
and economic prosperity. Yet, research experiences are typically structured as
internships, which limits the number of students who can participate. In
response, colleges and universities have begun to transform their laboratory
courses into scalable research experiences, called Course-based Undergraduate
Research Experiences (CUREs). Students who participate in CUREs achieve many of
the same gains as students who participate in research internships, but there
are colleges and universities that have yet to integrate CUREs into their
undergraduate curricula - especially colleges and universities that enroll
significant proportions of students from under-represented and under-served
backgrounds. The CURE Network 2 (CUREnet 2) will take a multi-pronged approach
to build capacity for CUREs at Historically Black Colleges &amp; Universities
(HBCUs) and other under-resourced colleges and universities. As a result,
broader and more diverse populations of students will have access to research
experiences. CUREnet 2 will also support networking and collaboration to
understand what makes CUREs effective for student learning and development and
to maximize the effectiveness, impact, and long-term sustainability of CURE
instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CUREnet 2 aims to support the national shift
in undergraduate lab instruction toward student engagement in research. CUREnet
2 is designed in response to educational needs and according to theories of
change in higher education, thereby maximizing its likelihood of impact and
success. With leadership representing seven universities and colleges, including
four HBCUs, CUREnet 2 will build national capacity for CURE instruction by: (1)
Offering campus-based faculty professional development on CURE instruction; (2)
Supporting the development of cross-institution CUREs and acquisition of
resources needed to support undergraduate research; (3) Convening meetings to
synthesize research in education, cognitive science, psychology, and learning
sciences to understand how CUREs influence student learning and development and
to plan collaborations to develop needed assessment frameworks, methods, and
tools; (4) Convening meetings to identify problems and solutions for sustaining
CUREs over time; (5) Improving the functionality, sustainability, and widespread
use of the CUREnet website; and (6) Sharing information and resources among
CURE-related networks. Ultimately, CUREnet 2 will help ensure the availability
and effectiveness of research opportunities for a broad and diverse population
of undergraduates early enough to make a difference in their academic and career
trajectories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action (http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/). This
project is also co-funded by the Division of Human Resources Development (HBCU-
UP) in the EHR directorate.