* 1730396
* CRI: II-New: An Infrastructure of Display Devices to Study Visual Analytics Beyond the Desktop
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Claudio Silva, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2021
* USD 273,552.00

Visual Analytics studies how to help people make sense of complex data by
providing interactive visual interfaces for data analysis and presentation. By
making data visible and interactive, visual analytics enables scientists and
researchers to detect patterns, formulate novel hypotheses and derive new
insights on relevant scientific, social, and economic issues. Existing methods
and technologies however focus exclusively on standard desktop interfaces and,
as such, do not take advantage of the remarkable opportunities non-traditional
display devices such as large screen displays, touch tables, and stereoscopic
displays, can bring. In this project the research team explores these
opportunities by developing methods for collaborative visual data analysis;
real-time data monitoring in mission-critical settings; and immersive virtual
navigation of "data spaces".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research the PI carries
out includes: (1) user studies to understand how people solve data analysis
problems in collaborative, data monitoring and immersive settings; (2)
development of novel interaction techniques and applications for touch and 3D
interfaces; (3) advanced evaluation methods that take advantage of rich user
experience sensors such as EEG and eye-tracking devices. Research in these three
directions will expand the horizon of visual analytics and increase our
knowledge of how it can help people extract useful and actionable knowledge out
of complex and large data sets.