* 1730066
* Collaborative Research: Unraveling the Limits of Computation in Structural and Infrastructure Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2016,03/31/2018
* Javier Rojo, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 03/31/2018
* USD 88,002.00

This project identifies structural and infrastructure engineering (SIE) metrics
and explores analytical and simulation methods that quantify these metrics. SIE
metrics studied in this research include: reliability, robustness, redundancy,
resilience, risk, sustainability, and life-cycle cost. Given that these metrics
have different semantic perspectives their quantification has not been explored
using computational and algorithmic thinking while this research does so. The
research also studies the computational limits for each metric and takes
advantage of the opportunities for exact and approximate formulations.
Computable metrics inform the practice of designing, building, maintenance, and
restoration of SIE systems. In addition, the research involves a diverse pool of
students for which computational algorithms will be a mechanism for the design
of SIE systems.

A taxonomy of metrics for SIE applications is explored, while demonstrating via
mathematical proofs the membership of these metrics to a computational
complexity hierarchy. Proofs are mainly achieved via reducible chains in
polynomial time, special subroutines such as oracles, while combinatorial
arguments reveal which metrics to pursue using diverse strategies, either
exactly or approximately. For instance, the research explores recursive
formulations for metrics at the bottom of the hierarchy, and additional proofs
are pursued to determine why practical constraints, such as correlations in
reliability, break the structure of the problem into exponential time
algorithms. The project explores symmetries, periodicities, and other features
that support probabilistic algorithms with tolerances and confidence levels that
are acceptable for large SIE problem instances.