* 1730479
* Speech Across Dialects of English (SPADE): large-scale digital analysis of a spoken language across space and time
* SBE,SMA
* 03/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Erik Thomas, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2022
* USD 199,791.00

This project focuses on new and fast ways to analyze speech across dialects--
here, dialects of English, but the process can eventually be used for any
language. The researchers take methods from computer science and put them to
work with tools and methods from speech science, linguistics and digital
humanities to find out objectively how much the sounds of English dialects
across the Atlantic vary now and in the past. Scholars across the humanities and
social sciences already routinely analyze huge amounts of written English
quickly and easily. In fact, the electronic tools for searching texts and,
within seconds, obtaining summaries that one can see are available to anyone.
However, speech research is only now entering its own "big data" revolution.
Past linguistic research tended to carry out detailed analyses of a few aspects
of speech from one or a few languages or dialects. The current scale of speech
research studies has shaped our understanding of spoken language and the kinds
of questions that we ask. Today, massive digital collections of transcribed
speech are available from many languages, gathered for numerous purposes: from
oral histories to large datasets for training speech recognition systems to
legal and political interactions. Sophisticated speech processing tools exist to
analyze these data, but they require substantial technical skill. Combining
these data and tools allows linguists to answer fundamental questions about the
nature and development of spoken language. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative project seeks to establish the key tools to enable large-scale
speech research to become as powerful and pervasive as large-scale text mining.
This ability to quickly and easily analyze speech in many English dialects
should be applicable in computational, forensic, and clinical approaches to
speech, and forensic and clinical speech applications, and useful to literary
scholars, sociologists, anthropologists, historians, political scientists. What
is learned from this project will be shared with the public through an
interactive sound mapping website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was made as
part of Round 4 of the Digging Into Data Challenge, an international funding
opportunity designed to foster research collaboration across countries and to
encourage innovative approaches to analyzing large data sets in the social
sciences and humanities. The U.S based researchers will collaborate with
scholars in Canada and the U.K. to achieve the goals of this project.