* 1730130
* RCN-UBE: CC Bio INSITES: Community College Biology Instructor Network to Support Inquiry into Teaching and Education Scholarship
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Linnea Fletcher, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2023
* USD 523,020.00

Biology education research (BER), where biology faculty investigate teaching and
learning within their own discipline, is considered a vital tool for
transforming undergraduate biology education and enhancing student success.
However, even though approximately half of biology majors complete coursework at
community colleges (CCs), including disproportionate numbers of under-served
students, only 3% of recent BER papers included a CC author or CC study context.
This raises concerns that existing BER may have failed to characterize the
educational experiences of half of the relevant undergraduate population and
that innovations stemming from BER might not be reaching CCs. This project is a
grassroots effort driven by a strong nationwide group of CC faculty to promote,
conduct, and publish CC BER. The network will mobilize diverse stakeholders from
CC settings including students, faculty and administrators to journal editors
and national society leaders to enhance the representation of CCs in BER.
Grounded in the unique values and cultures of CCs, it will provide opportunities
for intellectual support, infrastructure support, and social support to mitigate
previously hypothesized constraints on CC BER and empower CC faculty to engage
in and publish BER. The project will thus address the paucity of BER from CC
contexts and contribute insights that can improve life science instruction for
students from underserved groups across all institutional contexts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project is to address
research questions about the types of social, infrastructure and intellectual
support CC BER. These networks will build on established models of change,
provide answers to research questions regarding hypothesized constraints to CC
BER, and integrate with existing networks. At the core of this national effort
will be 20 geographically dispersed, regional CC BER networks. These regional
networks, consisting of approximately five individuals representing CC faculty,
administrators, students, future CC faculty, and CC BER advocates, will meet
regularly and make substantial progress on one or more collaborative CC BER
projects. The national network effort will provide intellectual resources in the
form of faculty development experiences in BER at an opening national meeting,
ongoing mentorship for regional networks, and travel to national BER
conferences. Additionally, the network will provide critical resources often
absent at CCs, such as access to an Institutional Review Board and journal
articles. The project will culminate with presentations by regional teams at a
national BER meeting and preparation of manuscripts related to regional efforts.
As a result, the new CC BER network will make substantial, novel contributions
to the present body of knowledge regarding CC biology teaching and learning and
will provide insights into how networks can support innovation at CCs and in
education research broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly
funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological
Infrastructure and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division
of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges
posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/).