* 1730083
* II-New: 60 GHz Millimeter-Wave Testbed for Multi-Gigabit Wireless Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Robert Simon, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2022
* USD 843,718.00

The next generation of wireless networks must meet the ever-increasing mobile
traffic demand due to the rapid growth of mobile and wearable devices and newly
emerging applications such as virtual/augmented reality and ultra high-
definition video streaming. Today's wireless networks such as legacy WiFi
networks operating at 2.4/5 Gigahertz (GHz) spectrum fall short in providing
multiple gigabit per second data rates on wireless links. In recent years, the
use of millimeter-wave spectrum (especially the unlicensed 60 GHz spectrum) has
been shown to achieve 7 gigabits per second per-link data rates. In spite of the
potential, there are many outstanding challenges in terms of reliability,
mobility, interference and coverage that need to be addressed to enable
enterprise-grade millimeter-wave networks. The main objective of this project is
to design a millimeter-wave networking and sensing testbed using reconfigurable
60 GHz software radios. The testbed will be a state-of-the-art infrastructure
that will foster research, education and development of the next generation
high-speed wireless networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the electronic
beamforming capabilities, integrated phased antenna array, multi-Field-
Programmable Gate Array processing functionality and development of the Physical
and Medium Access Control layer modules, the multi-link testbed will enable
detailed measurements and characterization of coverage, mobility and
interference in 60 GHz Wireless Local Area Networks. The insights gained from
the study will be used to devise intelligent network deployment strategies that
can provide reliable coverage in the presence of indoor mobility and
unpredictable link outages. Innovative multi-level codebook design and low-
complexity Direction of Arrival (DoA)-based channel estimation techniques will
be developed for agile and energy-efficient beamforming. Interference-aware
multiple access protocols based on Angular Division Multiple Access (ADMA) will
be investigated where users from different angles are separated in the angular
domain through beamforming and users from the same angular cluster may access
the channel simultaneously via orthogonal coding. Additionally, outage
mitigation techniques based on Coordinated Multi-Point (CoMP) and cross-
technology coordination will be studied to guarantee reliable connectivity in
the presence of blockage and mobility. The millimeter-wave testbed will be used
to design low-cost, highly-accurate radio frequency sensing techniques for
healthcare and activity sensing in assisted living facilities, ubiquitous remote
interaction in smart spaces, and accessible computing applications including
automatic sign language recognition for the deaf and hard of hearing users.
Solutions further enhancing the networking and sensing performance through
network mobility will be explored and evaluated.