* 1730503
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Dynamic crisis communication, rumor combating and decision making analysis of misinformed social media users during disasters
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Bairong Wang, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2018
* USD 0.00

Social media users significantly impact what information is spreading and how
fast it spreads during a crisis such as a hospital fire or a flood. Rumors
spread on social media have posed great risks to crisis response activities by
spreading inaccurate information on social media. The spreading of rumors can
worsen situation awareness and contribute to bad decisions. Regarding rumors,
social media can exacerbate problems by the ease of information sharing by only
clicking buttons; on the other hand, the rumors can also be debunked more
quickly. Better knowledge of the rumor responding behaviors of social media
users would be essential for a better rumor control on social media during
crises. This research investigates responding behaviors of social media users
during crises. The research team identified four crises for which data are
available of what happened on social media. From these data the team explores
how the rumors were debunked. Besides the data from different social media
platforms, the research also includes in-depth interviews to ascertain variables
that influence responses to rumors and to rumor-debunking efforts. Then the team
develops and validates a decision-making model to understand the decision-making
processes of misinformed social media users. This research provides novel
insights into a better rumor management during crises.