* 1730063
* Bargaining and Network Formation: Equilibrium Medical Provider Networks in Health Care Markets
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Robin Lee, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 261,105.00

This project combines economic theory and statistical methods to analyze the
strategic interactions between health insurance firms and medical providers in
the commercial U.S. health care market. The primary goal is to further our
understanding of how rate negotiations between insurers and providers (hospital
systems and physician groups) -- responsible for a substantial portion of the $1
trillion of spending in the private health care sector -- affect consumer
welfare, utilization, and access to high-quality and cost-effective care. The
analysis leverages detailed medical claims and enrollment data to estimate and
quantify the effects of selective contracting, or "narrow network" offerings, by
insurers, and of provider and insurer consolidation. The empirical findings and
applied frameworks from this research will help inform the evaluation of network
adequacy regulation, competition policy, and health marketplace design;
furthermore, it will assist final payers for health care services --
particularly self-insured employers and government agencies -- in designing
welfare-enhancing and cost-reducing plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
examines the formation of medical provider networks and determination of
reimbursement rates in three projects. The first project develops a theoretical
model of selective contracting and bargaining with exclusion; it then pairs the
model with estimated parameters from prior work to evaluate the impact of
insurance network regulation by simulating equilibrium networks, premiums, and
reimbursement rates under different policies. The second project applies a
dynamic model of network formation and bargaining among insurers and hospital
systems to examine the price effects of hospital consolidation. The model used
in this part differs from the first in that it considers competition among
several insurers when forming networks, and admits for contracting frictions and
dynamic considerations. It also departs from prior work on hospital mergers by
explicitly accounting for potential network and rate adjustments. Finally, the
third project studies the historic introduction of a narrow physician network
plan by a large HMO provider in California, and examines both supply-side
(including changes in physician capitation rates) and demand-side (consumer
enrollment, utilization) responses.