* 1730414
* CI-SUSTAIN: Stan for the Long Run
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Andrew Gelman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 07/31/2020
* USD 983,932.00

Stan is a software package that transforms scientific discovery by allowing
scientists to quickly and easily explore, evaluate, and refine rich scientific
hypotheses tailored to their particular research question and data collection
mechanism. For computational reasons, analyses of data (big or otherwise) have
tended to be simple and focused more on the difficulties of manipulating the
data than on realistic scientific models. The next generation of Bayesian
inference can take scientists beyond this impasse, via sophisticated models that
can adjust for differences between sample and population, and between treatment
and control groups, to join the benefits of large datasets with the rigor and
power of statistical adjustment. Stan further helps educate the next generation
of data scientists, with a natural, easy-to-learn and portable modeling
language, coupled with robust, practical inference tools. The specific goal of
this project is to solidify the Stan code base to enable application,
maintenance, and development of the Stan software. Stan is being applied in many
corners of the physical, biological, and social sciences, hundreds of at scales
ranging from the neutrinos to supernovas, from cellular biology to population
ecology, and from human reaction times to social network evolution. In this
project the PI aims to document and ruggedize the core infrastructure of Stan to
enable it to be used by a wider audience of scientists, to be maintained by a
wider group of software developers, and to be extensible to allow for the future
development of new scientific applications and statistical
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, this project is devoted to
thoroughly documenting for users and developers, testing at the unit,
integration, and functional levels, and inevitably refactoring the application
programming interfaces (API) of Stan's components. These components include (1)
an automatically differentiable mathematics, statistics, and matrix algebra
library, (2) an imperative probabilistic programming language for expressing
statistical data/parameter structures and scientific/measurement models, (3)
core inference algorithms for providing exact and approximate full Bayesian
parameter estimation and predictive inference, (4) a service layer of high-level
commands, I/O callbacks, and interrupts, and (5) interfaces integrating Stan's
probability modeling, analysis and visualization capabilities into existing data
science workflows in languages including R, Python, Julia, Stata, MATLAB,
Mathematica and the command-line for cloud and cluster computing. The main goal
of the refactoring is to achieve enough modularity in system components and
documentation that developers will be able to concentrate on a single component,
such as a new function, algorithm, or visualization, as well as to allow Stan to
be used as a research tool for algorithm development. These goals complement the
goals of documenting the language and interfaces in order to promote rigorous
statistical methodology and reproducible computational workflows for applied
scientists.