* 1730628
* Secure, Real-Time Decisions on Live Data
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Raluca Popa, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 02/29/2024
* USD 9,999,999.00

A new era is rising in which AI systems will play an increasingly central role
in people's lives. These systems will revolutionize healthcare through early
identification of patients at risk, cell-level diagnosis and treatment using
nanoprobes, and robotic surgery. They will reduce traffic congestion and help
eliminate fatalities by powering autonomous vehicles and unmanned drones. And,
they will make businesses safer by detecting and defending in real-time against
financial fraud and internet attacks. More generally, these systems will
transform how people sense and interact with the surrounding world making it
more adaptive and responsive to our needs. In order to fulfill this vision, a
new generation of AI systems is needed to power mission-critical applications
where human safety and well-being are at stake, and can work in adversarial
environments that change continually and unexpectedly. Besides being
intelligent, these decision systems need to address four challenges. First, they
must react in real-time (i.e., making decisions in seconds or even milliseconds)
to support applications such as robotic surgery and self-driving cars. Second,
AI systems need to learn continually on live data streams as their environments
evolve chaotically. Third, these systems need to be secure, i.e., ensure
privacy, data confidentiality, and decision integrity. Finally, as these systems
make decisions on behalf of humans, their decisions need to be explainable to
someone with limited understanding of AI. For example, if an AI system diagnoses
a patient with a rare disease or deems a certain test unwarranted, the system
should provide an explanation in terms of the patient's history and that of the
larger population, and not point to the AI algorithm's internal computations.
The goal of this Expedition project is to build AI decision systems to address
these challenges by developing open source platforms, tools, and algorithms for
Real-time, Intelligent, Secure, and Explainable (RISE) decisions. Achieving this
goal requires a holistic approach that combines AI, security, systems, and
hardware research. For example, to successfully deploy a fleet of delivery
robots in a crowded city requires not only advances in AI (e.g., the ability to
perceive and safely navigate complex urban environments), but also advances in
systems (e.g., new hybrid edge-cloud systems able to coordinate vehicles in
real-time), security (e.g., ensure the information collected by robots' sensors
does not compromise customer's privacy), and computer architecture (e.g.,
hardware and software co-design to reduce power consumption and improve
security). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The RISE project aims to empower a large
community of pioneers to build innovative applications and solutions based on
the tools and ideas it will create, and broaden research participation, allowing
students and researchers across many disciplines to contribute and build on its
artifacts. Building and fostering a community around a common open platform for
AI systems will enable the next decade of innovation centered around widespread,
intelligent, and trustworthy computing. The key technical contribution is in the
areas at the interface of systems, hardware, and security, which would enable
real-time AI. In the Systems domain, there are two key ideas: 1) the design of
micro-kernel to fundamentally transform the time scale at which decisions using
deep models are made; and, 2) incorporating the ability to replay the state and
the decision history of the system. In the security and hardware domain,
investigators are designing general purpose systems capable of running on a
variety of hardware and cloud platform with an added key feature of tunable
security that provides a trade-off between security and performance. In the AI
domain, the major contributions of the project are in developing real-time
systems and hardware supports that would assign tasks suitably to back-end and
edge for fast accurate decision making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.