* 1730653
* CyberTraining: CDL: Cyber Infrastructure Training and Mentoring (CI-TraM)
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Satyajayant Misra, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 07/31/2021
* USD 467,170.00

The Cyber Infrastructure Training and Mentoring (CI-TraM) project serves the
national interest by developing and increasing the cyberinfrastructure (CI)
literacy of undergraduates who are interested in STEM careers. It does this
through technical training and career mentoring focused around building
knowledge in CI. CI-TraM provides direct mentoring of new undergraduates by
active STEM researchers and IT professionals. The training will be provided by a
diverse group of researchers in CI-intensive domains and CI professionals.
Topics will include network and data security, high performance computing,
computer architecture, and data analytics tools to provide the background to
explore computing in a) cybersecurity, b) patterns discovery in biological data,
c) computational physics, d) neuroscience, e) game design and human-computer
interaction, etc. This will help address the challenge of creating a future STEM
workforce that has the technical and professional skills needed to promote the
progress of science; to advance the national health, prosperity and welfare; or
to secure the national defense. The CI-TraM program, developed in a Hispanic
Serving Institution (NMSU), cultivates untapped talent within a growing, yet
underrepresented, population in STEM careers. The model used for community
engagement and student recruitment addresses the transitions between secondary
education, post-secondary education, and individual career planning and
management.  The CI-TraM model will be designed to become institutionalized with
the ability to be replicated in other communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
goals of the CI-TraM program are: 1) To develop a program that exposed and
retains students in CI-STEM fields while teaching them valuable technical and
life skills needed for successfully pursing, attaining, and maintaining careers,
and 2) To develop a program that is sustainable and scalable to other
institutions so that other student populations may benefit from the program. The
program utilizes common job site internship procedures in area high schools that
provide dual/concurrent college credit. The CI-TraM program will create a cohort
of students interns each academic semester and summer (50/yr) that have
demonstrated interest/ability in STEM career pathways. To achieve Goal 1,
technical training and career planning modules developed and taught by working
STEM researchers and IT professionals will be completed by each student intern.
At the start and finish of the program a general assessment of a student's
knowledge will be performed, and each module would have a tangible deliverable
to evaluate student understanding and progress throughout the program. The
program itself will be assessed by a longitudinal follow up that will track
students into their futures. Assessment results will be used by the program
coordinators in a continual improvement process. To achieve Goal 2, the modules
will be generated using a standard Learning Management System allowing them to
be transferable to other universities. External consultant-created rubrics will
be used to evaluate the modules and their efficacy as well as the efficacy of
the modules together as the body of the CI-TraM program and available for others
to use.