* 1730126
* CI-P: Physical robotic manipulation test facility
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,11/30/2019
* Cindy Grimm, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 11/30/2019
* USD 115,699.00

The robotics community has a rich history of research and development in
teaching and training robots to pick up and manipulate objects. However, it has
proven to be very difficult to transition this research from structured
laboratory settings to real world settings, such as homes, small-scale
industrial settings, and search and rescue domains. The development of large-
scale, standardized testing and benchmarking of robotic manipulation approaches
is necessary to move robotic manipulation from the research lab to the real
world. Placing the burden of conducting these tests on every individual robotics
researcher is inefficient, at best. Cleaning the captured data to make it
available to other researchers requires additional work for the producers of the
data - and even more work on potential users. All of this impedes progress for
the community as a whole, and makes it difficult to bring to bear recent
developments in deep learning. This project addresses this problem by setting
the groundwork for a dedicated physical robotic grasping and manipulation
testbed infrastructure that can be remotely accessed and operated by anyone
doing research in this area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This testbed will provide
several critical components that the robotics grasping and manipulation
community needs: (i) "Test suites" that enable repeated testing and controlled
manipulation of several variables that have confounded robotic grasping and
manipulation research. Variables include object and gripper material properties,
compliance, force/torque of physical interaction, mass of manipulator elements
and the objects, surface texture, low-level control algorithms, and higher-level
planning techniques. (ii) Extensive instrumentation to capture (nearly) all
aspects of the physical interaction, such as the forces, kinematics of movement,
and three-dimensional geometry. (iii) A modular and customizable human-robot
interface for enabling robotic physical interaction. Users will be able to
directly control the robot using low-level interfaces, such as the knobs that
control the movements of individual joints, or use higher-level interfaces that
encapsulate robot-object interactions, such as close the fingers until they
contact the object. (iv) Data collection, where the data will be made publicly
available in a standardized form. The focus of this planning activity is to
develop the necessary technological elements to prove the feasibility of such a
test facility (automated object return in a fully instrumented space, a fully
instrumented "door" to evaluate opening and closing doors) and to evaluate the
community's needs in this area.