* 1730519
* CyberTraining: CIP: NCSA Internship Program for CI Professionals
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Volodymyr Kindratenko, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 499,999.00

This project is NCSA's pilot internship program for cyberinfrastructure (CI)
professionals, designed to address the shortage of a workforce with the
specialized skills needed to support advanced CI operations. The program both
provides internship opportunities for individuals who want to gain first-hand
experience in the CI operations of a supercomputing center, and develops and
refines instructional materials to serve as templates that are openly
distributed for use by other centers and institutions to train CI professionals
for scalability. Program interns work directly with a group of engineers in one
of the areas of CI focus to gain hands-on experience in the deployment and
operation of cutting-edge high-performance computing (HPC) infrastructure at a
leading HPC center. Graduates of this internship program will enter a workforce
that will develop, deploy, manage and support advanced CI at other universities,
centers, and industry to meet the needs of the national computational science
research community. By doing so, the project serves the national interest by
promoting the progress of science and advancing the nationalÂ prosperity and
welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Managing modern CI that supports scientific
research is a challenging task which requires deep and broad knowledge and
experience to plan, acquire, deploy, and operate complex HPC resources. This
project plans to help prepare the next generation of system engineers and
administrators knowledgeable about computer architecture, storage technology,
interconnect, operating system, cluster software stack, user management, job
management, resources monitoring, networking, and security, as well as best
practices in the field. The goals for this internship program include expanding
the talent pool by attracting and supporting professional development of
minority and underrepresented groups in the field of CI, providing motivated
individuals the opportunity to obtain real-world CI operational experience
through a short, full-time program in an area already supported by NSF for its
programmatic needs, and developing training materials and identifying best
practices that will be contributed back to the community to be used stand-alone
or in combination with an internship program to train next-generation CI
professionals.