* 1730695
* CyberTraining: CIP: CiSE-ProS: Cyberinfrastructure Security Education for Professionals and Students
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2017,06/30/2024
* Donald McMullen, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 531,616.00

The rapidly changing nature of the cybersecurity landscape underscores the need
for trained professionals who are prepared to efficiently identify and mitigate
new threats. The Cyberinfrastructure Security and Education for Professionals
and Students (CiSE-ProS) program adopts well-established teaching and learning
practices to provide in-person and online training avenues for practitioners to
develop core competencies in secure computing relevant to advanced
cyberinfrastructure. CiSE-ProS works with an international consortium of
professionals in research computing, academia and workforce training to define a
common standard for certification. Evidence-generating learning activities are
designed around concepts utilized in cybersecurity. These activities include
hands-on exercises with computing clusters in both laboratory settings and
virtual reality environments. Scoring schemes developed by CiSE-ProS help
evaluate a participant?s effectiveness at achieving the desired learning
outcomes. Overall, CiSE-ProS aims to have a significant impact on cybersecurity
preparedness and as stated by NSF's mission, it will help promote the progress
of science and advance the national security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CiSE-ProS
project will be implemented through continuing education programs, and as a new
cybersecurity minor along a cyberinfrastructure track at Texas A&amp;M
University. At its core, the project increases awareness of cybersecurity issues
in research computing and actively prepares participants from a variety of
backgrounds for productive cybersecurity careers. Learning modules, virtual
laboratories, and the cybersecurity minor developed by CiSE-ProS can be adapted
by other institutions to support various learning levels. The project will
leverage an academic-industry partnership to train more than 400 undergraduate
students in STEM+C, through a combination of workshops, e-learning and community
engagement activities. The training program will implement a wide range of
activities including a community workshop, a series of hackathons, a set of
workshops aimed at delivering core technical competencies in cybersecurity,
online learning modules, and integration of those curriculum as part of a
cybersecurity minor program at TAMU. The training program will develop core
competency in a number of areas including system and data security/privacy, how
to set up secure computing and data directories, secure networking, secure
remote access, auditing maintenance for secure data, intrusion testing, and
secure cloud-based computing environments. By engaging stakeholders during the
development process, project intends to increase the likelihood of widespread
adoption of CiSE-ProS materials by academic and professional communities.