* 1730570
* CI-New: Collaborative Research: Developing an Open Networked Airborne Computing Platform
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Shengli Fu, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 08/31/2022
* USD 242,316.00

Networked airborne computing is a novel computing paradigm that can benefit many
important civilian applications, including intelligent transportation, emergency
response, infrastructure monitoring, precision agriculture, etc. Networked
airborne computing also opens up many new fundamental research opportunities.
Despite its importance, existing infrastructures for Unmanned Airborne Systems
(UAS) research cannot serve the research needs because they are often designed
specifically for a single purpose and/or oriented to missions that involve a
single aircraft. Therefore, an open networked airborne computing infrastructure
is critically needed to enable the Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE) communities and beyond to participate in new research and
development in this burgeoning field. This project is expected to produce broad
impact related to cooperative multi-UAS applications in emergency, energy,
environment, and transportation sectors. This project also provides Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics learning opportunities, and expands
underrepresented minority participation. Three of the participating universities
are minority-serving and/or Hispanic serving institutions with a large number of
underrepresented minority students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
project is to develop a new community infrastructure to enable advanced research
on networked airborne computing systems. Specifically, the proposed community
infrastructure will provide hardware/software designs and development tools,
workshop and training opportunities, and field-test support in a Federal
Aviation Administration-designated test site. The proposed airborne computing
platform is innovative in that it includes a UAS-mounted generic and interactive
computing system, a broadband wireless communication system, a UAS/antenna
cooperative control system, and up-to-down application development capabilities
to support a full-scale development. Both hardware and software are open-sourced
and designed in modules with virtualization support so that CISE researchers can
easily enhance or replace modules and instantiate additional virtualized
functions to facilitate various research and development activities for
networked airborne computing applications and services. The modular design,
flexibility and extensibility for new development allow researchers to easily
isolate and develop specific components of their own research focus while
relying on the basic functionality of other components, thus saving significant
cost and time for learning and development. The project opens up opportunities
for CISE researchers to quickly develop and test solutions that address many new
fundamental challenges in networked airborne computing, and to significantly
advance cross-cutting research and development in computing, communication,
control, and aerospace.