* 1730289
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The processing of NPI licensing and intrusion
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2021
* John Bailyn, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 01/31/2021
* USD 14,250.00

Language comprehension relies on brain mechanisms which decode incoming signals
into meaningful messages in fractions of a second. This involves (i) encoding of
the incoming signal, (ii) access/retrieval of information stored in long term
memory linking words to both meanings and syntactic function, (iii) temporary
maintenance of complex representations of structured phrases, clauses, and
sentences, and (iv) a mapping these syntactically structured objects to
meanings. How our brains realize this uniquely human capacity, however, is still
poorly understood. The present project uses high temporal resolution
experimental techniques--including measurements of eye-movements and
electrophysiological recordings (EEG) during reading--in order to study in
detail the nature and time-course of the various sub-systems involved in
extracting sentence-level meaning in real time. A further important feature of
this investigation is the focus on cross-linguistic universals and variation by
studying how these mechanisms work when processing a well-studied language like
English compared to a less well-studied language like Turkish.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific focus of this work is on the processing of
cross-linguistically common expressions known as negative polarity items (NPIs).
These include English words like "any" or "ever". Study of these elements in
linguistics is important as they expose the way language relates to logical
aspects of semantics. NPIs impose demands on the sentences that contain them:
they must co-occur with "licensors" like negation (e.g., compare the deviant
"Everyone ate *anything" to the well-formed "Nobody ate anything"). Further,
NPIs must bear a structural relationship with their licensors in order to be
well-formed; it is not enough for a licensor to be merely present (e.g., compare
"The man that nobody knows ate *anything" versus "Nobody that the man knows ate
anything"). Of central interest to the present project is the fact that these
types of dependencies appear to be subject to so-called "intrusion effects"
where, in the dynamics of incremental processing, parsing mechanisms appear to
sometimes be tricked by the input, resulting in a situation where structurally
ineligible licensor/NPI relationships are temporarily processed as if they were
licit. This is a species of "grammaticality illusion", where an ungrammatical
structure is temporarily judged as well-formed. Such cases have been of interest
to language processing researchers, similar to work on illusions in
understanding visual cognition, since they appear to reveal important details of
how comprehension systems work by understanding cases where they fail or can be
"tricked". Competing accounts have been offered in the psycholinguistics
literature to explain these intrusion effects with NPIs: (i) cue based retrieval
takes intrusion to be a special case of retrieval and dependency resolution
error arising from mechanisms posited to underlie a wide variety of types of
linguistic dependency processing, and (ii) erroneous pragmatic licensing, which
posits that the mechanisms underlying intrusion are specific to NPIs. The
present project examines these issues with a special focus on Turkish.
Crucially, in Turkish, unlike English/German, NPIs precede their licensors (they
realize a prospective/predictive dependency). This work thus systematically
examines intrusive NPI licensing cross-linguistically to probe the nature of
universals and variation in language processing.