* 1730611
* Attention Influences Emotional Judgment and Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Leaf Van Boven, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 09/30/2022
* USD 400,200.00

Most research in judgment and decision making examines the influence of emotion
on attention. This project examines the converse: how does attention influence
emotion and what are the implications for perceptions of risks such as social
threats, environmental hazards, and terrorism? Understanding how attention
intensifies emotion and risk perception is fundamental to effective
communications by governments, nonprofits, and other organizations. For example,
public health campaigns seek to raise awareness of health risks regarding
smoking. Environmental campaigns seek to raise awareness of climate change.
Public safety campaigns seek to raise awareness of terrorism threats associated
with international travel. To be effective, these communication efforts must
take into account how attention influences emotion and risk perception. This
research will provide such understanding. The results will also help explain why
some major threats fail to arouse alarm, whereas other relatively minor concerns
such as commercial airline travel can be unduly alarming. This work will also
support scientific training of a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will test the hypotheses that
attention intensifies emotion, and that attention consequently increases risk
perceptions associated with environmental hazards, terrorism, and social
threats. The underlying idea is that attention intensifies emotion because
attention increases the vividness of attended objects. The project will use
three procedures to experimentally manipulate attention. In one study series,
participants will repeatedly search for target images in a series of
sequentially presented images. This procedure mimics searching for objects, as
in security screening, medical scans, and grocery stores. In a second study
series, participants in a multi-tasking experiment repeatedly orient attention
to images located at the periphery of their visual field. Attention is oriented
toward some images more frequently than others, without a designated target.
This procedure mimics looking at pop-up advertisements that appear on screen or
selectively attending to headlines on a news website. In a third procedure,
participants monitor letters presented on one side of a computer screen while
two images are presented: one attended image just below the letters, and one
unattended image on the opposite side of the screen. This procedure orients
attention as an incidental byproduct of monitoring letters. Preliminary results
using all three procedures suggest that people judge attended images as more
emotionally intense and vivid - but not more (or less) liked compared with
unattended images. A fourth series of studies uses the three procedures to
examine whether attention increases perceived risks of environmental hazards,
terrorist activities, and social threats.