* 1730262
* IUSE/PFE:RED: Transforming for inclusion: fostering belonging and uniqueness in engineering education and practice
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2024
* Susan Margulies, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 06/30/2024
* USD 2,394,872.00

Engineers are increasingly called upon to solve society's most complex problems,
working in teams to find elegant solutions that meet multiple constraints.
Research shows that diverse teams produce superior solutions to complex problems
than do homogeneous teams. Unfortunately, the engineering workforce lacks
diversity. More importantly, most of today's professional engineers are not
trained to interact effectively with diverse individuals so that they are fully
included and integrated in the problem-solving process. For this reason, it is
critical that we equip today's engineering students with the inclusive
strategies needed to fully realize the positive impact provided by high-
functioning diverse and inclusive teams. We call this positive impact the
inclusion dividend. The purpose of this project is to transform the curriculum
of the Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering at Georgia Tech
and Emory University to one that intentionally trains its students to become
engineers who are capable of realizing the inclusion dividend. This project will
serve as a case study for how to change the culture and curriculum of a high
research activity engineering department, and help diversify the image of the
"ideal engineer" so that interested students do not feel they must fit a
specific mold to be successful or included. It is expected that these changes in
how engineering is perceived will help diversify the nation's engineering
student body and workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's goal is to
revolutionize engineering education to create engineers who are capable of
realizing the inclusion dividend. To achieve this vision the department will 1)
establish diverse pedagogical incubator teams of students, faculty, industry
engineers, and learning scientists to develop novel inclusive classroom
practices, 2) iteratively hatch, implement and evaluate classroom activities and
strategies that help students and faculty recognize the inclusion dividend and
translate that recognition into inclusive interactive strategies, and 3)
transform the departmental culture such that the inclusion dividend is embraced
and enacted through interactions and practices evidenced one-on-one, in teams,
in the classroom, and in department policies and procedures. This project will
use two frameworks to guide its efforts: optimal distinctiveness theory and
human social systems theory. Optimal distinctiveness theory helps explain why
people need to both belong and be unique. Diversity efforts promote
distinctiveness but often fail in achieving, for the minority member, a sense of
belonging. Or alternatively, a minority member might feel they belong but only
at the cost of assimilating to the group norms and giving up their uniqueness.
An environment is inclusive only when all participants experience both. This
feeling is achieved through inclusive interactional practices. Human social
systems theory helps us understand that humans interact on four distinct social
scales: in pairs, in small groups, in classrooms, and in larger communities such
as departments, each of which requires a specific set of interpersonal skills.
Cultures emerge from the constellation of social interactions that take place at
each of these scales. To achieve the vision of a diverse and inclusive
engineering workforce that is able to fully realize the inclusion dividend, this
project seeks to equip engineers with the knowledge and skills they need to
interact inclusively at all four social scales. This project will advance our
knowledge of how to develop these multi-scale interpersonal competencies within
engineering students. This project is jointly funded by the Division of
Undergraduate Education; the Division of Engineering Education and Centers; and
the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems;
reflecting the alignment of this project with the respective goals of the
divisions and their programs.