* 1730689
* CRI: II-NEW: MYSTIC: Programmable Systems Research Testbed to Explore a Stack-WIde Adaptive System fabriC
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Ioan Raicu, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,042,238.00

This project will build a testbed for experimenting with reconfigurable
communication and Input/Output subsystems to conduct low-level systems research.
This goal of this research is to remove network, memory and storage performance
bottlenecks by dynamically reconfiguring them to the needs of an application. As
the nature of computing applications change from compute-centric to data-
centric, communication of data comprises a large part of program execution. In
this testbed, the organization of memory, storage and their connectivity will
change dynamically to adapt to the workload to improve overall performance of
the executing programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will build a dynamically
configurable cluster called MYSTIC to study system re-configurability across the
entire computing stack, from the processor to memory, storage, and the network.
It will allow low-level experimentation and reconfiguration at the level of
networks-on-chip (NoC), universal memory, and the network interconnect with
multidimensional network topologies. Dynamically reconfiguring interconnects,
memory and storage will speed-up applications running on a heterogeneous
computing environment. Examples of target applications include dynamic multipath
routing for load-balancing, universal memory that deploys byte addressable Non-
Volatile Dual In-line Memory Module (NVDIMM) for persistent storage and Network-
on-Chip (NoC) abstractions for Operating Systems.