* 1730291
* CRI: II-New: Pebbles: A Modular, Composable Hardware and Software Platform for Pervasive Edge Sensing and Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Yuanyuan Yang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2023
* USD 822,419.00

Edge devices such as smartphones/tablets, Internet-of-Things and connected
vehicles will continue to proliferate in our environments. They possess sensing
and computing resources and are able to gather and process various data to
produce information and insights for novel applications in many domains, such as
smart vehicles/buildings/campuses/transportation. However, many such
applications require peripheral modules (especially sensors/radios) customizable
in both types and quantities, a capability gravely lacking in existing edge
devices. This project will design, create and evaluate a novel hardware and
software platform where heterogeneous peripheral modules and modularized
FPGA/software computation components can be easily composed electrically and
computationally like interlocking Lego pieces, to create various customized edge
sensing and computing devices required in these "smart"
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will develop Field-Programmable Gate
Array (FPGA)-based peripheral controllers to connect diverse sensors/radios, and
accelerators for common data/signal processing and security algorithms; an edge
tailored stream processing system that can compose reusable hardware/software
computation components to create applications; and pilot applications in smart
vehicles/buildings/campuses to test and validate the platform. The easy
customization in sensor/radio types and quantities, and flexible composability
in FPGA/software computation are urgently needed but unavailable from both
commodity or research prototypes. Researchers and educators in edge computing,
mobile sensing, connected vehicles and Internet-of-Things communities can all
benefit immensely from this platform, using it to create customized devices and
compose novel applications. Collaborations with industry partners are
established for both pilot studies and potential technology transfer.