* 1731612
* SHF:Small:Scalable Scheduling for Program Transformations in Heterogeneous Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Louis-Noel Pouchet, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2018
* USD 159,222.00

Optimizing compilers are asked to automatically achieve good performance over an
increasingly larger and heterogeneous set of architectures. Complex high-level
program transformations are required to address this problem, to map the proper
grain of independent computation and the proper data locality to a complex
hierarchy of memory, computing and interconnection resources. The polyhedral
compilation framework is one of the most powerful and flexible loop
transformation system, with numerous compelling results achieved in recent years
in terms of automatic program optimization (CPUs, GPUs and FPGAs). But a
difficult challenge remains the deployment of those research results to larger-
scale programs. Indeed, this framework uses complex mathematical algorithms that
are the reason for the better program performance achieved, but which are often
too time consuming for production use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to significantly improve the scalability and effectiveness of
polyhedral optimizations, through the design of exact optimization methods and
their associated approximation heuristics for increased scalability. We will
develop novel program transformation algorithms operating under hardware
resources constraints, for a variety of devices currently available on
heterogeneous computing systems: for multi-core CPUs using short-vector SIMD
units; for FPGAs with the help of high-level synthesis tool-chain; and for GPUs.
The proposed work has the potential to significantly enhance the effectiveness
of optimizing compilers thereby reducing the manual performance tuning required,
with significant cost savings. The developed tools will be made publicly and
freely available to the research community.