* 1731698
* SpecEES: Collaborative Research: CoSeC-RAN: Cognitive Secure Cloud RAN for Efficient Spectrum Sharing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Eylem Ekici, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2021
* USD 164,601.00

Next generation wireless networks will be characterized by larger volume, faster
information transfer, and diversity. Wireless industry has been altering
conventional license-based spectrum access policies through approaches utilizing
unlicensed spectrum. This leads to dynamic spectrum access (DSA), where
unlicensed use of a spectrum should avoid harm to licensed users, or should
ensure a fair share of spectrum with other unlicensed users. DSA places an
additional burden on business operations because revenue needs to be generated
over dynamically changing resources, while providing expected quality of service
to potential users. Yet, existing high-level approaches for spectrum sharing are
not well poised to solve the core problem. Instead, finer-scale spectrum sharing
in time, space, and spectrum dimensions is required. Furthermore, at such finer
scales, it is essential to consider human behaviors and integrate economics into
the tool-set of spectrum sharing. Finally, recent cyber-security concerns
necessitate that such a system should incorporate security and privacy in its
core. This project designs and develops advanced spectrum sharing techniques at
the nexus of spectrum, pricing, and privacy, for next-generation DSA solutions.
The project is conducted by an interdisciplinary team of experts in security,
operations management, decision science, wireless communication, networking, and
optimization. The fundamental results emerging from this research can enable
transformative cognitive radio network management and operation solutions. The
project supports multiple graduate students. Insights from the proposed
collaborative research project between Ohio State and University of Nebraska
Lincoln will educate both industry and academia across rural Nebraska and urban
Ohio regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project explores four main goals: (1)
Secure spectrum resource metering solutions with a Cognitive Secure Cloud Radio
Access Networks (CoSeC-RAN) architecture. Preserving the digital base-band data
within the network leads to more accurate resource assignment and pricing
decisions. (2) Advanced security and privacy-preserving solutions. The novel
CoSeC-RAN architecture enables new directions to provide security to and by the
network while preserving user privacy. (3) Dynamic pricing algorithms, where
prices are updated in real-time based on available capacity and customer load.
These pricing algorithms reflect non-stationary and stochastic nature of both
available capacity and demand. Customer- specific bandwidth requirements and
mechanisms for ensuring customer privacy are incorporated into algorithm design.
(4) Spectrum sensing methods with incomplete information. CoSeC-RAN estimates
primary signals at secondary user locations, with incomplete information from
the network, to ensure minimum interference. Developed solutions are rigorously
tested through large-scale simulations and experimentally in a city-wide
testbed.