* 1731909
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Dissecting the effect of encephalization on skull morphogenesis
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Joan Richtsmeier, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2019
* USD 31,418.00

Dramatic increases in cranial capacity have occurred in hominins. These shifts
in relative brain size are hypothesized to have caused (1) alterations to the
modern human skull and (2) delays or reductions in somatic growth that may
affect skull development. While prior studies have used fossil or comparative
primate data to understand the relationship between the brain and skull, this
project utilizes an experimental approach to link the process of encephalization
with specific changes in skull morphology. The results of this project will be
incorporated into multiple educational and outreach activities designed to
stimulate interest in younger students pursuing STEM fields and careers,
particularly young women, and foster awareness of the interdisciplinary
potential for biological anthropology. Through the Penn State Expanding Your
Horizons STEM Career Day for Women and the ScienceU Pre-Med Expo, the
researchers will help students understand the morphological changes that have
occurred in the human skull over time, including the specific impact of
encephalization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses the BAF170 murine model
with a known genetic variant that results in an enlarged brain phenotype. The
BAF170 gene is knocked-out only in cortical tissue resulting in an enlarged
cortex, such that any changes in the skull can only be attributed to the effect
of the larger cortex. Using high-resolution micro-computed tomography data of
prenatal and early postnatal skull development, this research will test whether
an increase in relative brain size affects somatic growth of the skull or causes
changes in cranial development or eventual morphology. Experiments are designed
to determine whether the change in brain size causes changes in: (1) the timing
of the appearance/formation of cranial ossification centers during embryological
development; (2) cranial bone quality, evaluated by quantifying bone volume and
bone density; or (3) morphology of the cranial base, cranial vault, or facial
skeleton that can be compared with similar changes seen through time in
hominins. These experiments will test the spatial packing hypothesis and the
expensive brain hypothesis, by examining the relationship between brain size and
cranial base angle and between changes in brain size and somatic ontogenetic
trajectories. The resulting data will provide experimental evidence pertaining
to the relationship between encephalization in hominins and changes in skull
morphology and growth producing the unique human skull phenotype.