* 1731824
* SpecEES: Chip-Scale Millimeter-Wave Spectrum / Signal Analyzer Using Spin-Wave Diffraction and Interference
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Wolfgang Porod, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 698,000.00

The dramatic growth in wideband cellular networks, the proliferation of public
and private WiFi access points, and the impending demand of machine-to-machine
(M2M) and Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices put a premium on the efficient use of
the available electromagnetic spectrum. Current regulation regarding usage of
the electromagnetic spectrum follows a static licensed allocation model.
However, it is widely recognized that this model is no longer able to meet the
rapidly growing demands for spectrum access. Dynamic spectrum access and
cognitive radios have been proposed as solutions to the problem, but their
ultimate success is predicated upon the existence of high-quality spectrum
occupancy data. This project proposes a bold new concept for dynamic spectrum
data analysis, which will significantly improve the efficiency of radio spectrum
utilization while at the same time providing improved energy efficiency.
Specifically, this concept is based on a fundamentally new way of processing
millimeter-wave and microwave information using spin waves in magnetic thin
films. Such new technology will make possible the replacement of today's bulky
passive electromagnetic systems by a chip-scale, low-power device. If
successful, the devices proposed in this project will become a new class of
millimeter-wave and microwave components, performing many functions that today
are only achievable with transistor-based circuits. Students will be educated
and trained in this new technology. Graduate students will be exposed to avenues
for commercialization through University of Notre Dame's Innovation Park and the
Engineering Science and Technology Entrepreneurship Excellence Masters (ESTEEM)
Program that partners science, engineering, and business students with research
faculty toward the goal of commercializing locally-generated fundamental
research. Local high-school teachers will participate through an NSF Research
Experiences for Teachers (RET) program, which will also include faculty from the
local Ivy Tech Community College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal presents a
micromagnetics-based real-time spectrum sensor that is low-cost, high-
performance, and chip-scale. The combination of these features means this sensor
can be deployed on individual devices in a network or IoT devices to provide the
high spatial resolution necessary to realize spatial dynamic spectrum access and
to provide the speed and resolution necessary to realize temporal dynamic
spectrum access. In the proposed scheme, millimeter-wave and microwave signals
are converted to spin-waves and processed by spin-wave interference, and then
the intensity distribution of the interference patterns is converted back to the
electrical domain. In particular, a spin-wave-based frequency spectrum and
signal analyzer device is proposed that can perform high-resolution, real-time,
wideband spectral analysis on millimeter-wave and microwave signals and provide
an on-chip, low-power compact replacement for bulky and expensive spectrum
analyzer instruments, which contain a large assembly of discrete microwave
components (filters, sweep-oscillators, etc.). The benefits of this scheme,
which combine small size, low power, and high speed, derive from the low-power
and short-wavelength characteristics of spin waves. As such, our approach
provides a potential solution to a particularly challenging task in modern
electronics, namely to realize devices that are both fast and low-power. In
conventional CMOS-based electronics, power consumption increases quickly with
increasing computing speed (clock rate), which makes it very challenging (maybe
impossible) to simultaneously achieve low power and high speed (several tens of
gigahertz) operation in electrical devices. Our proposed spin-wave-based devices
may provide a solution to this fundamental problem.