* 1731784
* Water in the Lithosphere: The Fidelity of Mantle Xenoliths
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Terry Plank, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 08/31/2021
* USD 232,497.00

The tectonic plates, formed from the outer rigid shell of Earth (termed
lithosphere), have a long term strength and evolution that depends on the amount
of water contained in mantle minerals. Water inserts itself into mineral
defects, in places where Mg or Si are missing from the lattice, and in so doing,
weakens the mineral structure. The primary way the water content of the mantle
lithosphere is known is through study of xenoliths, pieces of the mantle that
get accidently entrained in ascending magma and erupted out volcanoes. Recent
research, however, has shown that water can sometimes be gained or lost from
minerals at magmatic temperatures (&gt;1000°C) in a matter of minutes. If this
is true, then the fidelity of mantle xenoliths is questioned. Xenoliths would
not necessarily preserve the concentrations they had in the mantle (&gt; 40 km
depth), but be reset to the concentration in the magma that conveyed them to the
surface. Additionally, water may be lost during degassing, eruption and cooling
in lava flows. If this is true, then most of the existing measurements of water
in mantle xenoliths would have to be reinterpreted, and many notions about the
strength of the lithosphere reconsidered. This projects aims to determine the
fidelity of the water record in mantle xenoliths by intensive study of xenoliths
in their context ? their size and the water content of their host
magma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes three different approaches. 1)
Study of xenolith-host magma pairs. Most xenoliths studies are carried out in
the absence of data on the H2O content of the host magma and thus without
constraints on the boundary conditions for H2O exchange. The simple test is
whether xenolith minerals and host magma phenocrysts and melt inclusions reflect
H2O equilibration. Pilot data on xenolith clinopyroxene and host magma melt
inclusions are consistent with H2O equilibration. 2) Study of diffusive
lengthscale relationships as a function of grain size, position within the
xenolith, and xenolith size. If there is diffusive exchange, then small grains
should reflect greater equilibration than large ones. Large xenolith clasts will
cool more slowly post-eruption, and may reflect greater extents of dehydration.
3) Study of site-specific zonation patterns in xenolithic olivines and
pyroxenes. H is associated with several point defects in both olivine and
pyroxene, as identified by specific infrared (IR) absorption bands, and some may
diffuse slowly enough to survive hours of transport in hot magma, while others
will record degassing and H2O-loss. We will address each of these tests with an
IR study of olivines and pyroxenes in variably-sized peridotite xenoliths
erupted in alkali basalt cinder cones from the western US (Cima and Grand Canyon
volcanic fields). Most of the project budget is in support of a Columbia Ph.D.
student (Henry Towbin) already engaged in preliminary analyses. An undergraduate
will also be supported to carry out field work, and complete a summer internship
and senior thesis.