* 1731237
* SpecEES: Collaborative Research: Energy Efficient Dynamic Spectrum Access in Uncoordinated Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Biao Chen, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2021
* USD 353,700.00

With its focus on energy efficient dynamic spectrum access where the users are
treated as equals and there is minimal coordination across the users, this
project addresses challenges for enabling next-generation wireless
communications and networking in a dynamic spectrum environment. The results
from the project should greatly enhance access to broadband wireless services in
traditionally under-serviced communities. The spectrum-sensing and spectrum-
sharing techniques developed should prove to be equally applicable in a slew of
applications involving energy-constrained ad hoc networks such as those
encountered in disaster relief operations and in a variety of applications
relevant to national security. The involvement of undergraduate students in this
project, especially in software radio experiment, is expected to foster their
long-term interest in Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM)-related
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is focused on both spectral
efficiency and energy efficiency for a class of dynamic spectrum access
applications that have been much less well studied: an uncoordinated wide-band
system where the users are treated as equals, i.e., there is no
primary/secondary distinction. The project will develop the spectrum management
framework as well as enabling technologies for such applications, ranging from
multi-channel spectrum sensing using quickest change detection to novel spectrum
access schemes for spectral/energy efficient and fair spectrum usage in the
absence of user coordination. Experimental studies are an integral part of the
proposed research, and the project leverages existing software radio
capabilities developed at Syracuse University. This study of spectrum access
with equally privileged users without coordination also fills an important gap
in dynamic spectrum access. Given the generality of the models considered, this
research can be expected to make fundamental contributions to the theories of
quickest change detection and random access.