* 1731142
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Form and function of the primate cervical spine
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* William Kimbel, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2019
* USD 29,950.00

The goal of this research is to understand the relationship between the shape of
the neck bones (cervical vertebrae) and how they function in humans and our
living relatives. The co-PI will address this question by comparing the shape of
the bones to both the movement of the spine during walking and its maximum
ranges of motion in living lemurs and apes. The relationships between spinal
form and function established in this study have implications for both
anthropological and medical fields. Spine research often uses non-human primates
as models for spinal injury and treatment without understanding the functional
differences that may exist between humans and their living relatives. This
research will have implications for the appropriateness of non-human primates in
spinal medical research. In addition, this lab-based study is a first step
towards conducting field research. As primate habitats become increasingly
fragmented due to human influence, the ways in which primate change their
locomotor habits to accommodate this fragmentation has implications for their
survival. This research will also act as the cornerstone of the co-PI's career
as a female scientist. As such, it will provide the opportunity for her to
mentor undergraduate students and offers research training that is vital for her
future career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The neck is an understudied, yet
significant, anatomical region. It is especially important in primates because
it maintains postural stability during the diverse forms of locomotion practice
by the primate order. Stability is especially important in the head because it
houses the eyes and inner ears, which allow animals to efficiently navigate
complex environments. Within our hominin lineage, drastic changes have occurred
in both the shape and size of the head as well as our manner of walking. These
changes likely affected how the neck balanced the head in our fossil ancestors.
The relationship between neck form and neck function will be addressed by
collecting two measures of form: radiographs of maximum ranges of head and neck
motion and range of head and neck motion during locomotion. These measures of
form will be statistically compared to specific measures of vertebral form taken
from 3D scans of skeletal specimens. The statistical relationships will then be
used to understand the function of fossil species based on the preserved form.
This work will further the understanding of neck function, its relationships to
vertebral form, and its evolution within the hominin lineage.