* 1731143
* Student Travel Support for the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) Symposium on Software Defined Networking Research (SOSR) 2017 Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Anduo Wang, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 02/28/2018
* USD 15,000.00

The Symposium on SDN Research (SOSR) is a major forum for presentations and
discussions of novel networking technologies that will shape the future of SDN.
This year SOSR is once again co-located with the Open Networking Summit (ONS)
and with attendees from each event having access to selected sessions in the
other event. The Symposium will enable interaction among the academic and
industrial attendees of these two events focused on research and development of
SDN. This proposal requests funding to assist ten United States-based students
to attend this conference. SOSR emphasizes interactions between networking
researchers and industry practitioners at an international level, and attending
SOSR presents an excellent opportunity for U.S. students to connect with the
thriving international research community. New in this year, SOSR 2017 will
include a demos and posters session, allowing students to present and obtain
feedback on their work-in-progress. The support requested in this proposal will
enable students to attend the main conference, the demos and posters sessions at
SOSR 2017. These students would otherwise be unable to attend the conference.

Intellectual Merit: This award provides travel support for US-based students to
attend SOSR 2017 and the associated sessions. This program will expose students
to new ideas and allow them to interact with other researchers. In particular,
through exposure to a premier technical meeting in software-defined networking,
co-located with the Open Networking Summit (ONS) and with attendees from one
event having access to selected sessions in the other event. Students will have
the opportunity to observe high-quality presentations and interact with senior
researchers in the field, both in the main conference, the demos and posters,
and the ONS sessions.

Broader Impact: This project integrates research and education of students
through exposure to a premier technical meeting in computer networks and
communications. Students will have the opportunity to observe high-quality
presentations and interact with senior researchers in the field, both in the
main conference and the associated sessions, and their inclusion will have a
positive impact on the quality of their research. Women and other minorities
will be especially encouraged to participate and are given selection priority.
The SOSR conference has developed into a top-tier international conference,
presenting a tremendous opportunity to students to expand their breadth of
ideas, research skills, and technical perspective. This conference will prepare
students to take their place as the backbone of the next generation of computer
networks and communications researchers.