* 1731554
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Faunal dental microwear texture for fine-scale reconstruction of hominin paleoenvironments
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2018
* Jenny Burgman, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2018
* USD 19,477.00

Many significant hominin and archaeological sites represent complex, mosaic
paleoenvironments that require high spatial resolution to be properly
characterized. This study presents a new approach to fine-scale environmental
reconstruction at these sites using tooth microwear in rodents, which have small
home ranges and are found in abundance in different habitats. The project will
collect data on rodent dental microwear, and will combine microwear analysis
with ongoing and independent rodent ecological research. These analyses will
result in a detailed association of microwear texture patterns with diet and
environmental data that will help us better reconstruct paleohabitats using
fossil rodent teeth. This award provides research support to a female graduate
student from an EPSCoR state. It also provides research opportunities for
undergraduates and fosters international collaboration between the University of
Arkansas and the National Museum of South Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
on rodent dental microwear textures has been limited because of a lack of
information about habitat or diet for specific individuals in a study sample.
This project will attempt to address this problem by associating incisor and
molar microwear texture patterns with stomach contents of those same
individuals, as well as their documented habitat floral composition and
atmospheric dust load. The project focuses on three core questions: (1) Will
individual differences in diet be reflected in differences in molar microwear
textures? (2) What effect does habitat openness and associated dust level have
on incisor microwear? and (3) Do incisor and molar microwear patterns reflect
the floral composition and dust loads of rodent microhabitats? The co-PI will
study rodents from an on-going environmental assessment project at the Kolomela
Mine in the Central Free State of South Africa to answer these questions. She
will obtain information on the dust levels and floral composition at each rodent
capture site. Diet details will be derived through stomach content analysis of
each specimen. These data will then be associated with standard quantitative
descriptors that result from incisor and molar dental microwear texture
analysis.