* 1731928
* SpecEES: Collaborative Research: Enabling Spectrum and Energy-Efficient Dynamic Spectrum Access Wireless Networks using Neuromorphic Computing
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2017,01/31/2018
* Yang Yi, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 01/31/2018
* USD 478,812.00

During the last two decades, the use of Radio Frequency (RF) spectrum has
increased tremendously due to the ever growing demand for wireless connectivity.
The existing network technologies that support the current wireless data demand
are expected to increase their capacity significantly in the next decade,
calling for spectrum and energy efficient communication strategies. There are
two popular approaches to efficiently utilize the RF spectrum: One is the
cognitive radio networks which allow mobile users to share the spectrum that has
been primarily allocated to other services such as television broadcasting,
global position system (GPS), radar, weather forecasting, etc., provided that
the mobile users impose limited interference to existing services. Another
approach is to enhance the mobile broadband networks via expanded bandwidth,
massive Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (MIMO) systems, and densified
heterogeneous networks (HetNets). However, both approaches have limitations and
have different impacts on spectrum efficiency and energy efficiency. In
addition, current hardware platforms exhibit formidable challenges in supporting
high computational complexity and low power consumption. This project introduces
a novel network architecture and its application-specific hardware optimization
using neuromorphic computing devices. The new wireless network architecture
allows mobile users to perform spatio-temporal spectrum sensing and actively
search for dynamic spectrum access (DSA) opportunities to enable short-range and
local communications. Meanwhile, neuromorphic computing devices that mimic bio-
neurological processes will be designed to tackle the high computational
complexity of the new dynamic spectrum access approach with extremely low power
consumption. In this way, we will be able to enable our nation's next-generation
wireless communications and networking that are intelligent, spectrum-efficient,
and energy-efficient in a dynamic spectrum environment. The developed concepts
and technologies will also help achieve National Broadband Plan which targets at
significant improvements in the efficiency of RF spectrum utilization. The
project has an extensive education and outreach plan which includes designing
new course components on energy-efficient communications, analog neuron
circuits, and computational intelligence for wireless networks, joint training
of graduate and undergraduate researchers between the two collaborative
institutions, and outreach to telecommunication industry and underrepresented
students through seminars and diversity programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Short-
range and local communications are extremely beneficial for spectrum and energy
efficiency. The research objective of the project is to 1) design DSA-enabled
HetNets to enable short-range/local spectrum access to improve the spectrum and
energy efficiency, and 2) leverage neuromorphic computing architecture to
efficiently solve the associated resource allocation problems with extremely
high energy efficiency. To achieve the goal, the project is organized into four
interconnected research thrusts. Thrust 1 focuses on spatio-temporal spectrum
sensing with MIMO transceivers. Thrust 2 investigates cooperative communications
and resource allocation for DSA-enabled HetNets. Thrust 3 studies neuromorphic
computing based hardware design for DSA-enabled HetNets. Thrust 4 develops and
evaluates the hardware-software test-bed. The proposed paradigm shift from
centralized base-station-controlled approach to the decentralized approach will
revolutionize the future wireless network design, where the individual users
will play stronger role in spectrum access and drastically change the network
topology by utilizing neuromorphic computing devices. The hardware-software co-
design methodologies developed in this project can be readily applied to other
related fields: computer communication networks, cyber security, and energy-
harvesting communications, etc.