* 1731773
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Intergenerational Consequences of Interpersonal Violence: The Role of Fetal Programming
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Catherine Panter-Brick, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2018
* USD 11,201.00

The intergenerational consequences of prenatal stress and its impact on fetal
development are of growing interest to biological anthropologists. However, the
mechanisms by which maternal experiences are transmitted to their offspring are
poorly understood, and most studies to date have focused on subclinical
disorders in high-income settings. This doctoral dissertation project is a study
of the intergenerational consequences of exposure to interpersonal violence
among women and their developing offspring. Interpersonal violence remains a
significant societal issue in many locations, and while many studies have
examined the consequences for health and well-being across the life course, the
enduring intergenerational effects remain under-investigated. Findings from this
study will contribute to our understanding of the biological mechanisms that
perpetuate the deleterious health consequences of violence to the next
generation. This project will support graduate student training and mentoring,
international research collaborations, K-12 science outreach activities, and
inform public health and clinical research for maternal and child
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this study is to
investigate the biological mechanisms through which exposure to interpersonal
violence impacts not only maternal biology but also fetal and infant
development. Specifically, we will examine whether maternal exposure to
interpersonal violence and psychosocial stressors impact offspring stress
regulation, neurodevelopment, and DNA methylation patterns, in women and their
infants in Brazil. We predict that maternal exposure to violence will be
associated with increased hair cortisol concentrations during pregnancy, and for
infants at one year of age, altered DNA methylation patterns and dysregulated
diurnal cortisol patterns. The investigators will also take a mechanistic
approach by investigating the mediating role of DNA methylation on infant
diurnal cortisol rhythms. This study advances knowledge by focusing on
methylation and hormonal changes occurring early in life, and by focusing on a
contextually salient stressor, interpersonal violence.