* 1731128
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Iron, infection, and malnutrition
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Achsah Dorsey, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2019
* USD 25,116.00

This dissertation project is a biocultural investigation of iron deficiency and
its connection to negative physiological outcomes in children living in multi-
generational households where individuals experience both under- and
overnutrition. Investigators will examine biological and ecological factors that
influence child iron status, providing practical knowledge on determinants of
iron deficiency and addressing the theory that low iron may be partially
protective against infection. The research objectives and methods of this
project will advance knowledge about human life history, and contribute to the
discussion about why policies that aim to reduce iron deficiency and anemia are
not always successful. This project will contribute to the education of a
graduate student as well as provide training opportunities in anthropological
and health sciences to a female community health worker. Investigators will
distribute the results of this project through community workshops, meetings
with local and national health agencies, and a series of peer-reviewed
publications and presentations at anthropological, public health, and medical
conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While low levels of iron are associated with
negative health outcomes, iron withholding is an important component in immune
defense against infectious disease. The Optimal Iron Hypothesis (OIH) states
that an individual's optimal iron status is contingent on their particular
disease ecology. This project will test a new application of OIH in an area that
suffers from the dual burden of over- and undernutrition. Using both qualitative
and quantitative methods, researchers will investigate the relationship between
iron, infection, and malnutrition as well as examine household-level and
biological predictors of current iron status. Investigators will employ
interviews and observations to establish participant health histories, diet
quality, and disease exposure in households. Researchers will also measure
height and weight to establish nutrition status as well as gather data on iron
status and infection through the collection and analysis of blood samples.