* 1731164
* SpecEES: Secure and Fair Spectrum Sharing for Heterogeneous Coexistent Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Ming Li, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2022
* USD 600,000.00

The dramatic growth in demand for wireless services has fueled a severe spectrum
shortage, especially in the overcrowded unlicensed bands. The regulatory
approach for meeting this galloping demand is to allow the coexistence of
competing wireless technologies, cellular, Wi-Fi, radar, TV, emergency
communications, and others. This shared spectrum paradigm poses novel challenges
for the secure, efficient, and fair resource allocation. Many of these
challenges stem from the heterogeneity of the coexisting systems, their scale,
and the lack of explicit coordination mechanisms. Whereas some recent efforts
have tried to address the coexistence of specific technologies, a comprehensive
and general approach to securely and efficiently coordinate spectrum access for
heterogeneous systems remains elusive. By facilitating the fair and secure
coexistence of heterogeneous wireless systems, this project directly addresses
the spectrum scarcity challenge. The outcomes of this project will benefit many
industry verticals such as transportation, manufacturing, agriculture, critical
national infrastructure, telecommunications, and others. Moreover, the expected
results will advance knowledge in a number of scientific fields including
security, privacy, and communication theory. Training opportunities for future
wireless and security experts are also provided. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on developing a novel coexistence framework for coordinating,
monitoring, evaluating, and adapting spectrum access in a secure, efficient, and
privacy-preserving manner. A general coexistence model in which spectrum can be
horizontally and/or vertically shared in time, frequency, and space is
considered. For this model, new fairness mechanisms that go beyond airtime
sharing and account for unfairness due to spatial multiplexing are being
investigated. These mechanisms dynamically allocate resources, not only in
frequency and time but also spatially, yielding a fairer coexistence. Moreover,
unfairness scenarios due to selfishly ignoring the coexistence etiquette are
being modeled and assessed. The critical challenge is to detect and mitigate
selfish misbehavior at the device and system level without explicit signaling.
To overcome this challenge, the project explores implicit physical layer sensing
and monitoring mechanisms that infer various operational attributes and
safeguard spectrum access. Finally, the interplay between privacy, interference
management, and efficiency in vertical spectrum sharing is investigated. The
goal here is to protect the location privacy of assets deployed by legacy
operators. Adaptive location obfuscation methods are being developed for
achieving a desired degree of privacy while maximizing the spectrum efficiency.