* 1731238
* SpecEES:  Collaborative Research:  Spatially Oversampled Dense Multi-Beam Millimeter-Wave Communications for Exponentially Increased Energy-Efficiency
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Xin Wang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 187,500.00

The vast amount of spectrum available in the millimeter-wave (mmW) bands offer a
path for exponential growth in data rates for wireless communications networks.
In emerging systems such as fifth-generation (5G) networks, the use of mmW
frequencies will potentially enable unprecedented improvements in network
capacity, mobility, and spectral efficiency. However, the exploitation of mmW
bands requires solutions to many technical challenges. In particular, the
technology limitations present in today's implementations require new paradigms
in algorithms, signal processing methods, circuit architectures, and integration
methods in order for 5G wireless to become a reality. For example, there is a
need for advanced channel models that let designers implement the wireless
network infrastructure of the future. There is also a need for new algorithms,
software, hardware, and electronic circuits for efficient mmW antenna array
processing. This project will exploit well-known physics arising from Einstein's
Special Theory of Relativity, namely the causality light-cone, to significantly
improve the performance of key array signal processing components in mmW
wireless basestations. Specifically, the spatio-temporal properties of
electromagnetic waves, as described by Special Relativity, are exploited in
novel architectures to improve the energy efficiency, reduce the noise, and
improve the linearity of array receivers. A system-wide study of spatio-temporal
properties of mmW channels is combined with these architectures to design new
types of mmW array receivers and optimum beam forming algorithms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Special Theory of Relativity describes a region in the
multidimensional spacetime continuum that is not occupied by propagating waves
due to the constant speed of light and the nature of the wave equation. As a
result, the region of support (ROS) of all propagating waves, which correspond
to wireless propagation channels, are confined inside a ``Light Cone''. The
region of spacetime outside this cone (known as ``Elsewhere'') is a void within
which wireless communications signals cannot propagate. Although devoid of
waves, the Elsewhere is occupied by both electronic noise and nonlinear
distortion arising from real-world amplifiers and data converters. The project
explores the possibility of spatially over-sampling the mmW antenna arrays and
thereafter applying multidimensional extensions of well-known sigma-delta
modulation techniques across both discrete space and continuous-time dimensions
to achieve noise and distortion shaping, which effectively move the unwanted
received components into Elsewhere. Although sigma-delta algorithms have been
employed in analog-to-digital converters (ADCs), it is here proposed that
multidimensional extensions of these algorithms are not limited to just ADCs;
rather, it is possible to apply these algorithms to low-noise amplifiers, ADCs
and other circuit components used in arrays, which in turn leads to the creation
of new concepts in multi-dimensional circuit theory for array processing. The
technique is expected to lead to improved amplifier noise figure and linearity
and exponentially improved ADC figure-of-merit for array digitization at a
linear cost in the number of antennas and receivers. The resulting mmW array
processors have applications in wireless communications, phased-array radar, and
radio telescope antenna apertures. The project is a multi-institutional
collaboration between four universities in Ohio and New York, and has multiple
education and community outreach activities, which will be implemented via the
annual Brooklyn 5G Summit. The project includes mentoring for female engineers
and students, development of new educational material, and engagement of
underrepresented groups in wireless communications topics. Outreach will be
achieved through community activities, workshops, the Brooklyn 5G Summit
including events for women in 5G, and scientific outreach and academic events
organized within IEEE conferences. The mmW circuits research and education
program combines theory with hands-on system prototyping. Industry engagement,
which is critically important for emerging wireless technologies, is planned
throughout the project, and facilitated via the annual Brooklyn 5G Summit. Open
source models, designs and prototype chips will be offered to the public and
wireless industry.