* 1731956
* SpecEES:Collaborative Research: Power and Spectral Efficiency enabled by RF Co-Designed Electrically-Adaptive Front Ends
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Zoya Popovic, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Zhengdao Wang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 420,000.00

The rapid growth of wireless communications and sensing demand more efficient
use of the precious frequency spectrum, imposing tougher constraints on the
radio-frequency hardware. To responds to this challenge, transformative radio
front-end designs are needed. This collaborative project proposes new classes of
electrically-tuned RF front-ends for efficient, on-demand spectrum
access/sharing in spectrally-congested environments. Although 5G networks,
devices and communication schemes have been extensively discussed, they are not
yet appropriately defined, deployed and fully exploited. The goal of this
project is to develop RF front-ends with multiple levels of transfer-function
adaptivity enabled by electrically-controlled materials and new types of RF
filters that can: (a) arbitrarily define the band of operation; (b) efficiently
transmit/receive under dynamic spectrum allocations; and (c) co-exist in
unlicensed bands. The co-design of filters with other transceiver components
such as antennas, power amplifiers and low-noise amplifiers will increase power
efficiency while reducing the size of RF front-end. The multi-level adaptivity
and circuit co-design are fundamental methodology advances which will allow
transformative improvements in hardware performance. The proposed research will
be carried out by a unique multi-institute team from the University of Colorado
at Boulder (UCB) and the University of Michigan (UM), with complementary
expertise in RF filters, active circuits and microfabrication. The outreach
components of this project focus on: (i) broadening the undergraduate experience
in practical training and research through NSF Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) program, as well as university and industry-funded
opportunities for students; (ii) enhancing the UCB/UM curriculum with new class
contents integrating the proposed research results; (iii) increasing the
participation of underrepresented undergraduate/graduate students by active
recruiting through organized events and university scholarship programs; and
(iv) outreach efforts for K-12 students through existing infrastructure at
UCB/UM such as the well-established Science Discovery Program at
UCB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objective of the proposed collaborative
research is to investigate new classes of fully-reconfigurable co-designed RF
front-ends that will facilitate efficient spectrum access at frequencies below 6
GHz, where the spectrum is most congested. For 5G applications, the millimeter-
wave frequency allocations allow for larger bandwidths, but are accompanied by
higher atmospheric loss and higher cost. The proposed hardware developments will
exploit the multi-functional voltage-controlled properties of barium strontium
titanate (BST) as structural materials for bulk acoustic-wave resonators (FBARs)
and electrically-tuned reactive elements. This allows for significantly
increased functionality through: (1) new filter design methodologies and tuning
schemes for continuous and analog RF tuning; (2) high quality factor FBARs with
intrinsically-switched transfer function; (3) co-designed RF passive and active
circuit elements resulting in miniaturization and reduced loss; and (4)
frequency-selective agile harmonic terminations to increase the circuit
efficiency and dynamically adapt to RF signals with diverse spectral and spatial
content. The collaborative research effort will lead to the development of
switchless transmitter/receiver front-end chains with multiple levels of
transfer function adaptivity capable of achieving higher efficiency and lower
noise than conventional approaches. The proposed tuning speeds on the order of
hundreds of ns will allow dynamic frequency coverage in 0.8 - 6 GHz and adaptive
multi-band front-end chains.