* 1731202
* The 9th USA-China Chemical Engineering Conference, Beijing, China, October 15-19, 2017
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2018
* Norman Li, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 03/31/2018
* USD 35,000.00

This grant is to provide travel support for US-based researchers to attend The
9th Sino-USA Joint Conference of Chemical Engineering (SUCE 2017), to be held in
Beijing, China, on October 15 - 19, 2017. The theme of the conference is Green
Chemical Engineering and a special emphasis will be placed on Chemical
Engineering yielding environmental benefits. The organizing committee, which
consists of distinguished researchers with a broad range of skills in chemical
engineering, will provide for a vibrant and diverse atmosphere that will foster
exchange of ideas on research and education. It is anticipated that
approximately 35 US-based researchers will receive partial travel support to
attend this conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global challenges related to
depletion of nonrenewable energy resources, climate change, environmental
pollution, and population growth are creating a need for the development of
green and sustainable manufacturing technologies. The three-and-half-day
technical conference will feature invited plenary and keynote lectures, oral
presentations, two plenary discussion panels, one forum and a poster session.
The conference will emphasize not only the role of chemical engineers in the
development of sustainable chemical and energy processes, but will also explore
the frontiers of Chemical Engineering research and the fundamental principles
that are needed to tackle these challenges. The US-based conference participants
supported by this grant will have the opportunity to network with leading
researchers from China and exchange ideas about the current status and future
directions in research and education. They will benefit from state-of-the-art
reviews and presentations by leading experts and by debating controversial
points with their peers. The meeting will also provide an opportunity for
interaction and cooperation among industrial and academic researchers. The
organizers plan to give special consideration to young or junior faculty members
from U.S. Universities. Female and under-represented minorities will also
receive special consideration. The conference will address global challenges
with potentially significant benefits to society.