* 1731658
* SpecEES: Energy-efficient Spectrum and Infrastructure Co-use for Sensing and Communications in Dense Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Gustavo de Veciana, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 08/31/2021
* USD 649,999.00

This project will develop new energy-efficient techniques to co-use wireless
spectrum for both communications and sensing. The setting considered will be
that of emerging cellular networks consisting of a dense deployment of base-
stations (wireless infrastructure on cell towers) providing overlapping wireless
coverage. By enabling co-use of spectrum, this research will result in both
better connectivity and improved data rates to users, and improved sensing
through radar technologies for locating and tracking mobile users. These
technologies will thus enable new smart city services and applications. On the
educational front, the project will lead to development of new educational
materials. Outreach activities to middle and high school students will occur
through widely-accessible lecture series. The proposed activities will pay
special attention to promoting diversity and nurturing student talent. Finally,
the results will be shared with industry through the industrial affiliates
program of the Wireless Networking and Communications Group (WNCG) at The
University of Texas at Austin. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is
geared at developing a new class of energy efficient cross-layer resource
allocation algorithms for joint management of base-station and spectrum
resources in dense wireless networks. At the same time, mathematical models and
tools based on stochastic geometry will be introduced enabling one to
characterize and optimize energy-performance for dense deployments. The
intellectual merit can be summarized along four thrusts: (a) Infrastructure and
spectrum co-use for communications and radar/sensing, where the focus will be on
algorithms for handling interference from a mixture of communications and radar
waveforms; (b) Stochastic geometry models and tools for characterizing
heterogeneous spectrum use over space, where Central Limit Theorems over space
will be developed to characterize SINR and radar distortion performance; (c)
Algorithms for mode switching and base-station activation, where load-dependent
algorithms for network management will be developed that are cognizant of
hysteresis costs associated with changing modes and activation states of base-
stations; and (d) Managing user dynamics through directed association to reduce
the frequency of change in the network, which will result in improved
convergence behavior of management algorithms at various spatial scales.