* 1731924
* Student Investigator Travel Awards for OHBM 2017
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Michael Greicius, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Uri Hasson
* 02/28/2018
* USD 31,570.00

The Organization for Human Brain Mapping (OHBM) is the primary international
organization dedicated to non-invasive neuroimaging research and the functional
organization of the human brain. The Annual Meeting of OHBM is regarded as the
premier venue for the integration of innovative brain imaging methods and
cognitive neuroscience. It was started more than 20 years ago to provide a forum
for the brain-mapping scientific community to disseminate findings and enable
interactions among scientists investigating the functional organization of the
brain with emerging imaging methods. Since 1994, the OHBM has sponsored twenty-
two highly successful meetings, where attendees are exposed to cutting-edge
neuroimaging data acquisition methods, emerging approaches to large-scale
neuroimaging data analysis, the visualization of results, and their applications
in health and disease. This award will fund travel awards for deserving students
and trainees to attend the 2017 Annual Meeting to be held in Vancouver, Canada.
Travel awards will be given to 30 students with high-ranking abstracts. Of these
at least 15 travel awards will be awarded to the students with the top-ranked
abstracts among 3 targeted groups (women, minorities, disabled.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Annual Meeting provides a means for students of
neuroimaging to attend educational courses, hear lectures from leading brain
researchers, form new collaborations, and to present their original research.
Historically, female representation in the mathematical and computational
sciences has been low. In contrast, in both neuroscience and psychology it has
been relatively very high. Hence, the ability to work in the cross-section of
statistics, computer-science, psychology, and neuroscience promises to provide
computational training to a diverse audience and help bridge the gender gaps in
the STEM fields. In addition, improved understanding of the organization of the
human brain is directly relevant to treating neurological and psychiatric
disease, and the use of non-invasive imaging methods is increasingly important
to translational investigation and training in clinical neuroscience. As
neuroimaging is used in a wide-range of scientific disciplines, we would expect
benefits for society in areas ranging from economic and social policies to
medical, educational and psychological interventions.