* 1731694
* SpecEES: Collaborative Research: Stochastic Geometry Meets Channel Measurements: Comprehensive Modeling, Analysis,Fundamental Design-tradeoffs in Real-world Massive-MIMO Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Andreas Molisch, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 345,660.00

One promising solution to handle the ever-increasing demand for wireless
capacity is to deploy significantly higher number of antenna elements at the
base station compared to the number of users in the cell. This so called Massive
MIMO approach creates extra degrees of freedom that can be used to "shape"
beams, thus enhancing both the energy and spectral efficiency of communication
links. Massive MIMO can be implemented in a variety of ways. One extreme is the
concentrated implementation in which hundreds of antennas are deployed at a
single location within a cell. On the other extreme is the fully distributed
implementation in which hundreds of single-antenna remote radio heads,
distributed throughout the cell, are connected to a common baseband processing
unit, thus forming a distributed base station. In between these extremes is the
relatively less-investigated case of semi-distributed implementation in which
multi-antenna remote radio heads are distributed across the cell. While the
massive MIMO idea has been around for several years now, our understanding of
the performance of these systems is still limited. This is mainly due to the
lack of real-world propagation models (especially for the semi-distributed
implementations) as well as mathematical tools that can expose performance
trends for different spatial distributions of the users and base stations, both
of which are known to significantly impact the performance of these systems. The
main goal of this research is to develop a transformative measurements-driven
analytical approach to enable the efficient deployment of massive MIMO networks
ultimately leading to better customer experience, via improved spectral
efficiency, and greener wireless communications, via improved energy efficiency.
All the key outcomes of this project will be widely disseminated through
publications, tutorials, and industry collaborations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will develop a comprehensive measurement-driven approach to
the spectral and energy efficiency analyses of massive MIMO systems by blending
ideas from multiple disciplines, such as communication theory, stochastic
geometry, point process theory, and propagation modeling, yielding the following
key innovations: (1) stochastic geometry-aware spectral and energy efficiency
metrics to facilitate fundamental analysis and fair comparison across different
flavors of massive MIMO, (2) new stochastic geometry approaches to the coverage
analysis of concentrated, distributed, and semi-distributed massive MIMO
systems, (3) new results on the channel characterization for distributed massive
MIMO systems under different classes of propagation models, (4) extensive
measurement campaign (tailored to massive MIMO systems) using a one-of-its-kind
channel sounder, (5) fundamentally new channel models for semi-deterministic
massive MIMO setups that will incorporate correlation of the pathloss and
dispersion metrics, in addition to traditionally modeled correlation of the
shadowing from user to different RRHs, and (6) new massive-MIMO channel models
for the millimeter-wave frequencies. This project will thus combine the powerful
spatial modeling tools from stochastic geometry with real-world massive MIMO
channel models to compare and contrast the performance of different flavors of
massive MIMO under real-world operational constraints, which will directly
impact the design, operation, and management of future cellular networks.