* 1731424
* Collaborative Research: Energy-Efficient Heterogeneous Network Virtualization with Spectrum-Power Trading
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Zhu Han, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 07/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

To accommodate the significant growth in wireless traffic and services, it is
beneficial and important to decouple wireless network infrastructure and type of
the services, resulting in network virtualization where different types of
services can share the same infrastructure and network utilization. Moreover,
wireless network virtualization makes it easy to migrate spectrum power trading
to balance traffic flow in heterogeneous networks and effectively reduce network
energy consumption. Those facts motivate us to investigate the spectrum-power
trading mechanism under the heterogeneous network virtualization frameworks. The
proposed research will improve design methodology by providing new perspectives
and solution concepts. The unique angles of the proposed cross-layer approaches
integrate interdisciplinary and transformative concepts in different areas,
including economics, decision theory, optimization, and social science. The
results will be publicly available through publications and open source software
release, to facilitate technology dissemination. The research can also
significantly boost the quality of undergraduate and graduate programs, through
curriculum development and engaging students in related research. The outreach
activities will encourage high school students, especially female and minority
students, to pursue science and engineering careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
network virtualization, wireless equipment, such as base stations (BSs), might
be controlled by individuals instead of by one or a few service providers. As a
result, network economy, especially for spectrum-power trading, has to be
carefully investigated to implement network virtualization. In this cross
disciplinary proposal, the intellectual merits include: 1) The network
virtualization framework will be constructed to facilitate the spectrum-power
trading. The separation of physical and virtual networks requires the game
theoretical analysis due to different interests for different scenarios. 2) The
key challenge is the trading strategy, i.e., how to efficiently allocate
physical resources to different virtual wireless networks, including BS
association, spectrum and power allocation. The problems will be approached
through exploiting its special structures and making use of fractional
programming theory, duality methods of mixed integer programming, and graph
theoretic tools to find the good solutions with low-complexity. 3) The device-
to-device (D2D) communications can provide services with low latency and reduced
power consumption. Spectrum and power trading will be performed in virtualized
D2D networks for further performance improvement. 4) To facilitate network
virtualization, spectrum-power trading game theoretical approaches, such as
auction theory and contract theory approaches, will be studied. Furthermore, big
data scale optimization algorithms will be developed to conduct parallel
computing.