* 1731754
* Collaborative Research:  Enabling Real-Time Interference Alignment - From Theory to Practice
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Sriram Vishwanath, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 07/31/2020
* USD 249,999.00

The goal of this project is to enable interference alignment in practice using
the concept of reconfigurable antennas, and by doing so, enable a much deeper
understanding of the "interference barrier" that plagues wireless systems today.
Interference alignment is a new, novel transmission strategy that results in
linear gain in throughput with the number of nodes in the network. The planned
research is expected to have a significant impact on the manner in which next
generation wireless systems operate and how they access spectrum in multiple
domains, including public safety, inter-vehicular communication and Industrial
Internet of Things (IoT). The research agenda will also be tightly integrated
with education and outreach activities at University of California-Irvine and
University of Texas-Austin, with direct involvement of underrepresented
minorities, graduate, and undergraduate students as well as a minority focused
Research Experiences for Undergraduates program at University of
Texas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort initially begins with a demonstration
that blind interference alignment (with no channel state knowledge at the
transmitter) is indeed implementable in hardware, in real-time . Moreover, the
gains promised by interference alignment in theory are indeed realized in
practice for a 2 by 2 X channel setup. Using this as the foundation, it goes on
to propose to design, characterize and develop reconfigurable-antenna-based
interference alignment solutions in a variety of more general settings,
including those where we have partial/delayed/mixed/distributed and/or
alternating channel state knowledge. The effort is complemented&lt;br/&gt;with
implementations on a variety of platforms. The primary goal is to improve
spectral efficiency of wireless networks.