* 1731635
* SpecEES:Heterogeneous Integration Techniques for Frequency-Conversion and Access to the Submillimeter Spectrum
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Robert Weikle, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 610,000.00

The submillimeter-wave region of the electromagnetic spectrum is crucial to
fundamental scientific inquiry and progress in fields such as radio astronomy,
atmospheric physics, and remote sensing. Moreover, new and emerging device
concepts promise to open this largely-inaccessible spectrum to further
scientific study as well as important engineering applications in imaging, non-
destructive test and evaluation, and extremely high data-rate communications.
The lower portion of the submillimeter-wave band (100 GHz to 500 GHz) remains a
vast and untapped resource for wireless data transfer. Although limitations
imposed by atmospheric attenuation make this spectral range unsuitable for long-
distance wireless data transfer, these frequencies can potentially be used for
super-high-speed wireless data transfer to augment and expand the performance of
existing RF and microwave communications. To enable access to this
submillimeter-wave band, this project focuses on the development of fabrication
processes that will facilitate heterogeneous integration of compound
semiconductors (e.g., gallium arsenide or indium phosphide) as well as methods
to efficiently connect submillimeter-wave circuits with silicon CMOS integrated
circuits. The intellectual merit in developing such processes lies in their
potential to improve understanding of the fundamental science of
electrical/mechanical interfaces as well as the practical issues involved with
applying this knowledge to creating new wireless technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to create the device,
interface, and front-end infrastructure needed to extend the capabilities of
existing wireless systems to access the submillimeter-wave region of the
spectrum. To achieve this goal, the research effort focuses on three primary
tasks: (1) robust methods for heterogeneous integration of gallium arsenide (or
other III-V semiconductor materials) onto high-resistivity silicon carrier-
substrates for interconnection with silicon CMOS backend electronics, (2) design
and implementation of low-parasitic interfaces between CMOS chips and III-V
submillimeter-wave front-ends, and (3) development of power-efficient up- and
down-converters for accessing the submillimeter-wave region. The work proposed
here represents an initial and necessary step towards developing an
infrastructure that overcomes the limitations of current approaches in utilizing
submillimeter-wave technology for wireless applications. Moreover, the research
to be undertaken will address fundamental issues in heterogeneous integration,
micromachining, and high-performance interfaces. These topics comprise an
important area of work that will impact a wide array of engineering fields
including microelectronics, microelectromechanical systems, electromagnetics,
and communications.