* 1731056
* SpecEES: Wideband Wireless Communications with Low-Power Transceiver-Cell Circuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* J. Nicholas Laneman, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 650,000.00

With the exponential increase in data consumption world-wide, the corresponding
increase of associated power consumption in wireless communication systems is
receiving significant attention and concern. This research effort examines
wireless communication performance techniques and limits when simple low-power
devices are used to transmit and receive signals. These devices, because of
their simplicity, are constrained to transmit and receive "one bit" of
information, and with extremely low power consumption. However, many of them can
be used together and at very high speeds, giving an overall high effective data
rate. The effort examines the potential power advantages of using such devices
over conventional devices that are more capable but have much higher power
consumption. The project pushes the boundaries on many areas of traditional
linear systems and circuit theory, and will be integrated into undergraduate and
graduate course offerings in linear systems, digital signal processing, circuit
design, and microwave engineering. The results will be used to encourage
discussion about how high data rates need not require a large power
budget.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design of wireless communication systems that
rely on classical linear-system techniques runs into difficulties with high
power-consumption of circuits at carrier frequencies above 20 GHz and with
bandwidths above 2 GHz. Linear amplifiers, mixers, and high-speed analog-to-
digital converters, and digital-to-analog converters in the transceiver chains
become inefficient and expensive. This research effort examines wireless
communication performance limits and techniques when a novel energy-efficient
"transceiver cell" is used for the air interface. The transceiver cell exploits
nonlinearities in its devices and circuits to obtain very low power consumption
and ease of fabrication in a variety of technologies for wide bandwidths and at
very high carrier frequencies. The cell comprises a transmitter and receiver
capable of modulating and demodulating a single bit per symbol. The effort is
transformative because it looks at maximizing bits/(second-Hz-Watt) in the
trade-off of the performance of each cell versus the number of cells in a power-
constrained system, by applying concepts from neural-networking systems of low-
power nonlinear ``computational cells''.