* 1732359
* Collaborative Research: Energetic Particle Precipitation Mechanisms in the Inner Magnetosphere: Van Allen Probes and Incoherent Scatter Radar Coordinated Measurements
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Robert Marshall, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2021
* USD 120,791.00

This project will examine the mechanisms by which charged particles in Earth's
magnetic field travel both out of and through the atmosphere. Identifying these
mechanisms is important for understanding how the various layers of the near-
Earth environment are coupled. Understanding the neutral and charged atmosphere
has become of increasing interest for understanding the background in which
space weather events play. Data from NSF supported facilities such as the
Advanced Modular Incoherent Scatter Radar (AMISR) will be analyzed in
conjunction with space craft data. This award will also fund two postdoctoral
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current particle precipitation theories assume
that energetic particles in the magnetosphere precipitate into the atmosphere
after undergoing pitch-angle scattering into the loss cone due to interactions
with waves at or near the geomagnetic equator. However, the experimental
verification of the effect of the multiple candidate waves on the particles'
pitch-angle distributions has not been definitively established. This project
brings together height-resolved measurements of ionization in the ionosphere, in
situ measurements of pitch-angle scattering in the inner magnetosphere, and
multidisciplinary expertise to achieve closure for all wave modes that may be
involved in electron precipitation mechanisms. Instances of temporally
coincident Van Allen Probes' measurements of particles and waves in the
radiation belt (or ring current) and Poker Flat Incoherent Scatter Radar (PFISR)
measurements of particles precipitating into the ionosphere near the foot-point
of the Van Allen Probes' flux tubes will be identified. The loss-cone
distribution functions created by candidate waves for pitch-angle scattering
using the quasi-linear diffusion equations will be calculated. Changes in the
phase-space distribution of electrons that are produced by the electric and
magnetic wave fields in the frequency range from a few Hz to several kHz will be
quantified by applying UCLAs Full Diffusion Code to Van Allen Probes' particle
and field measurements. Finally, a comparison of the ionization profiles
produced in the atmosphere by loss cone distributions calculated from Van Allen
Probes' data with the ionization profiles directly measured with PFISR.