* 1732963
* Cross-cultural trust and resource sharing: The Role of Ideal Affect
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Brian Knutson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/2023
* USD 574,985.00

Trust is the basis of social coordination and cooperation, and considered by
many to be the very foundation of high-functioning societies. Indeed, people
share more with people whom they trust, and societies with higher levels of
trust have more efficient judicial systems, higher quality government
bureaucracies, less corruption, and are more economically developed. How do
people decide whom to trust, especially when they need to make these decisions
quickly, with very little information? Remarkably, little is known about the
cues that people use to judge trustworthiness and how these cues might vary
across cultures, despite the fact that these cues may critically determine
whether people become friend or foe. This is especially important now because
people are in greater contact with others whose cultural ideas and practices
differ from their own. In the proposed project, Tsai and colleagues test the
hypothesis that people trust and share more resources with others whose
emotional expressions match how people ideally want to feel (their ideal
affect). They predict that cultural differences in whom people trust and share
resources with are due to cultural differences in how people ideally want to
feel. This prediction is tested in three behavioral and three fMRI experiments,
as well as a longitudinal study. These findings will provide insights about
interpersonal trust in different cultures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In previous
work, we observed that members of North American cultures value excited states
---excitement, enthusiasm, and elation---more, while members of East Asian
cultures value calm states---calm, peacefulness, serenity---more. These cultural
differences influenced whom people trusted and with whom they shared resources.
European Americans trusted and gave more to people who showed excitement (vs.
calm), whereas East Asians trusted and gave more to people who showed calm (vs.
excitement). These findings demonstrate that people trust and give more to
others whose emotional expressions match their ideal affect. This ideal affect
match mattered even more than matches in race or sex, suggesting that emotional
expressions may signal shared values even more than more static facial features.
In the proposed project, we use a variety of experimental, cross-cultural, and
neuroimaging methods to examine whether situational factors (i.e., having time
to deliberate; being in a good vs. bad mood; knowing someone's reputation)
increase or decrease people's use of emotional cues to decide whom to trust and
share with. In addition, using a longitudinal design, we examine whether these
processes influence the development of trust and friendship while people are
adjusting to new cultures -- specifically, Chinese studying in the U.S., and
Americans studying in China. Together, these studies will: (1) advance
understanding of how people decide whom to trust and share resources; (2)
promote cross-cultural communication and exchange; and (3) increase awareness
about the unconscious cultural biases that may result in discrimination against
particular groups (e.g., bicultural Asian Americans) in multicultural societies
like the U.S.