* 1732194
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Climbing Performance in African Apes
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Herman Pontzer, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2018
* USD 9,828.00

Compared to the living apes, humans are notably different in having relatively
short arms and long legs, which is functionally related to our unique, two-
legged gait (bipedalism) and life on the ground. To better understand hominin
locomotor evolution, researchers want to know when and how bipedalism affected
other aspects of hominin mobility. In this dissertation project, the student co-
PI will compare aspects of climbing performance in humans, chimpanzees, and
gorillas to see how a range of body sizes and limb proportions affects climbing
ability. The research has broad implications for understanding human evolution,
movement and mechanics. Understanding more about climbing performance can also
address how to limit climbing injuries, assess risk, and design technology for
both sport and military climbing pursuits. This project will also support
graduate student training, and science outreach to groups underrepresented in
STEM fields and to local communities and athletes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this study is to establish the effects of limb proportions and body
size on the climbing performance of humans, chimpanzees, and gorillas by
assessing three aspects of climbing performance: energetic cost, fatigue, and
canopy access. The co-PI will collect behavioral locomotor data in sympatric
human, chimpanzee, and gorilla populations in Nouabale-Ndoki National Park,
Republic of Congo, and in human rock climbers, to control for environmental
variation and observe a range of size and proportion variation. Whether, and to
what extent, hominins were arboreal continues to be debated, and, more
specifically, the relative prominence of vertical climbing in the locomotor
repertoires of various hominin taxa remains an issue. This study will result in
a more comprehensive understanding of the form/function relationship for
climbing, and enable the assessment of how selection for bipedal adaptations
affected climbing abilities during human evolution. It may also improve
assessments of the ecology of fossil taxa.