* 1732622
* The Long Term Effects of Animal Introductions on the Ecology of Central New Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Emily Jones, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2020
* USD 69,284.00

Dr. Emily Lena Jones, of the University of New Mexico, will investigate changing
social-environmental networks in the Middle Rio Grande region of New Mexico
between AD 1300 and 1945. When Coronado led an expedition of Spaniards into New
Mexico in 1540, he entered a complex socioenvironmental network in which
indigenous communities worked with (and occasionally against) each other to
survive in an environment characterized by unpredictability, variability, and
patchy resources. This Prehispanic system (documented through a variety of
archaeological work as well as through Spanish documents) was fundamentally
altered by the biological agents the Spanish brought with them (domestic plants
and animals from Spain) as well as by cultural agents (global trade networks,
the mission system, the Spanish colonists themselves). This alteration, famously
dubbed the "Columbian Exchange" by Alfred Crosby (1972), had ramifications
across the globe and set the stage for the world in which we now live. In
particular the research will provide insight into the factors which shaped and
continue to affect Southwestern USA environment today. This has the potential to
develop effective management tools. The project will also provide educational
and training opportunities for students.

In this project, Dr. Jones and University of New Mexico archaeology students
will analyze fauna from archaeological sites to assess changes in people's use
of animal resources in central New Mexico from the late Prehispanic period (ca.
A.D. 1300) through the early 20th c. Activities will combine identification of
archaeofaunal collections with analysis of carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen bone
isotopes to (1) establish a baseline diet for central New Mexico in the late
Prehispanic period; (2) understand the nature and timing of the adoption (and
eventual dominance) of introduced animals of Spanish origin, namely domestic
sheep, cattle, and pigs as well as the replacement of the region's Prehispanic
domestic taxon, the domestic turkey; and (3) test for evidence for widespread
environmental change resulting from the introduction of domestic taxa of Old
World origin to central New Mexico. This project will therefore make use of
existing collections to contribute new data to significant questions in
archaeology, environmental history, and ecology. Dr. Jones and students will add
primary data (both archaeofaunal and isotopic) relevant to a variety of
disciplines to the record, allowing other large-scale landscape analyses to take
place.