* 1732144
* String Phenomenology 2017
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2018
* James Gray, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2018
* USD 10,000.00

This grant, under the direction of Professor James Gray at the Virginia
Polytechnic Institute and State University, provides partial support for the
conference "String Phenomenology 2017: The Sixteenth Annual Meeting on String
Phenomenology", which will be held at Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA on July
3rd-7th, 2017. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since their inception at the University of
Oxford in 2002, the annual String Phenomenology conferences have become the
flagship annual meeting for the subfield of string phenomenology. String theory
aims to describe the nature of the fundamental building blocks of matter and
their interactions at the very highest energies, and string phenomenology aims
to develop connections between the ideas of string theory and those of more
traditional particle physics, astrophysics, and cosmology. As such, these
conferences attract physicists and mathematicians representing a diverse
international community and provide a venue in which they can discuss and
present recent developments and challenges in this exciting interdisciplinary
field. The sixteenth iteration of this conference series will be particularly
important and timely, given recent important experimental results from the Large
Hadron Collider at CERN in Geneva, from the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-
Wave Observatory (LIGO), and from the Dark Energy Survey (DES), as well as a
plethora of new results from the mathematical literature. As such, support for
this series of meetings serves the national interest by promoting basic science
in the United States. This grant is also envisioned to have significant broader
impacts. These conferences bring together talented researchers from a diverse
range of institutions and backgrounds, and special effort is made to incorporate
the work of junior researchers and members of under-represented groups.