* 1732157
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Measuring the Kinetics of Gas-Generating Electrolysis through the Collective Modes of Bubble Evolution
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2018
* Matteo Cargnello, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 04/30/2018
* USD 54,105.00

The project will involve technique development and exploratory research to
examine the mechanism and dynamics of gas bubble formation at electrode
interfaces and their effects on aqueous-phase electrolysis and
photoelectrochemical reactions related to solar fuel production. State-of-the-
art x-ray and optical scattering techniques will be combined with data analytic
methods and novel catalyst synthesis techniques to relate modes of bubble
evolution to catalytic activity at unprecedented temporal and spatial
resolution. The resulting understanding will aid in optimizing the design of
hierarchically structured photocatalytic devices for efficient conversion of
abundant resources such as water and carbon dioxide to solar fuels needed for a
sustainable energy future. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research will utilize high
speed microscopy and scattering experiments to develop a statistical
understanding of electrolytic and photolytic bubble evolution. X-ray microscopy
data will be used to develop a model for bubble growth, coalescence, and
detachment from continuous and patterned electrocatalytic interfaces. This model
will inform the understanding of measurements of correlations between gas
bubbles evolving from electrodes using image analysis from microscopy
measurements and light scattering measurements. This research aims to develop a
methodological approach for studying catalysis via reciprocal space measurements
on heuristic systems such as TiO2 photocatalysts and Pt electrocatalysts on Si.
The ultimate goal is to utilize bubble correlation spectroscopy as a general
technique in combination with precision synthesis of catalyst structures to
minimize the impact of bubble interference on solar fuels catalysis. In addition
to advancing critical sustainable fuels technology, the project will provide
undergraduate and graduate students with cross-disciplinary training in advanced
spectroscopic methods, data analysis techniques, and catalyst synthesis, as well
as providing a highly interdisciplinary environment for high school and
undergraduate students to learn how to work in a team to advance scientific
knowledge.