* 1732326
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Mating strategies and reproductive endocrinology of female primates
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Laura Abondano, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2019
* USD 24,163.00

Female mate choice in primates is sometimes overshadowed by studies of male-male
contest competition as the predominant selective pressure influencing patterns
of reproductive behaviors in primates. This doctoral dissertation project will
explore female mate choice in wild woolly monkeys, a group-living Neotropical
primate, where female choice is hypothesized to be a particularly important form
of selection. The proposed study represents one of the first investigations of
female reproductive strategies in Neotropical primates from an explicitly female
choice perspective. It will include evaluation of female behavioral variation in
relation to fertility status, expanding our knowledge of the biology of female
choice and providing a comparative primate model for mate choice in hominins.
This project will support research training and mentoring of U.S. students,
development of international collaborations, public science outreach, and
primate conservation efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on patterns of
primate reproductive behavior often focuses on male strategies such as male-male
contest competition and female coercion, with less attention to female mate
choice. In primate species with low male-male contest competition and low male-
to-female aggression, such as woolly monkeys, females mating decisions may be
less constrained than in other primate taxa, and females may have more
opportunity to actively choose their mates. This project will specifically
examine how changes in fertility and likelihood of conception across females'
reproductive cycles affect their rate of copulation, partner number and
identity, and directing of mating-related behavior towards males. Using a
combination of behavioral, endocrinological, and genetic methods, the
researchers will study four groups of woolly monkeys in the wild. The project
will explore whether female choice for particular males depends upon (1) male
physical traits, (2) male-female affiliative relationships, (3) MHC
dissimilarity, and (4) degree of genetic relatedness, and will examine whether
these preferences vary according to cyclical changes in the ovarian hormones
that determine female fertility. Ultimately, the results from this work may
provide new insight into how mating systems are shaped by female decisions and
behavior.