* 1732223
* EAGER/Collaborative Research: Aeroelastic Real-Time Hybrid Simulation for Wind Engineering Experimentation
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2020
* Steve Wojtkiewicz, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 05/31/2020
* USD 101,763.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) will explore the
feasibility of Real-Time Hybrid Simulation (RTHS), used for earthquake
engineering experimentation, for experimentation for other natural hazards such
as extreme wind loadings. RTHS is a cyber-physical systems approach to
structural engineering analysis where experimental and numerical components are
interfaced to provide the system-level response of a structure that is
challenging to test in its entirety. This approach allows complex structural
behavior and loading conditions, difficult to model computationally, to be
captured experimentally while the remainder of the structure, which can be
accurately represented numerically, is simulated to provide increased accuracy
and efficiency in the test. To extend RTHS to include aeroelastic testing,
aerodynamic RTHS (aeroRTHS) will be explored through tests at the boundary layer
wind tunnel (BLWT) at the University of Florida's (UF) NSF-supported Natural
Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) Experimental Facility (EF).
The aeroRTHS framework will facilitate the rapid creation, investigation, and
validation of the next generation of mitigation strategies by fully capturing
the complex fluid-structure interaction in structures needed to investigate the
aeroelastic response from wind hazards. The successful realization of the
aeroRTHS framework will contribute to the reliability and resilience of the
nation's infrastructure by enabling the investigation of an increased number of
windstorm hazard mitigation approaches applied to more realistic situations in a
non-destructive, cost-effective manner. A cyber-physical systems workshop will
be organized and hosted at the UF NHERI EF, in conjunction with other cyber-
physical projects utilizing the EF, to facilitate the use of aeroRTHS throughout
the wind and seismic research communities. A report summarizing the workshop
will be archived in the NHERI Data Depot (https://www.designsafe-ci.org/). This
project will provide advanced training to graduate and undergraduate students at
the University of Connecticut and Clarkson University through their involvement
in the research and aeroRTHS experimentation at the UF NHERI EF.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are threefold: (i) to explore
the feasibility of RTHS to include aerodynamic testing, (ii) to accelerate the
adoption of aeroRTHS advanced testing techniques through implementation in the
BLWT at the UF NHERI EF, and (iii) to train a broad spectrum of researchers to
utilize aeroRTHS for future research efforts. Numerous technical challenges will
be addressed in this research to enable RTHS to be beneficial for
aerodynamic/aeroelastic experimentation. These challenges include: actuator
compensation; stability analysis; and limitations imposed by the size of the
computational substructure, the increased time scale of wind tunnel models, and
the type and number of sensor measurements. Achieving these three goals will
help accelerate the adoption of RTHS for multi-hazard applications, thus
broadening the impact of these advanced testing methodologies within the natural
hazards research community. Specific guidelines for equipment, software, and
methods needed to conduct aeroRTHS tests will be developed and disseminated at
the cyber-physical systems workshop and through a report archived in the NHERI
Data Depot. These guidelines will be suitable for investigators interested in
employing RTHS for wind applications at the UF NHERI EF or at any other wind
tunnel facility.