* 1732544
* Science Policy Research Report: The Effects of Patents on Innovation, Diffusion and Access
* SBE,SMA
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2018
* Bhaven Sampat, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 04/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

Evidence-based patent policy can help ensure the patent system achieves its
constitutionally mandated goal: To Promote the Progress of Science and the
Useful Arts. Between fears that gene patents hinder scientific progress,
concerns that patent trolls are a threat to innovation in IT and software,
claims that drug patents contribute to high prices of pharmaceuticals, and the
counter-arguments that patents are essential for innovation, patent policy has
emerged as one of the most controversial aspects of science and technology
policy. Patent policy design is difficult: it requires balancing incentives for
innovation with benefits from broad access to new technology, two goals that are
often at tension with one another. Concerns that the U.S. may not have this
balance right have lead to numerous proposals for patent system reform over the
past decade.

There is now a considerable body of empirical evidence on the effects of
patents. This research report provides a systematic survey of empirical work on
patent policy, summarizing the evidence on five main questions central to patent
policy-making: (1) How important are patents for innovation? (2) Do patents
create incentives for disclosure of information that would otherwise be kept
secret? (3) How large are the costs associated with restricted output and higher
prices? (4) Do patents hinder follow-on research in contexts where innovation is
cumulative? (5) Does the patent system support markets for technology? The
report discusses the strengths and limits of different approaches, distills what
we have learned about the effects of patents and implications for policy, notes
key uncertainties, and indicates where more research is needed. Finally, it
summarizes evidence on the effects of major patent policy changes over the past
fifty years, including the expansion of patent eligible subject matter, the
growth of patenting on publicly funded research, special patent law procedures
for pharmaceuticals, and the globalization of patent protection.