* 1732172
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Maternal predictors of infant developmental trajectories in olive baboons
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2017,12/31/2019
* Joan Silk, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 12/31/2019
* USD 20,399.00

Early life experiences can have substantial influence on development and adult
outcomes, and the mother is a crucial component of the early life environment
for humans and other primates. Recently, researchers have begun to examine the
complexities of maternal signals, how infants use these signals to navigate
developmental trade-offs, and the impact of trade-off decisions. This doctoral
dissertation project will investigate the influence of maternal hormonal and
behavioral signals on infant development in several groups of wild olive baboons
living under different ecological conditions. The researcher will document
variation in maternal signals, to develop a comprehensive model of infant
development and provide insights into the evolution of human health and
development. The project contributes to local community outreach programs and
provides mentorship and research opportunities to undergraduate students, recent
graduates, and local employees. The research team promotes diversity and
inclusion in STEM through active involvement with professional organizations for
marginalized identities and through workshops that address issues of sexual
harassment in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address three
questions: What predicts variation in maternal signals, how do infants respond
to maternal signals, and how do infants navigate developmental trade-offs? The
study will capitalize on long-term ecological and demographic data for olive
baboons and provide detailed behavioral, physiological, and growth data. The
study will use photogrammetry to measure body size and growth trajectories,
fecal samples to measure glucocorticoid levels in mothers and infants, and focal
samples to obtain detailed information about nursing behavior, infant activity
levels, and maternal responsiveness. The study will examine 40 mother-infant
pairs over a 14-month period. The study site in Laikipia, Kenya provides the
opportunity to compare animals that rely heavily on invasive Opuntia stricta
fruits with animals that have limited access to these fruits. Variation in the
availability of Opuntia fruit will provide insight into how high-sugar diets and
predictable food availability -- traits that characterize recent changes in
human diet -- influence maternal signals and infant responses. These results
could potentially inform medical intervention practices that target infant
health by indicating when interventions will be most effective and how long
interventions are needed.