* 1732077
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Biosocial Responses to Political Invisibility in a Refugee Camp
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Lee Gettler, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 06/30/2018
* USD 22,050.00

Extensive research has shown that a person's political and social status affects
his or her physical, economic, and psychological well-being. However, we do not
know exactly how this happens or particularly, how these different factors work
together. In the United States and around the world, marginalized populations
find ways to directly or indirectly access mainstream socio-economic resources.
In the context of unprecedented global population mobility, there is a need to
better understand the negative health and psychosocial impacts of low status,
especially with respect to their effects on the economy at large. The research
funded by this award will address this problem by examining a case in which
people suddenly experience a very sharp reduction in their political and social
status, which will allow the researchers to observe the effects more clearly. In
addition, the research will test the idea that a person's social support
networks moderate the effects of low status on well-being. This project will
also contribute to an ongoing partnership between the co-PIs, economic
development practitioners at the World Bank, humanitarian aid officials at the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), and health service
providers from the International Rescue Committee. Data and analyses from this
project will be shared with these policy makers to continue to improve the
effectiveness and efficiency of refugee-oriented projects in a variety of global
contexts.

Notre Dame anthropology doctoral student Rieti Gengo, under the supervision of
Dr. Rahul Oka and Dr. Lee T. Gettler, will carry out the research at the Kakuma
Refugee Camp in northern Kenya. With approximately 200,000 residents, Kakuma is
one of the world's largest refugee camps. Thousands of asylum seekers at Kakuma
lose institutional support from the UNHCR and other international non-
governmental organizations when their petitions for refugee status are rejected,
denying them access to food distribution, healthcare resources, and other
services. Those denied refugee status are expected to leave the camp, but most
are unable to do so because of prohibitive financial costs and their precarious
status as stateless persons. The unfortunate situation provides an important
research opportunity to compare the effects of marginality on those who receive
official status and those who do not. The researchers will collect data on how
both groups obtain resources and how their social and behavioral responses are
reflected in their health and physiology. They will employ ethnographic
participant observation, semi-structured interviews, and the World Health
Organization Quality of Life questionnaire to assess refugees' perceived
wellbeing and integration into the camp's informal economy. They will collect
social network data to quantify the size and diversity of social support
networks. Body composition (body fat and BMI), blood pressure, and heart rate
will be used to provide measures of overall health and nutritional status, while
biomarkers of immune function and stress physiology will be assessed from blood
and fingernail samples. Findings from this research will provide insight into
the behavioral and physiological pathways through which low-status, marginalized
populations cope with exclusion from institutional resources and services.