* 1732175
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Evolutionary biomechanics of the human hyolingual apparatus
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Callum Ross, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2019
* USD 21,974.00

The human tongue and hyoid bone have been extensively studied for their role in
the evolution of speech. Some researchers hypothesize that our unique tongue and
hyoid morphology also makes us more prone to choking. This research uses
advanced imaging techniques and computational modeling to test whether human
hyolingual morphology is beneficial or detrimental for swallowing. While this
research focuses on swallowing function in an evolutionary context, the findings
of this research will also advance our understanding of normal swallowing
mechanisms and therefore may have clinical applications. The software for the
computational model generated by this project will be made freely available upon
completion. This project provides mentored research not only to a woman in
science but specifically one studying biomechanics, a field in which women are
underrepresented. Furthermore, the project will support undergraduate research
and training for a diverse group of students at the University of
Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The short faces and low tongue, hyoid, and larynx
of humans have been argued to be adapted for speech and maladapted for
swallowing. Recent studies cast doubt on both of these claims, prompting further
exploration of alternative hypotheses to explain the origin of the uniquely
human hyolingual apparatus. This project tests the hypothesis that hyolingual
biomechanics constrain morphology, specifically that a low hyolingual apparatus
is necessary to maintain swallowing performance as the face becomes shorter.
X-ray Reconstruction of Moving Morphology (XROMM), diffusible iodine-based
contrast-enhanced CT (diceCT), and electromyography (EMG) will be used to obtain
high spatiotemporal resolution in vivo measurements of bone, tongue, and muscle
biomechanics, including hyolingual muscle length, velocity, and activity in a
primate model system. These data will then be used to validate a computational
model of the impacts on swallowing biomechanics and performance of variation in
hyolingual position, and craniofacial morphology. Falsification of the
constraint hypothesis would provide indirect support for the hypothesis that the
morphology of the human vocal tract is the result of natural selection for
speech performance. This project will inform future research on how the
functional requirements of the hyolingual apparatus may have influenced the
morphology of surrounding structures, e.g., the mandibular symphysis, in both
extant and extinct taxa.