* 1732279
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Personality, Stress Response, and Social Complexity in Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Ryne Palombit, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2019
* USD 25,200.00

Personality differences appear to have many influences on the social lives and
relationships of humans. Given that an individual's relationships develop from
social interactions with others, and that interactions can be stressful, an
important question is how personality differences in the stress response
influence social relationships. This doctoral dissertation project will
investigate variation in stress response in a non-human primate model, with
collection of behavioral and (non-invasive) hormonal data. Understanding how
variation in coping with social stress affects the social lives of primates is
important in light of growing evidence that the management of both stress and
social relationships influences the mental and physical health of individuals
(human and non-human). This project will provide laboratory research
opportunities to Rutgers undergraduate students, particularly those from groups
that are underrepresented in STEM fields. Science outreach and training in
conservation, ecology, and wildlife management will be provided to local
communities. The results of this project will be presented at institutions of
higher learning with the goal of explaining the contributions of this research
and of biological anthropology to society at large. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will investigate how wild social primates, with naturally formed long-
term relationships, individually differ in how they cope with stress. The olive
baboon, more behaviorally and socially complex than most non-primate models,
will provide comparative data for studying stress response variation in humans.
The investigator will collect behavioral and hormonal data and use network
analysis to study aggression, grooming, and spatial proximity, and observe how
individual baboons react to various stressful situations. The results of this
work will contribute knowledge about the maintenance of social relationships,
the consequences of different types of stress coping, and how these variables
interact with one another. These outcomes are important for understanding how
certain individuals balance the problem of coping with stress with aspects of
their social lives.