* 1732228
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Human-Landscape Interactions and Response to Holocene Sea-Level Rise and Climate Change in Coastal New Hampshire, USA
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Kevin McBride, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2021
* USD 30,453.00

Peter Leach will undertake an investigation of the response of mid- to late-
Holocene people, cultural materials and landscapes to sea-level rise, climate
change and ecosystem variability. This will be accomplished through
geoarchaeological evaluation of an intertidal mid-to-late Holocene
archaeological site on the Gulf of Maine, USA. This precontact, multi-component
site was drowned by late Holocene sea-level rise and it is now buried by 1.0-2.0
meters of salt marsh peat. Because the site was submerged, it exhibits
exceptional preservation of unburned faunal remains, multi-component
stratigraphy, and organic materials. The main goals are to understand the timing
and nature site submergence, map the spatial distribution of cultural materials
and natural features, and to continue high-resolution unmanned aerial vehicle
[UAV] analyses of short-term geomorphic processes. An understanding of
preservation potential and the influence of local geographic/geological
variables will greatly enhance modeling of site survival through sea-level rise.
This will generate information relevant to older sites buried farther offshore.
The current project and related future research will provide undergraduate and
graduate student training and will generate scientific data ideally suited for
public dissemination. Project results will raise awareness of precontact site
potential beneath salt marshes, a study area that is frequently overlooked
during construction and engineering activities. Project data will benefit
Historical Preservation Officers by elucidating the effort required and research
potential of intertidal and submerged sites. This in turn should lead to
improved regulations regarding environmental impact assessments during wetland
remediation or infrastructure improvements. These and other data will
demonstrate the need for continuous monitoring and underscore the urgency of
identifying archaeological sites threatened by coastal
erosion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In northeastern North America and many other
northern hemisphere locations, early- to mid-Holocene coastal sites were
submerged through relative sea-level rise and are likely variably preserved due
to local geomorphic factors. The investigators seek an understanding of past and
on-going geomorphic processes that influence human use of landscapes and long-
term preservation potential of submerged and intertidal sites. The researchers
will use radiocarbon dating to constrain the age of site components and the
timing of sea-level rise. Laboratory techniques will extract and stabilize
organic materials unique to waterlogged sites. Traditional archaeological field
methods will be augmented by manual core extraction, high-resolution UAV
surveys, and intensive spatial data analyses. Site-level inferences will augment
geologic models of marine-transgressed landscapes and demonstrate the need for
refinement at archaeological scales. UAV mapping is superior to LiDAR and
coarse-scale qualitative erosion assessments, and the researchers' innovative
use of this technology will generate quantitative data and improve models of
short-term (single storm event) erosion and deposition. Though the current
project focuses on precontact human and ecosystem responses to sea-level rise
and climate change, data generated will help to model the responses of similar
systems to future environmental variations.