* 1732117
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Life history tradeoffs affecting bone maintenance and development in women
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2019
* John Polk, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2019
* USD 31,720.00

Bone is a dynamic tissue that changes through the lifespan. This dissertation
research will combine markers of bone turnover with measures of bone density to
understand how bone varies with physical activity and life history. The project
seeks to understand the slow change in bone density and the processes that
maintain bone turnover, in two related populations with different lifestyles. In
addition to data on estrogen and physical activity levels, the co-PI will
collect information on age at menarche, number of offspring, and duration of
breastfeeding, which are life history traits that can vary with energy
availability and stress levels, reflect changing estrogen concentrations, and
may correlate with bone characteristics. Combining data on past conditions and
current lifestyle factors in this comparative context will expand our
understanding bone health through the lifecourse in adult women. The project
will also promote international collaborations, student training and mentoring,
and public science outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
builds upon previous work in life history and human reproductive ecology and
applies these approaches to analyses of bone health. Using these paradigms for
interpreting female reproductive endocrinology in ecological and evolutionary
contexts, this research focuses on bone as a product of the hormonal, energetic,
and mechanical demands of the human female across the lifespan. Integrating the
bone-related effects of physical activity across multiple physiological systems
is important because they do not operate independently of one another. By
comparing physical activity levels, current estrogen concentrations, and life
history variables between Polish women and second and third generation Polish-
American women, this research will test hypotheses about the ways in which life
history, physical activity, and the estrogen-mediated interactions between these
variables affect bone density and turnover in healthy adult women. This work
extends the life history concept of resource allocation to include bone
maintenance as one of the tradeoffs between growth, maintenance, and
reproduction. Additionally, it contributes to broader anthropological
discussions regarding health effects of demographic transitions to sedentary
industrialized lifestyles.