* 1732642
* An Investigation of the Chronological Association Between Agricultural and Social Complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Michael Lane, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2019
* USD 33,335.00

Archaeologists are well placed among scientists to answer questions of three
kinds: What changes in the size and organization of human societies take place
over the shorter or longer term? To what extent do cultural and non-human
processes and events have an effect over different geographic scales? To what
degree do deliberate socio-economic strategies achieve (or not) their explicit
aims or prove counterproductive? All three of these questions are perennially
important to policy-making, economics, diplomacy, risk management, and other
applied social sciences. Michael Lane of the University of Maryland Baltimore
County (UMBC) responds to all three in his proposed research. In collaboration
with Greek and American colleagues, he proposes to answer specifically and
generally relevant questions concerning what motives lay behind an
technologically intensive agricultural endeavor over 3,000 years ago, whether it
was initially organized by state institutions or a rather looser-knit
association of communities, whether relevant hydraulic technology was largely a
local innovation or adopted from abroad, how rapid the technological change was,
whether and how attendant political and economic institutions kept pace, and the
extent to which the agricultural intensification successfully addressed an issue
- for example, population pressure or external demand - without raising some
other undesirable social or economic cost. Answers to these questions have clear
contemporary relevance, covering such issues as feeding the world's growing
population, building political and economic capacity, and transferring relevant
technologies. The project will also provide training for the next generation of
American researchers, including UMBC undergraduates and an American
interdisciplinary geological archaeology post-doctoral
fellow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Late Bronze Age was a time in the wider Eastern
Mediterranean of the emergence of state institutions in societies on the
periphery of pre-existing kingdoms in Egypt and Mesopotamia. Lane's research
will be carried out in the Kopaic Basin in Greece, where, during the Late Bronze
Age (ca. 1700-1100 BCE) the region's inhabitants realized a colossal drainage
and land reclamation project, involving 15 miles of channeled rivers, together
with dikes to prevent re-flooding. He has discovered a vast, largely intact
buried landscape of cultivated fields evidently irrigated through the drainage
system. Prior studies indicate that the most recent construction of the drainage
works dates to about 1300 BCE. Lane's preliminary results indicate that the
fields were created as early as 1700 BCE. The consensus is that state
institutions are required for orchestrating such work, yet no indication of
these is found earlier than about 1500 BCE. Hence a period of two centuries
exists that needs to be reevaluated either for evidence of a centralized state
or, conversely, of the social capacity to realize such a technological feat
without central authority and administrative bodies. The discrepancy between
newly obtained and consensus dates bears important implications for
understanding possible interconnections among local and regional Late Bronze Age
socio-economic developments, including whether the relevant technology was
mostly indigenous or introduced, whether the undertaking was mainly a response
to internal stimuli or external interests, and whether it was viable over the
long term. Lane's proposal, involving side-by-side employment of well-
established carbon-14 and luminescence dating methods with state-of-the-art
shell amino-acid racemization dating - widely used in crime scene investigation
and also applied in archaeology - will not only address these important concerns
but also lead to potential methodological improvements in multiple areas of
research.