* 1732139
* US GEOTRACES Pacific Meridional Transect (GP-15): Resolving Silicon Isotope Anomalies in the Northeast Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Mark Brzezinski, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2022
* USD 657,959.00

This project will examine the distribution of isotopes of the element silicon in
the Pacific Ocean to gain insights into processes that control the movement of
silicon through the global ocean. Such studies are motivated by the fact that
the silicon that is dissolved in seawater supports the growth of diatoms.
Diatoms are microscopic algae that use silicon to produce ornately sculpted
shells called frustules. Diatoms are unique in that they are the only major
group of marine photosynthetic microbes that need silicon in order to grow.
Diatoms are responsible for 20% of the total photosynthesis on Earth so we can
each thank a diatom for every fifth breath of oxygen that we breathe. The sheer
scale of their contribution makes understanding what controls their distribution
and abundance important for the ecology and chemistry of the oceans and for
society. Their need for silicon means that the amount of silicon dissolved in
seawater can control where diatoms grow and how many are produced. Diatoms
obtain silicon, and other nutrient fertilizer, when currents bring deep waters
that are rich in these nutrients to the surface ocean. This project will
investigate how the stable isotopic composition of dissolved silicon varies in
the Pacific Ocean. Why bother with isotopes? It turns out that diatoms
preferentially use lighter isotopes of silicon when building their frustules.
This produces signals in diatom frustules and in the dissolved silicon in the
sea that allows isotopes to be used to reconstruct diatom productivity in the
past. The isotopic composition of the dissolved silicon in deep ocean waters is
different in different ocean basins. These differences in isotopes of silicon in
deep waters appear to be systematic and are tied to the movement of currents in
the deep sea. Once these patterns are understood evaluations of diatom
productivity based on isotopes will improve enormously. Testing the relationship
between isotopes of silicon and the water masses that comprise the deep
circulation of the global ocean is a major goal of this
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will take place as part of the 2018
GEOTRACES expedition from Alaska to Tahiti. This expedition will sample several
important water masses. The deep waters of the northeast Pacific are among the
most puzzling relative to current understanding of the processes controlling Si
isotope distributions. Deep waters of the north Pacific possess the highest
concentration of dissolved silicon and oldest waters at the "end" of the global
deep water circulation. Moreover, the northeast Pacific is of particular
interest as it contains what could be the largest silicon isotope anomaly in the
global ocean, known as the North Pacific Silicic Acid Plume. The plume, as its
name implies, consists of a tongue of elevate dissolved silicon that extends
from the Cascadia Basin off North America nearly to Japan. The limited data
available so far implies that isotope patterns across the plume are the opposite
of model predictions challenging our current understanding of controls on Si
isotope distributions. Elsewhere, the planned expedition will intersect key
water masses including surface waters, North Pacific Intermediate Water, North
Pacific Deep Water, and at the southern extreme of the section, Antarctic
Intermediate Water and Circumpolar Deep Water allowing tests of hypotheses on
how silicon isotope relate to the distribution of deep water masses in the
Pacific. Examining these features will involve sampling seawater using the
logistical support from the GEOTRACES management team. Seawater will be
collected from the surface to near ocean bottom at twelve stations between
Tahiti and Alaska targeting key water masses and the North Pacific Plume.
Samples of diatom frustules from throughout the water column will be collected
at three stations to explore fractionation of silicon during the dissolution of
diatoms frustules. This project will also provide partial support for a
postdoctoral scholar who will both participate in the science and also
collaborate with the principal investigator on disseminating the discoveries to
the public.