* 1732008
* Effects of lexical predictability on parafoveal and foveal processing in reading
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Adrian Staub, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 06/30/2021
* USD 457,845.00

Reading is an essential skill in modern society. Developing effective methods
for teaching reading, and effective interventions for reading difficulties and
disabilities, requires an understanding of the cognitive processes involved in
fluent reading. Recent research has suggested that skilled reading may be aided
by our ability to predict upcoming words. Readers use their knowledge of their
language and the world to anticipate or predict the words that they are likely
to encounter; words that are correctly predicted are more easily recognized. The
present research investigates this phenomenon in detail, comparing data from two
state-of-the-art methods: 1) tracking of readers' eye movements and 2) recording
of Event-Related Potentials (ERPs), which reflect the brain's activity in
response to individual words. Both methods show reliable changes in response to
a word's predictability. A paradox that motivates the present research is that
eye movements reflect a word's predictability only when the word can be pre-
processed in peripheral vision, before it is directly inspected. In contrast,
ERPs reflect a word's predictability even without such pre-processing. By
achieving a better understanding of what these two methods are telling us, and
the source of the differential effects, the investigators hope to further our
knowledge of the ways in which making unconscious predictions about upcoming
words can benefit readers.

The researchers test the hypothesis that predictability influences eye movements
through an influence on early orthographic processing, which is carried out in
parafoveal vision while a word is not viewed with maximum visual acuity. This
implies a Bayesian account of the predictability effect, whereby the influence
of a contextually based prior is strong only when perceptual evidence is
relatively ambiguous. The effect of predictability in ERPs is thought to be an
entirely distinct effect on late, integrative processes. To test the predictions
of these hypotheses, eight eye-movement experiments using the boundary paradigm
(in which a word is replaced by a different word until it is directly fixated)
will be carried out. Three of these experiments also require participants to
detect the change from preview to target explicitly, as the hypotheses make
novel predictions about the circumstances in which such changes are detectable.
Two of the experiments combine eye-movement recording and the boundary paradigm
with concurrent ERP measures. In these experiments the effects of predictability
on eye movements and ERPs are expected to be fully dissociable, with one or the
other emerging depending on the nature of the preview word and the target word.
Finally, the E-Z Reader model of eye movements in reading will be modified to
account for these effects, as well as other predictability-related phenomena. A
new, publicly available implementation of E-Z Reader will be developed, which
will allow other researchers to evaluate the model's architecture and test the
effects of changes to model parameters.