* 1732307
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Zoonotic Risks at the Human-Primate Interface: Behavior, Nutritional Status, and Immune Function
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2021
* Melissa Remis, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 12/31/2021
* USD 109,512.00

This dissertation project will investigate how differences in human behavior,
gender, subsistence patterns, nutrition, and immune function influence the
transmission and progression of zoonotic illnesses from nonhuman primates, such
as monkeys, gorillas, and chimpanzees, to human groups. The project's
anthropological and primatological context and expertise provide a unique
opportunity to understand these complex relationships among human groups who
rely on forest resources but vary in terms of culture and nutritional access. In
addition, improved understanding of the cultural, behavioral, and biological
processes that promote novel zoonotic infections in humans helps inform
scientific advancements and public health research on epidemics. The project
will support training for a female graduate student and underrepresented groups
in STEM research fields, and will foster international research, science
outreach, and public health collaborations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
takes place over a 15-month period in a protected forest reserve in the
southwest corner of Central African Republic where human communities rely on
wild meat and forest vegetables as primary sources of protein and nutrition, and
where the diminishing availability of wildlife and other forest resources
threaten food security and public health outcomes. The study focuses on a unique
mix of communities and cultural groups to understand multiple factors that may
influence zoonotic emergence -- human contact with nonhuman primates, varied
nutritional access, increased food security, and increased population density.
Researchers will use behavioral and dietary surveys, measurements of nutritional
status, analysis of hemoglobin levels, and analysis of immune function to
understand zoonotic risk. Zoonoses threaten global health and security and are
linked to the HIV epidemic, Ebola outbreaks in West and Central Africa, and Zika
outbreaks in South America. By providing insight on variation in zoonotic risk
across a single population, this project can help develop more effective global
health policies for preventing and controlling new epidemics.