* 1732190
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: L1 Biases in Learning Root-and-Pattern Morphology
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Adam Ussishkin, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2019
* USD 15,489.00

How does the knowledge of our first language affect our ability to learn other
languages? This dissertation examines how the rules we already know help or
hinder our efforts to learn rules in a new language. Semitic languages like
Arabic and Maltese employ root-and-pattern morphology to form words. Unlike in
English, where meaningful pieces of words are usually tacked onto the ends of
words (dis-em-bowel-ment), Semitic languages tend to change the vowels in the
middle of the words for the same effect (kitaab 'book' --&gt; kutub 'books').
Though most of the previous research shows that learning how to correctly
interweave consonants and vowels like this is very difficult for English
speakers, recent research shows that this task is easier if you speak a language
that uses similar rules. To carry out this research, an artificial language is
created that mimics Arabic plural pairs like kitaab and kutub, and is taught to
English speakers, students learning Arabic, Arabic speakers, and Maltese
speakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses two psycholinguistic methods
to investigate the effects of linguistic biases on learning rules in new
languages: a segmentation task and a Wug Test. The segmentation task allows for
direct comparison to previous studies, and the Wug Test is more sensitive to how
well participants have learned the artificial language. In the segmentation
task, participants listen to a randomized string of nonsense words, then must
select the words that they heard as well as possible words based on the rule
that they were able to extrapolate. In the Wug Test, participants are briefly
shown how to create the plural in an "alien language", then are asked to provide
the plurals for each item following the rules that they learned. Participant
groups were selected on the basis of their exposure to root-and-pattern
morphology, as linguistic biases may depend on learning a language natively or
may be developed while learning another language. This research has implications
not only for theories of language acquisition and mental representation of
morphology, but also for Arabic language pedagogy, especially for heritage
learners.