* 1732231
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The energetics of male reproductive strategies in geladas
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Andreas Koenig, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2021
* USD 26,402.00

In primate reproductive ecology, the role of energy as a constraint on
reproduction has often focused on females. Yet across mammals, including humans,
male reproductive effort can often entail substantial metabolic costs. This
doctoral dissertation project will examine how energy constrains male behavior
and reproduction in a wild primate, the gelada monkey. The project will provide
insight into how animal physiology and reproductive efforts adjust to natural
ecological change, and examine how testosterone, a regulatory mechanism for male
reproductive behavior, may be directly limited by energy. By examining the
effects of energetics on the allocation of testosterone-mediated reproductive
effort in a nonhuman primate, this project will shed light on the selective
pressures and potential influence of energetics in shaping non-human primate and
hominin species. Through the course of this research, the Co-PI will provide
training in lab-based behavioral endocrinology techniques for undergraduate
students from groups underrepresented in STEM fields. In addition, the Co-PI
will conduct science education and conservation outreach at various domestic and
international venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study wild gelada
monkeys as a model to examine the relationship between male energetic condition,
physiology, and male quality as assessed from vocal and visual signals used in
male-male competition. Towards this end, this project will combine classic
behavioral observations with innovative methods in (1) digital photogrammetry to
assess male chest patch coloration, and (2) endocrinology to determine energetic
condition from non-invasively collected urine and fecal samples. The polygynous
mating system of gelada monkeys provides an ideal model to investigate contrasts
in male reproductive energetics: harem-holding gelada leader males sire the vast
majority of offspring while bachelor males in all-male groups lack reproductive
opportunities. Reproductive success is therefore heavily skewed towards gelada
leader males, and bachelors must overthrow a leader during energetically
challenging "takeover" events to gain reproductive access to females. This
research will evaluate the underlying seasonal variation in male energetic
condition, how this variation relates to male social status, and whether
energetic condition ultimately constrains testosterone-dependent signaling and
male reproductive strategies. Although ample evidence suggests that lower food
availability and energy may constrain male reproductive physiology, a
comprehensive picture of the interrelationship between testosterone, energy, and
reproduction in male primates is needed. This research will be one of the first
to assess how energy may be a limiting factor for male reproductive success in
wild primates.