* 1732137
* Collaborative Research:   Science Policy Research Report: A Research Agenda for Science of Broadening Participation (SoBP) 2.0: STEM Employment of People with Disabilities
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Connie L McNeely, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 05/31/2019
* USD 16,667.00

Continued United States (U.S.) economic competitiveness and global leadership in
technology and science necessitate a well-prepared science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) workforce. Ensuring that this critical
workforce is broadly inclusive of individuals with relevant capabilities and
skills requires a highly adaptive, networked system of interdisciplinary
educational collaboration, and innovative employment preparation strategies,
programs, and approaches. This approach constitutes a partnership of scientists
and engineers, educators, trainers, innovation networks, laboratories, research
institutions, and employers. This science policy research report addresses these
issues, detailing barriers and opportunities for increasing participation in
STEM fields among under-served populations, focusing on people with disabilities
and high technology industry and non-government employers. Distinct applications
of related research are studied, such as the inclusion of veterans who became
disabled in the line of service, and with applicable education and training,
could be new participants in the STEM workforce. This is especially important as
both these populations might not be aware of, or not actively involved in social
networks of STEM innovators, and conversely technology innovators might not
fully consider these individuals. The report explores new frameworks, decision
support tools, dissemination design parameters, and knowledge-generating
communities to provide lessons learned and guidance for innovative best
practices and inclusion in STEM disciplines. Addressing the under-representation
of people with disabilities in STEM fields, it offers an analysis of relevant
research and policy approaches and looks to inform related government agenda
setting and decision making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much research on the STEM
participation of people with disabilities has tended to emphasize specific
disability characteristics. Building upon findings generated during the 2016
Symposium on the Science of Broadening Participation (SoBP), sponsored by the
National Science Foundation, this project takes a wider, interdisciplinary
perspective, looking a range of social, economic, methodological, institutional,
and policy contexts. Identifying barriers and opportunities for increasing
participation in STEM fields among under-served populations and policy
approaches, the report addresses the need for novel approaches to developing and
nurturing a qualified, diverse, and agile U.S. STEM workforce. The report
articulates a framework for developing tools and approaches to understand the
role of collaborative networks of innovation that encourage STEM participation
of individuals with disabilities. The report explores research that can enhance
broadened participation, and addresses areas in which targeted efforts would be
valuable, including a toolkit for assessing innovative practices and
organizational structures in the context of knowledge transfer and closing
knowledge-practice gaps, and a sustainable design for a Professional Inclusive
Innovation Network (PIIN) of innovation nodes and researchers to test inclusive
practices. The PIIN presents the SoBP community with an opportunity to capture
relevant research and policy data, cultivate meaningful programs at the
appropriate scale, and develop a network of mentors, advocates, and others to
inform the SoBP community and other stakeholders. The toolkit coupled with an
iterative observatory approach allows for bottom-up insights that speak
specifically to regional context, culture, and population needs, promoting
favorable outcomes.