* 1732246
* EAGER:  Collaborative Research:  Detection limit in marine nitrogen fixation measurements - Constraints of rates from the mesopelagic ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2018
* Julie Granger, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 04/30/2018
* USD 47,418.00

The availability of nitrogen is required to support the growth and production of
organisms living in the surface of our global ocean. This element can be scarce.
To alleviate this scarcity, a special class of bacteria and archaea, called
nitrogen fixers, can derive the nitrogen needed for growth from nitrogen gas.
This project would carefully examine one specific method for measuring nitrogen
fixation that has been used recently to suggest the occurrence of small amounts
of nitrogen fixation in subsurface ocean waters. If these reports are verified,
then a revision of our understanding of the marine nitrogen cycle may be needed.
The Ocean Carbon and Biogeochemistry program will be used as a platform to
develop community consensus for best practices in nitrogen fixation measurements
and detection of diversity, activity, and abundances of the organisms
responsible. In addition, a session will be organized in a future
national/international conference to communicate with the broader scientific
community while developing these best practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this study is to conduct a thorough examination of potential experimental and
analytical errors inherent to the 15N2-tracer nitrogen fixation method, in
tandem with comprehensive molecular measurements, in mesopelagic ocean waters.
Samples will be collected and experimental work conducted on a cruise transect
in the North Atlantic Ocean, followed by analytical work in the laboratory. The
specific aims of this study are to (1) determine the minimum quantifiable rates
of 15N2 fixation based on incubations of mesopelagic waters via characterization
of sources of experimental and analytical error, and (2) seek evidence of
presence and expression of nitrogen fixation genes via comprehensive molecular
approaches on corresponding samples. The range of detectable rates and
diazotroph activity from the measurements made in this study will be informative
for the understanding of the importance of nitrogen fixation in the oceanic
nitrogen budget.