* 1732263
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating human diet and the oral microbiome in ancient and living Pacific Northwest Coast indigenous communities
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Ripan Malhi, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2019
* USD 31,701.00

Several significant periods in human biological and cultural evolution have been
correlated with changes in diet. The oral microbiome, communities of bacteria
living in the human mouth, can also be influenced by individual diet and may be
another indication of how human evolution has been shaped by dietary
transitions. This project examines the link between human diet and the oral
microbiome by collaborating with an indigenous community who have lived along
the Northwest Coast of North America for over 6,000 years. This collaboration
will allow the researchers to reconstruct the oral microbiome of an ancient
community adapted to a predominantly marine diet, and assess how significant
social and cultural transitions associated with dietary changes, such as
European colonization, may have influenced the oral microbiome. The research
will inform our understanding of the relationship between human evolutionary
history and modern human experiences, such as the health disparities documented
in many indigenous communities of North America. This project will also
incorporate community-based projects like the development of an Ancestor "House"
room to respectfully store indigenous human remains awaiting laboratory
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project draws on both Western science
research methods and indigenous community knowledge and oral history. The
researchers will first reconstruct the diet and oral microbiome of the ancestral
indigenous community using a combination of cutting edge ancient DNA sequencing
methods, stable isotope analysis, and oral history. Prior to European contact,
this ancient community underwent a period of increasing social complexity,
transitioning to villages with large, stratified, lineage-based,
multigenerational households, which likely controlled local food resources. In
non-egalitarian communities like this, there are often individual status
differences. This research will assess how increased status differentiation and
social complexity influenced individual diet and access to food resources, and
how the bacteria in the oral cavity responded to these changes. The diet and
oral microbiome of this ancient community will then be compared to similar data
from the living descendant community to assess how their current diet may be
different from that of their ancestors, as a result of European colonization and
the introduction of Western industrialized processed foods, and to understand if
this change has influenced the bacterial composition of the oral microbiome.
This research will provide a novel approach to understanding the biological
consequences of European colonization.