* 1732321
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The reproductive ecology of the Kinda baboon
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,04/30/2020
* James Higham, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2020
* USD 25,186.00

Many models of primate behavior and evolution have relied heavily on the
generally well-studied baboon genus. However, the relatively understudied Kinda
baboon exhibits unique physical and social traits compared to other baboon
species, suggestion a wider variety of reproductive strategies that should be
considered in baboon models. This project will collect new data on the Kinda
baboon to understand the evolution of their unusual biology, facilitating future
comparative studies into the evolution of mating system diversity among primates
including our own hominin lineage. This project will facilitate the training of
graduate and undergraduate students in multiple aspects of research including
field data collection and processing, computational methods, and laboratory
work. The project will support international research collaborations, science
outreach to students and local communities, conservation efforts, and data
dissemination through various media.

Kinda are the only baboon species for which we lack detailed biological data,
and are an excellent species on which to test predictions of evolutionary models
in primatology. Kinda baboons have a unique suite of characteristics, including
reduced sexual dimorphism and male-driven intersexual social relationships,
suggesting that baboons exhibit more variation in their reproductive strategies
than previously thought. This project will test the hypothesis that compared to
other baboons, Kinda baboons evolved traits indicative of weaker direct, and
stronger indirect, male-male competition. This project has two major objectives,
to: 1) characterize the mating system and types of reproductive competition
observed in a population of Kinda baboons; and 2) characterize the consequences
of these characteristics for female sexual signaling. We will achieve this
through: i) the characterization of female reproductive life-history; ii)
hormonal assessment of reproductive profiles; iii) the calculation of female
reproductive synchrony and male reproductive skew; and iv) the reliability of
female sexual signals in advertising female fertility. Since data on these
parameters exist for other baboon populations, we will be able to compare our
results to those of other baboon taxa. This project will result in the first
detailed longitudinal dataset on wild Kinda baboon reproduction, particularly in
relation to physiology and sexual signaling. The project will facilitate future
comparative studies into the evolution of mating system diversity among primates
and other animals. Further, exploring the behavioral and life-history correlates
of reduced sexual dimorphism, a characteristic observed in Kinda baboons and
also in hominins, will provide important insights into the evolution of hominin
reproductive strategies and the selective pressures leading to the derived suite
of modern human traits.