* 1732129
* Factors Which Enhance Urban Resilience in the Context of Societal Change
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Cynthia Robin, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 254,829.00

Dr. Cynthia Robin, of Northwestern University, along with colleagues from the US
and Belize, will conduct research to study how a city can survive, and even
thrive, during periods of political and environmental stress in society. As over
half of the world lives in cities today, there is perhaps no more pressing
question than: how can people create cities that are long-lived and successful?
Archaeology is uniquely suited to answer questions about the longevity of
cities, because archaeologists can excavate long periods and time and can thus
examine the long-term history of human cities and assess why some cities succeed
and other cities fail. The social, political, economic, and environmental
pressures that modern people and cities face are not new and archaeology
provides a means to evaluate how people in the past successfully and
unsuccessfully dealt with challenges in establishing and maintaining cities. The
data that archaeologists generate about why cities succeed or fail takes on
renewed importance in today's world in which developing successful, long-lived
cities is an imperative. Dr. Robin and her colleagues will train US and Belizean
graduate and undergraduate students in archaeology. They will develop
educational programs for the general public, as well as University students, to
demonstrate how knowledge about the past is important for creating a better
world today and foster interest in archaeology and the preservation of
antiquities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Robin and her research team will examine
how cities can develop socio-political and economic systems that allow them to
withstand periods of political turmoil and environmental stress. The research
will take place in northern Belize, Central America, a region that is peripheral
to major power centers in PreColumbian Maya society. On the periphery of and at
the crossroads between major power centers of the ancient Maya, cities in
northern Belize were able to develop political and economic relations and
resource extraction that allowed them to survive and thrive during periods of
drought and political crisis that led to the decline and collapse of cities in
core areas of Maya society. Research will focus on the city of Aventura that
thrived while cities around it in core Maya areas collapsed. The research team
will survey and map the city of Aventura using state of the art laser and
digital technologies. They will conduct test excavations across the city to
understand a broad swath of the city and completely excavate three building
groups to gain more in depth knowledge. Through the archaeological survey and
excavation of Aventura's 2500 year history, Dr. Robin and her research team will
analyze archaeological, botanical, soil science, and osteological evidence to
determine how this city succeeded when others failed.