* 1732364
* CAREER: Mixed-Integer Optimization under Joint Chance Constraints
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2017,07/31/2017
* Simge Kucukyavuz, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2017
* USD 63,210.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
is to advance models, theory and algorithms to solve a difficult class of
optimization problems called chance-constrained mixed-integer programs (CC-MIP).
Although CC-MIPs are ubiquitous in practice, operations research theory and
algorithms provide limited guidance for this class of problems. CC-MIPs include
quality of service or reliability constraints; they are dynamic, contain
uncertain data, and involve discrete decisions. The resulting multi-stage
stochastic mixed-integer programs are challenging both theoretically and
computationally. The service level requirements are modeled with joint chance
constraints, which are non-convex. In addition, the deterministic equivalents of
CC-MIPs are very large-scale MIPs. To overcome these challenges, this research
aims to develop a unified theory and computational methodology, utilizing
extended formulations, polyhedral combinatorics, and decomposition algorithms.
The research will be pursued in four major thrusts: (1) chance-constrained
mixed-integer programs, (2) dynamic chance-constrained problems, (3) chance-
constrained problems with special structures, and (4) chance-constrained
problems with technology uncertainty.

The results from this research will advance decision-making tools in several
sectors that operate under uncertain environments and high service level
expectations, such as energy, telecommunications, finance, emergency management,
and distribution systems. For example, the modeling framework and strong cutting
planes for joint chance constraints may be incorporated into existing open-
source MIP modeling languages and software to improve their ability to solve CC-
MIPs that arise in practice. The educational goals of this award are to develop
novel programs that will arm the next generation of students with skills to
incorporate uncertainty into optimization theory, models and solution methods,
and to attract women and other under-represented groups to pursue advanced
research in this field. In pursuit of these goals, case studies will be
developed from application areas to highlight the importance of incorporating
uncertainty into decision-making processes, and tutorials will be given through
various fora to disseminate the research results to a broader audience.