* 1732084
* Evaluation and Assessment Program for the Industry University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) Program
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2025
* Philip Weilerstein, National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators Alliance
* Cooperative Agreement
* Prakash Balan
* 02/28/2025
* USD 9,113,436.00

The intellectual merit of this proposal is to provide rigorous and structured
monitoring and evaluation of the Industry/University Cooperative Research
Centers (IUCRC) program to better inform the IUCRC Community with knowledge and
best practices that will enhance the effectiveness and success potential for the
program in achieving its goals. Key goals of the IUCRC program include the
following: Contributing to the nation's research enterprise by developing long-
term partnerships among industry, academe, and government; Leveraging NSF funds
with industry to support graduate students performing industrially relevant pre-
competitive research; Expanding the innovation capacity of our nation's
competitive workforce through partnerships between industries and universities;
and Encouraging the nation's research enterprise to remain competitive through
active engagement with academic and industrial leaders throughout the world.
This grant will support a program that will seek to provide critical, timely and
ongoing assessment of the effectiveness of the IUCRC program to the recipients
of IUCRC Program awards as well as the broader industrial community engaged in
the IUCRC activities. The insight and knowledge gained on the catalysts that
drive enhanced effectiveness of funded IUCRC centers will be critical in
informing the IUCRC community and the NSF. This knowledge will enable the
creation and sustenance of a vibrant and robust program, while also providing
critical insights to NSF to better support a vast, rich and highly heterogeneous
group of center ecosystems. The insights and knowledge gained through the
proposed evaluation and assessment activities will help ensure that the vision
and mission of the IUCRC program is well supported and further enhanced.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project will be the enhancement
of the IUCRC Program and its ability to deliver innovations to address societal
needs through effective Industry-University Collaborations. Effective and robust
program assessment and monitoring will help accelerate the sustainability of
strong centers that can achieve NSF's published goals for the IUCRC centers.
This assessment program will be critical in ensuring that public funds are
effectively spent on maintaining the highest caliber IUCRC center network, while
serving as a transformative vehicle for the translation of pre-competitive
research and development activities into industrial use through university
collaborations. This will in the long term ensure that the IUCRC program
continues to remain robust, grow effectively and have a sustainable long term
commercial and societal impact.