* 1732360
* Long Term Development of Economic Landscapes in an Island Context
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Kyungsoo Yoo, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2022
* USD 226,267.00

Agricultural development is a cumulative process that occurs within dynamic
social and ecological contexts. Because agricultural practices modify the
environment, the collective impact of development changes the contexts of
production for the next generation of farmers. In the tropics, food-production
strategies have transformed the environment to create a mosaic of economically
important species and microenvironments, which have allowed populations to
extend production and innovate new techniques. Such environmental changes reside
within wider social relationships, often those that negotiate power. Social
relations impact the course of agricultural development by influencing the
nature of labor mobilization and the use of landscapes. Scholars have long made
a compelling case that change in Polynesian economies was motivated by elite
demands for surplus, often taking advantage of favorable but circumscribed
ecological conditions, but the evidence to model such processes are lacking in
small scale political entities. Archaeological investigations of agricultural
development provide information on cultivation strategies used in different
places and times, relevant for understanding the role of social and
environmental factors. These data have considerable temporal depth to support an
examination of the complex interplay of social, economic, and physiological
processes over time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within this broader context, Dr. Seth
Quintus and his co-investigators will undertake research to study the
development of economic landscapes on Ta'u Island American Samoa. This research
will be conducted by collecting data from a field and settlement system recently
discovered in the interior uplands of the island. Traditional archaeological
excavation and remote sensing methods will allow the team to understand the
distribution of human activities, which will aid in identifying social
differences within the population. The results of archaeological survey will be
compared with an assessment of local variation in soil fertility and landscape
evolution that might have affected the decisions of producers. Taxonomic
analysis of wood charcoal assemblages will be used to investigate the role of
tree-cropping in the production system, an important but not well understood
component of Pacific production systems. These methods will provide an
integrated examination of the coupled social and environmental processes that
have created small island landscapes such as the one found on Ta'u. Socio-
ecological dynamics helped to create the environments that we see today, which
continue to be the focus of production for island residents. Understanding how
these environments were created on isolated islands, which are considered ideal
model systems, is fundamental to developing production strategies that can
address concerns regarding food security and the promotion of food sovereignty
today.