* 1732434
* Collaborative Research: An Integrated Approach to Convex Optimization Algorithms
* MPS,DMS
* 10/21/2016,08/31/2018
* Anne Gelb, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 27,735.00

Image reconstruction and feature extraction have been important aspects in
various applications such as medical resonance imaging (MRI) and synthetic
aperture radar (SAR). However, these procedures involve challenges. Different
applications may vary in data acquisition (sampling) domains, levels of detail
required, and processing domains for the features of interest. The data
acquisition is usually under-prescribed and noisy. The sampling domains and/or
processing domains may not be well suited for the underlying question. All of
these make the problems ill-posed, and various regularization techniques are
necessary to study the problems by formulating them as convex optimization
models. This project will develop an integrated framework of investigating such
convex optimization models. The project will provide graduate students with
opportunities for training through research involvement and will prepare them
for careers in science and engineering.

The PIs aim to propose a systematic way of evaluating various regularization
techniques in such models, conduct a rigorous numerical analysis of the models,
and develop efficient numerical algorithms of solving the models. Specifically,
the PIs will address the following technical questions: (1) What constraints
must be placed on the collected data in order to construct a numerically robust
approximation to the underlying function? (2) How quickly and in what sense does
the approximation converge? (3) Are the corresponding numerical algorithms
developed for the fidelity and regularization terms viable? (4) How well are
perturbations from the original data tolerated? The project aims to provide
answers to all of these questions.