* 1732256
* Experimental Study of Mineral Solubility in Fluids of the Deep Crust and Upper Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Craig Manning, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2021
* USD 468,247.00

Fluids in Earth's deep crust and upper mantle play an important role in a wide
range of geological processes. They change rock compositions, participate in
crustal and mantle melting, and mediate how rocks deform. Their ability to
change rock composition figures prominently in Earth?s long term compositional
evolution that resulted in formation of the continental crust on which we live.
The action of fluids in deep environments is a fundamental aspect of melting
that leads to large volcanoes whose volatile content governs explosivity and
therefore the hazards they pose. By controlling how rocks deform, fluids in deep
settings also play a poorly understood role in deep, slow-slip earthquakes whose
generation we are only now beginning to understand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to experimentally characterize the basic physical chemistry of how
water interacts with and dissolves minerals in the deep crust and upper mantle.
It is proposed to conduct experiments in three areas. The first will provide
robust thermodynamic constraints on the speciation of aqueous silica, the most
abundant neutral species at most crustal conditions. A second component of the
work focuses on dissolved Si at alkaline conditions. This is because models
suggest that the pH crustal and mantle fluids is alkaline over a wide range of P
and T. Finally. the team will extend previous experiments on quartz and feldspar
solubility in H2O-salt solutions to include CaCl2 and anorthite, which have not
previously been studied but which are key ingredients to any understanding of
deep fluids. All experiments will involve hydrothermal piston-cylinder methods
which provide precise and accurate solubility constraints at the requisite
conditions. The work will provide constraints that will help improve new models
of the chemistry of fluid-rock interaction at high pressure and temperature.