* 1733899
* A Longitudinal Study of Gender Stratification in Science and Engineering
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Susan Silbey, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 01/31/2020
* USD 68,750.00

This project is a longitudinal study that explores the cultural foundations by
which women and men take on different occupations and professional positions.
The plan is to survey people who entered college 10 years ago planning to be an
engineer to discover what they are doing now and what choices they made. The
purpose is to explain the persistent differences in men's and women's commitment
to a career in engineering. The respondents have been surveyed annually from
2003-2007, in 2012, and now in 2017. Men and women enter engineering school with
similar math and science achievement scores and graduate with similar
achievements in their engineering courses. Yet, women leave the engineering
profession at significantly higher rates than do men. While women and men enjoy
nearly comparable levels of confidence in their technical expertise, women
report lower levels of confidence that engineering is an appropriate fit with
their ambitions. Women seek careers in engineering as an expression of their
commitment to improve the quality of life for all citizens; and, they do not
find these values affirmed through their networks or exposure to the
occupational field. Despite repeated efforts to reform education and training
and to encourage workforce participation, recent trends suggest that the
engineering profession remains remarkably resistant to change in its gender
composition. Gender segregation in STEM compromises the competitive position of
the United States in a global economy as well as American values of equity,
fairness, and equality. The proposed study contributes to policy debates by
assessing the dilemmas plaguing engineering and STEM fields.

Our theoretical model adjudicates among the most important contending
explanations for continuing gender stratification in professional employment by
testing gendered advancement rates, work-family nexus, de-politicization in the
workforce, gender stratification and social networks. Methodologically, this
study builds from a unique longitudinal panel and dataset to explain the
critical transition from credential acquisition to workforce participation ten-
years post-graduation; the research exploits a rigorous design, and uses a
longitudinal panel to test causal models, yielding greater predictive power.
Specifically, we show how cultural schema and network patterns reproduce gender
segregation, offering insights that can be used more broadly. In sum, the
research is designed to identify gaps in our understanding, as well as to
address some of the methodological problems associated with answering
outstanding questions about gendering in STEM occupations.