* 1733004
* 2017 NSF Engineering Education and Centers (EEC) Grantees Conference
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2017,10/31/2021
* Rocio Chavela Guerra, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 10/31/2021
* USD 390,461.00

Under the current socioeconomic and political landscape, increased levels of
accountability are being faced in many scientific areas. As a result, funding
agencies have been paying significant attention to increasing the impact of
their research investments. This project will bring together approximately 200
researchers from the National Science Foundation (NSF) Engineering Education and
Centers (EEC) Division for a meeting to be held in the Washington, DC,
metropolitan area in the fall of 2017. During the two-and-a-half-day conference,
EEC grantees will have opportunities to collaborate, share promising practices,
and learn about state-of-the-art and ongoing efforts that could help them
increase the impact of their projects. By having a focus on impact, the proposed
conference contributes to the broader conversation to characterize and
meaningfully communicate insights about the outcomes of NSF investments in areas
such as engineering education research, broadening participation in engineering,
and workforce development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Staff from the American Society
for Engineering Education will consult with a four-member planning committee,
comprising EEC grantees, to plan and organize the meeting. The meeting will
include plenary talks and panels, concurrent sessions, poster sessions featuring
grantees' projects, and networking sessions. The interactive components of the
meeting will be designed and structured to emphasize conscious collaboration and
to maximize cross-pollination among grantees. Conference attendees will provide
feedback via two mechanisms: (a) immediate post-conference survey, and (b) six-
month follow-up survey. ASEE will produce a written summary of the meeting that
includes summaries of plenary talks, summary analyses of the relevant breakout
discussions (focusing on lessons that can be shared among grantees), and results
from the evaluation survey. The proposed meeting provides a cost- and time-
effective opportunity for EEC grantees to share their research, discuss current
directions and challenges, and explore new opportunities and partnerships for
future work. This meeting also represents an opportunity for the EEC community
to draw upon knowledge that is currently tacit within individual projects, as
well as highlight emerging knowledge about the characterization and effective
communication of project impacts within and outside of the engineering education
ecosystem.