* 1733598
* Collaborative Research: Tracking Middle-late Paleozoic Global-ocean Redox Conditions Using U Isotopes in Marine Carbonates
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Stephen Romaniello, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 08/31/2020
* USD 141,070.00

The goal of the funded proposal is to determine the relative amounts of oxygen
dissolved in ancient oceans during a unique geologic time interval (300 to 420
million years ago) when three major mass extinctions occurred and the Earth was
significantly warmer than today. Understanding the history of oxygen levels in
ancient oceans is important because oxygen concentrations influence all marine
animal life, control the formation and preservation of petroleum and many
economic mineral deposits, and affect important biochemical reactions in the
oceans and atmosphere. This project utilizes the relatively new geochemical tool
of uranium isotopes to develop the most detailed history of changing ocean
oxygen concentrations to date. The funding supports the training of the next
generation of Earth scientists, will provide hands-on field and laboratory
experience for first-generation college students, and will support multiple
primary school science teachers to conduct real-world science to gain confidence
and provide new ideas for their own classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project goal is to develop a global-ocean redox curve using U isotopes from
Devonian-Mississippian marine carbonates. The ~100 million year study interval,
which bridges the transition between poorly oxygenated Precambrian-Early
Paleozoic oceans and well-oxygenated Late Paleozoic-Recent oceans, is important
because of: 1) a doubling of atmospheric pO2 levels, 2) a transition from
greenhouse to icehouse climate and intensifying ocean circulation, 3) the
occurrence of three mass extinctions, two of which are attributed to marine
anoxia, and 4) multiple large positive &amp;#61540;13C excursions. The U-isotope
composition of marine carbonates has the potential to record mean global-ocean
redox conditions owing to the long residence time (~500 thousand years) of U in
seawater. Samples will be collected from biostratigraphically well-dated
successions in Nevada and Utah at spacings ranging from ~100 thousand
years/sample to &lt;20 thousand years/sample through specific event intervals.
To assess samples for local redox influences, we will analyze redox-sensitive
metals, Fe-speciation, and Corg:P ratios. To verify the global nature of the
composite curve, we will sample and compare to selected shorter stratigraphic
intervals on other continents. &lt;br/&gt;