* 1733465
* Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI)-2017 Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2017,08/31/2017
* David Aha, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2017
* USD 16,074.00

Support for student travel for select students participating in the 22nd
AAAI/SIGAI Doctoral Consortium (DC). AAAI (Association for the Advancement of
Artificial Intelligence) is the major professional association for AI. This year
it holds its yearly conference in San Francisco, CA, where this DC will also
take place. At the Doctoral Consortium (DC), PhD students who are pursuing work
on AI-related topics present their proposed research and receive feedback from a
panel of established researchers, as well as from other student participants.
This provides the students with invaluable exposure to outside perspectives on
their work at a critical time in their research and also enables them to explore
their career objectives.

The DC program includes interactive sessions for feedback on dissertation topics
from authorities in the field, collaboration-building sessions, early career
advice, and well-placed networking opportunities. Participation in a doctoral
mentoring opportunity such as this broadens participation to those who might not
have attended an AI conference out of lack of habit or resources. This is
especially true for those at smaller institutions and those which have less
developed AI programs. Engaging such participants has the potential to draw more
talent into AI research, improve research ideas in their formative stage, and
engender collaborations across the breadth of disciplines associated with
intelligent systems.