* 1733716
* The untapped community: Community colleges as an opportunity to broaden participation in engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Nadia Kellam, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 06/30/2022
* USD 399,388.00

By the year 2022, the demand for engineers is projected to exceed their
anticipated graduation from degree programs by 1 million. With the shifting
demographics of the country, there is also an imperative need to attract women
and people from groups traditionally underrepresented in engineering to address
this workforce shortage. Community colleges are well suited to be a resource in
these efforts with the potential to increase both the number and diversity of
such qualified engineers. Although community colleges have received much
attention in recent years, little is known about the experiences of community
college engineering students as they complete their coursework at the community
college and transfer to the next stage of their life (e.g., accredited
engineering program or their career). As this time period critically influences
students' chosen pathways to engineering careers, this study seeks to understand
the lived and told experiences of community college engineering students,
specifically focusing on those from underrepresented groups (URGs). As this is a
budding, diverse pool of talent with promise in meeting the workforce needs,
this project has the potential to uncover barriers and catalysts that URGs
experience as they progress in their education in multiple contexts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves diverse community college programs
spanning three U.S. Census regions, which could inform both community college
programs and four-year institutions across the country. This work also leverages
the progress of prior National Science Foundation investments in community
colleges while addressing issues of social justice such as inequity and
exclusion, which are perpetuated when pathways to Bachelor's degrees are less
accessible for particular groups of students - here, community college students.
Specifically, the project will address the following research questions:
&lt;br/&gt;RQ1: What are the lived and told stories of community college
engineering students from URGs? &lt;br/&gt;RQ2: How do URG community college
students' understandings of their experiences and the relationship of those
experiences to the environment influence their plans for future education and
careers? &lt;br/&gt;RQ3: In what ways, if any, do community college engineering
students' narratives bring to light issues of oppression, privilege and
inequality? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this narrative inquiry project, the project
will conduct a series of in-depth interviews with participants from
underrepresented groups at three community college systems in Virginia, Texas,
and Arizona, where the selected institutions each serve large numbers of
students from underrepresented groups. These community colleges were chosen
intentionally as they have close proximity to and/or articulation agreements
with four-year institutions with engineering programs. Gaining a better
understanding of student experiences promises to enable proactive development of
strategies to position and prepare students to pursue four-year degrees from the
inception of their studies at community colleges. Moreover, findings from this
study promise to shed light on why existing efforts to increase transfer rates
to four-year institutions have had limited effectiveness, which could inform
academia, industry, and government.