* 1733914
* Archaeological Investigation of the Eastern North Atlantic Trade and Globalizing Economic Systems
* GEO,OPP
* 11/15/2017,10/31/2022
* Michele Smith, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Erica Hill
* 10/31/2022
* USD 650,103.00

Paragraph 1: &lt;br/&gt;This award supports archaeological research on the
development of trade networks in the North Atlantic and women's role in weaving
cloth and participating in these trade networks for 1000 years. Past studies
tell us that trade in the middle ages connected the North Atlantic islands to
only one country. However, this scientist's earlier research showed that nearly
1,000 years ago the Vikings traded and sold cloth in London and other European
markets. This means that 900 years ago, women in places as far away as the
islands of the North Atlantic made cloth for markets in distant places. The
reason this is important is because it suggests that women's work was key to
developing commodity markets that were the ancestors of today's market. By
understanding how early international trade began in the North Atlantic and
expanded as far as the Volga river, the research will contribute knowledge about
the emergence of today's more complicated trade systems, how trade affects
women's labor, and how people make decisions about what to make and what to
trade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paragraph 2: &lt;br/&gt;This scientific
investigation will employ a mixed methodology to document and analyze textile
collections from rural and urban, North Atlantic and European contexts. AMS, dye
and material analyses, strontium isotope analyses, and X-Ray Fluorescence will
be employed to further characterize North Atlantic collections and compare them
to previously collected data assemblages. Strontium isotope analyses and pXRF
data of archaeological samples and modern wool will be carried out in order to
map isotopic signatures geographically and provide insight into the movements of
textiles and the compounds used in their production across long distances, such
as to North America, northern Europe and Eurasia. Bringing together analyses
ranging in scale from trans-continental trade to assessments of individual
women's handiwork and to their products' elemental and isotopic signatures, this
project has transformative potential to provide an engendered, interdisciplinary
perspective on trade, women, and the emergence of early globalized economies in
the North.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.