* 1733817
* Community Based Conservancies: Investigating the Prospects for Cooperation and Conflict
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Carolyn Lesorogol, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 275,115.00

The research supported by this award will investigate the efficacy of community-
based approaches to protecting natural resources. Natural resources provide
environmental services such as clean water and air, genetic diversity, and
employment opportunities. How to best manage these resources remains a challenge
because of the many, often competing, demands made on them by different groups.
Over the last few decades, methods of conservation have undergone significant
change from approaches that prohibited any human use of key areas to those that
recognize the important role that user communities have to play. Understanding
if and how community-based approaches to conservation work is important for
assuring that future efforts at designing policies and programs for natural
resource protection and utilization are efficient and
effective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher has chosen to conduct the
research in East Africa because she has found a site where some community-based
approaches, which are known as Community Based Conservancies or CBCs, have been
operating for some time while others are just being introduced. This allows her
to carry out a scientifically rigorous comparative project to evaluate the
advantages and disadvantages of this approach to natural resource management.
The region is home to important wildlife species such as lion, elephant, rhino,
cheetah and giraffe. These animals live in landscapes alongside communities of
livestock herders who depend for their livelihoods on the same resources as the
wildlife. Thus, this is an ideal setting in which to understand how community-
based approaches to conservation work, their costs and benefits to communities,
and whether they are an effective and efficient means of resource management.
Data will be collected interviews, observations, surveys, experimental
economics, and document analysis. These data will allow the team to study the
process of CBC formation, community participation, and how land use rules are
designed and implemented. They will assess how CBCs affect cooperation and
conflict among CBC members as well as communities that are adjacent to but
outside of CBCs. The investigators also will construct computer simulation
(agent-based) models to understand how changes brought about by CBCs affect the
environment and household well-being. The study will provide education and
training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students at two American
universities. Study results and the simulation models produced, which will be
made publically available, will be applicable to other settings, such as
national parks and other key sites in the United States.