* 1733878
* AitF: Collaborative Research: Fast, Accurate, and Practical: Adaptive Sublinear Algorithms for Scalable Visualization
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Aditya Parameswaran, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 234,000.00

With the wealth of data being generated in every sphere of human endeavor, data
exploration--analyzing, understanding, and extracting value from data--has
become absolutely vital. Data visualization is by far the most common data
exploration mechanism, used by novice and expert data analysts alike. Yet data
visualization on increasingly larger datasets remains difficult: even simple
visualizations of a large dataset can be slow and non-interactive, while
visualizations of a sampled fraction of a dataset can mislead an analyst.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop FastViz, a scalable
visualization engine, that will not only enable visualization on datasets that
are orders of magnitude larger in the same time, but also ensure the resulting
visualizations satisfy key properties essential for correct analysis by end-
users. To ensure immediate utilization, FastViz will be applied to three real-
world application domains: battery science, advertising analysis, and genomic
data analysis, and implemented in Zenvisage, an open-source visual exploration
platform developed by the PIs. Students in the project gain invaluable
experience in combining the algorithmic and systems considerations that enable
data exploration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FastViz's development is driven by
simultaneous investigation of systems considerations, such as indexing and
storage techniques that enable various forms of online sampling, and algorithmic
considerations for &lt;br/&gt;(a) visualization generation, where the goal is to
produce incrementally improving visualizations in which the important features
are displayed first, and &lt;br/&gt;(b) visualization selection, where the goal
is to select, from a collection of as yet not generated visualizations, those
that satisfy desired criteria. &lt;br/&gt;On the systems front, FastViz will
leverage and contribute back to recent developments on online sampling systems
that enable the use of more powerful sampling modalities. &lt;br/&gt;On the
algorithms front, FastViz will draw ideas from testing, distribution learning,
and sublinear algorithms literature that, to the best knowledge of the PIs, have
not been adapted in practice. The algorithms developed will obey optimality
guarantees, and wherever possible, instance-optimality guarantees, ensuring that
they will adapt to data characteristics in the most efficient way possible.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will lead to a better understanding of the
interplay between sampling algorithms development and systems design,
facilitating the adoption of more realistic models and algorithms on the one
hand, and the development of more powerful sampling engines that enable the
models required within the algorithms.