* 1733860
* AitF: Mechanism Design and Machine Learning for Peer Grading
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Jason Hartline, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2022
* USD 716,000.00

This project explores the design and analysis of peer grading technology. A peer
grading system is an online tool that collects student submissions, assigns
review tasks to the students and graders, and aggregates reviews to produce
assessments of both the submissions and the peer reviews. The PIs have developed
a prototype system and have collected preliminary evidence that suggests that
peer review has important potential benefits:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Learning
by reviewing: Students learn from critical assessment of other students' work.
In the PIs' prototype at Northwestern, 60% of the students reported that peer
review helped them learn course material and 55% of the students reported that
peer review helped them to prepare better homework solutions
themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Reduced grading staff: Peer grading reduces
the grading load on course staff and allows for effective teaching with larger
classes. This is especially important currently, as interest in computer science
classes increases at a faster pace than teaching resources. In the PIs'
prototype at Northwestern, the course staff graded 1/5 of the student
submissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Promptness of feedback: Reduced teacher
grading enables prompt feedback to students. In the PIs' prototype at
Northwestern, peer reviews were available within three days and final assessment
of both the submission and peer reviews were available within five days. Prior
to introducing peer review, assessments took one to two
weeks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A peer grading system is comprised of three main
components:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. The review matching algorithm determines
which peers should review which submissions and which submissions should be
reviewed by the teacher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. The submission grading
algorithm aggregates the reviews of the peers and the submissions and assigns
grades to the submissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. The review grading algorithm
compares the peer reviews with the teacher reviews and assigns grades to the
peer reviews. Without this algorithm, peers may not put effort into providing
quality reviews, and the reviews will be neither accurate for grading nor
beneficial for the peer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The details of these algorithms
are crucial for the proper working of the peer review system. A main research
effort of this project is to identify the algorithms to use for each of these
components. The review matching algorithm affects the accuracy of the subsequent
grading algorithms and the grading load of the teacher. The submission grading
algorithm determines which peer reviews are accurate and which are inaccurate
and uses this understanding to assign grades to the submissions that are
representative of the submission quality. The review grading algorithm
incentivizes the peers to put in sufficient effort to determine whether a
submission is good or bad and it is calibrated so that good reviews and bad
reviews get the appropriate review grades. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs have
implemented prototypes of these algorithms as part of a peer grading system that
has been prototyped in Northwestern computer science classes. However, the space
of possible algorithms is large and the PIs' work on the prototype has yet to
determine the algorithms that combine to give the best education outcomes. A
main focus of this project will be improving the understanding of which
algorithms lead to the best education outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical
work in algorithms and machine learning provides a starting point for the
project's study of good algorithms for peer grading systems. A key endeavor of
the project is translating and applying these theoretical algorithms to the peer
grading domain. As one example, proper scoring rules are a natural approach for
grading the peer reviews. However, test runs of the PIs' prototype
implementation suggest that these rules might not be so good in practice. Both
new models and algorithms are needed in theory, and these new algorithms need to
work in practice.