* 1733818
* Global Atmospheric Modeling Hierarchy Development
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Stephan Fueglistaler, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2021
* USD 368,228.00

This project seeks to advance understanding in theoretical climate dynamics
through the development and use of idealized models of varying levels of
complexity. The models are designed to be only as complex as necessary to
capture the phenomena of interest, which are assumed to be manifestations of
fundamental climate system processes. One such model is the Held-Suarez model
(HS, named for its creators), which does not include clouds or moist processes
and uses thermal relaxation to generate the temperature contrast between the
equator and the poles. Despite its simplicity the model reproduces many features
of the atmospheric circulation including jet streams, reasonable approximations
of middle-latitude weather systems, and the tropical overturning circulations
known as Hadley cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One use of the HS model is to test
the hypothesis that key aspects of the atmospheric circulation, including the
vigor of kinetic energy generation and the amount of heat transported from
warmer to colder latitudes, can be understood in terms of Maximum Entropy
Production (MEP). MEP can be used to derive an upper bound on kinetic energy
generation in the HS model, but the upper bound is too large to be useful unless
constraints are imposed which make it dependent on planetary rotation rate and
other fundamental parameters. Research conducted here attempts to identify the
appropriate constraints in the HS model and assess their relevance for more
sophisticated models and the observed atmosphere. Other problems to be addressed
include the role of lower tropospheric wave momentum fluxes in stormtrack
dynamics, wave instabilities that transport westerly momentum from the middle
latitudes into the tropics, and generation mechanisms for external Rossby
waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additional problems are addressed with the HS model
by incorporating a simplified representation of the hydrological cycle in which
water vapor is treated as a passive tracer without radiative effects. Surface
evaporation proceeds according to a standard bulk formula and water vapor
condenses when it saturates at higher and colder altitudes. But the condensation
does not result in clouds or latent heating and water cycling has no effect on
atmospheric circulation. Despite these omissions the model produces water vapor
streamers, frontal precipitation patterns, and atmospheric rivers which resemble
their real-world counterparts. The model is used here to study kinematic
constraints on the mean strength of the hydrological cycle and its response over
continents to warmer conditions. For the latter application continents are
specified using a simplified "bucket" representation of soil
moisture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further research is conducted with a model at a
somewhat higher level of complexity, which uses simplified atmospheric radiative
transfer (the grey-body approximation) rather than thermal relaxation to produce
the pole-to-equator temperature contrast. The model allows the hydrological
cycle to affect circulation through condensational heating, but water vapor has
no effect on radiative transfer and clouds are not represented. This version of
the model is used to study the behavior of the intertropical convergence zone
(ITCZ), the narrow band of clouds and precipitation usually found near the
equator. One strategy is to modify the model so that it represents only a
limited zonal sector of the atmosphere, so that disturbances of the ITCZ caused
by phenomena larger than the width of the sector are
eliminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has scientific broader impacts through
the sharing of model codes and documentation with the research community through
a web portal. Versions of the models have already gained broad acceptance as
research tools, but they have been disseminated largely through personal
connections with the PIs' research group. Beyond their value for isolating and
examining specific climate system processes, the models have proven useful for
testing numerical methods used in comprehensive climate models. In addition, the
models can play an important role in communicating climate science to the public
and researchers in other scientific fields. Simple models are valuable for this
purpose as they can be used to demonstrate that the simplifications required for
effective communication correctly represent, albeit in approximate form, the
workings of the climate system. The project also provides support and training
for a graduate student, thereby providing for workforce development in this
research area.