* 1733606
* ECA-PGR: Regulatory variation controlling architectural diversity in maize
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2023
* Sarah Hake, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 12/31/2023
* USD 3,880,563.00

Plant architecture, the number and arrangement of organs (e.g. branches, leaves,
flowers) on a plant, is central to crop productivity and has been a primary
target in domestication and improvement of many crops. Maize is a cereal crop
with the highest dollar value in the U.S. and abroad. Maize yields have
increased eight-fold in the past century due largely to selecting for optimal
architecture at increased planting densities. However, yield gains have
significantly diminished in recent years. This reduction requires the
acquisition of new knowledge about complex gene networks that control plant
architecture, which could be applied to breeding and engineering better maize
varieties. In maize, genes that control leaf angle also affect panicle
architecture. Breeding for upright leaves allows light capture within the lower
canopy in dense fields, while optimizing the structure of the grain-bearing
panicle improves seed set, grain fill, and harvestability. The major goal of
this project is to develop the ability to manipulate target traits without
disrupting other aspects of growth and development that may negatively impact
yield. This goal will be accomplished through an integrated approach that will
define the gene networks that control these traits, and map the location of key
regulatory genes on maize chromosomes. This information will be used for genetic
manipulation of optimal plant architectures that will lead to increased yields.
This project will educate high school and rural community college teachers in
concepts of quantitative genetics and genomics, and will also provide an
interactive curriculum for their
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pleiotropy is the effect a gene has
on multiple phenotypic characters, and it represents a major force that shapes
and constrains biological evolution. A well-established principle of
developmental evolution is that genes are reused in different developmental
processes leading to pleiotropic effects. The importance of cis-regulatory
elements for adaptive evolution is thought to result from their reduced
pleiotropy relative to protein-coding variants. Thus, the ability to manipulate
cis-regulatory elements at functionally conserved pleiotropic loci would allow
greater precision for engineering and/or breeding of optimal crop ideotypes.
Several lines of evidence in maize suggest a common gene regulatory network
functions at the boundaries of distinct lateral organs and contributes to
pleiotropy between leaf angle and tassel branch number, two important agronomic
traits. This proposal aims to uncover genetic variation in pleiotropic loci and
determine how that variation mediates phenotypic effects in these traits. First,
context-specific multi-omics datasets will be integrated to define core
regulatory modules that function at lateral organ boundaries, and promote
development of morphologically distinct organs in maize. Second, quantitative
approaches that leverage maize diversity will be used to explore allelic
variation in these modules and how it translates to phenotype. Finally,
hypotheses on function of cis-regulatory variants controlling pleiotropic loci
will be tested using functional genomics approaches, including genome editing.
These integrated analyses will define regulatory loci that control architectural
variation across maize diversity, which can be leveraged for targeted crop
improvement. New methods for incorporating biological network information in
genomic selection models to predict phenotype from genotype will be explored.