* 1733649
* Preparing undergraduate 'learning assistants' to teach in design courses
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Andrew Elby, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Edward Berger
* 07/31/2020
* USD 399,804.00

Engineering is not just the application of mathematics and science to address
real-world problems and create new products; it involves design thinking, a
creative, collaborative, yet systematic process by which engineering teams
design products or solutions. For this reason, many undergraduate engineering
programs require first-year students to take an Introduction to Engineering
Design course in which teams of students work to design a product or solution.
Because these courses can be large, universities often employ undergraduate or
graduate teaching assistants to help the student teams make progress. However,
these teaching assistants often face two major challenges. First, although it is
easy to simply tell the student teams what to do, it is much harder for teaching
assistants to cultivate their students' design thinking, which can enable
students to surmount obstacles and arrive at their own solutions. Second,
university engineering programs, reflecting the engineering profession, include
disproportionately few women, students from certain minority groups, and
students from lower-income backgrounds; and teaching assistants often need to
make sure that these underrepresented students (as well as quieter students from
all backgrounds) get to participate equitably in the student teams. In this
project, researchers and engineering educators at the University of Maryland are
testing a new approach to teaching the teaching assistants in engineering design
courses. The teaching assistants take a pedagogy course intended to prepare them
to foster the student teams' design thinking and equitable participation of all
team members. As a result, the students of these teaching assistants become
better at engaging in collaborative engineering design, which sets them up to
become better engineers once they enter the profession.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project staff is teaching a 3-credit
pedagogy course to undergraduate teaching assistants, based on the Learning
Assistant model from the University of Colorado. The pedagogy course integrates
topics from general STEM learning-assistant pedagogy courses, such as the
cognitive science of learning, facilitation of classroom discourse, and
metacognition, with topics targeting engineering design: design reviews, design
thinking, expert vs. novice practices in design, engineering epistemology,
teamwork and equity. Research on the effects of the pedagogy course addresses
two overarching research questions: (1) How do teaching assistants' interactions
with Engineering Design students affect the students' immediate actions, and
what effects do students think the teaching assistants have on their longer-term
growth, with respect to (a) design thinking and (b) enactment of equity as
reflected in communication, teamwork, etc. (2) How does the pedagogy course
influence teaching assistants' pedagogical beliefs and interactions with
students, with respect to how the teaching assistants notice and respond to (a)
students' design thinking and (b) threats to equity. The research team is taking
a design-based research approach, an iterative cycle of (i) collecting and
analyzing data, (ii) forming hypotheses about how and why the teaching
assistants did and did not learn specific ideas or enact those ideas in their
classroom instruction, and (iii) testing those hypotheses by modifying the next
round of the pedagogy course. Data include selected coursework from the pedagogy
course; videorecordings of teaching assistants' interactions with student teams
and what the teams do after the teaching assistant leaves; post-semester surveys
of the videorecorded student teams about their experiences with the teaching
assistant; and multiple interviews with the teaching assistants about particular
instructional decisions they made. This work informs the creation and
improvement of courses and programs that aim to prepare teaching assistants for
engineering design courses.