* 1733887
* Development of Technique: Systematically measuring the cosmogenic 26Al/10Be production ratio at a variety of altitudes and latitudes
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2022
* Paul Bierman, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 03/31/2022
* USD 112,053.00

Geologists use many rare isotopes of different elements to date events in the
past, both natural and those related to humans. One particularly widely applied
system compares the ratio of 26Al to 10Be in samples that have been exposed at
the surface of the earth and then buried. To create ages from a measured ratio
of 26Al/10Be, researchers need to know the ratio of 26Al/10Be after exposure but
before burial. While this ratio has been estimated before, its value is not well
known and appears to vary around the world. This project will be the first to
measure the 26Al/10Be ratio in over 150 different samples that have already been
collected and will thus provide the information needed for many researchers in a
variety of fields (geology, glaciology, archeology) to generate more accurate
26Al/10Be burial ages. The new data will also allow much better understanding of
the uncertainty of these ages. This work will train a graduate student in
science and will improve dates of ancient human remains as well as past changes
in Earth's climate, including the coming and going of
glaciers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowing the surface production ratio of 26Al/10Be
is critical for the calculation of two-isotope burial ages because a measured
26Al/10Be ratio less than the production ratio can be interpreted quantitatively
as the duration of burial after surface exposure of a sample. Although 26Al/10Be
dating has been widely applied (and many of the applications have been supported
by NSF), the 26Al/10Be ratio at production is not well constrained by data.
Recent measurements suggest that the ratio is at least 8% higher in Greenland
than the canonical value of 6.75, which is derived primarily from one series of
early 1990s measurements made at high elevation in the mid latitudes. Physics-
based models and some other new data suggest that the 26Al/10Be surface
production ratio should vary systematically with latitude and altitude. Here,
this project will test for spatial variance and determine the 26Al/10Be surface
production ratio empirically as a function of latitude (5-45Â° in both
hemispheres) and altitude (0 to 5000 meters above sea level.). The team will do
this by making 150 high-precision 26Al analyses of archived samples already
prepared and previously analyzed for 10Be. The team will compare this data-
driven determination of the 26Al/10Be surface production ratio with predictions
made using numerical models of nuclide production. The project will increase the
broader impact of this work by disseminating the results both at meetings and in
at least one peer-reviewed publication. This will ensure that the community is
aware of and can easily use the data that are generated to improve the accuracy
of 26Al/10Be two-isotope dating. Additional broader impacts include training a
student who will do much of the research and writing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.