* 1733556
* AitF: Algorithms and Mechanisms for Kidney Exchange
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Avrim Blum, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2022
* USD 799,621.00

Severe cases of renal failure require kidney transplantation. But the demand for
kidneys is huge while the supply is quite limited. Even when a willing donor is
found, several hurdles must be cleared before transplantation can take place.
Enter kidney exchange, the idea that patients can exchange willing but
incompatible donors. In its most basic form ? 2-way exchanges ? two patient-
donor pairs swap kidneys, that is, the first donor donates to the second patient
and the second donor to the first patient. However, exchanges along longer
cycles and even chains are also taking place. In recent years several kidney
exchange programs have become operational, building on the work of economists
and computer scientists. And while significant progress has already been made,
computer science has an even bigger role to play in kidney exchange research.
Indeed, the theme of this proposal is that challenges in kidney exchange give
rise to a wealth of exciting theoretical questions. Moreover, solving these
problems matters: These problems are important to the design and optimization of
real-world kidney exchange programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An overarching goal of
this proposal is to narrow the gap between the theory and practice of kidney
exchange. The proposed research will incorporate elements such as 3-way
exchanges, weighted edges, and chains initiated by altruistic donors into
existing work and develop new models that ? while still abstractions of reality
? are able to distill the essence of practical kidney exchange challenges. The
project can therefore impact the evolution of kidney exchange programs, which
are still in their infancy. &lt;br/&gt;In more detail, the project focuses on
two main research directions: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Dealing with incentives:
Transplant centers care foremost about their own patients. Thus if the
individual transplant centers cannot each be confident that their own patients
will fare at least as well if they participate in the exchange than if they do
not, then they may not join. Even more subtly, the transplant centers may join
but "hide" their easier-to-match patients. The proposed research aims to tackle
both of these challenges. The goal is to develop algorithms and analysis for
exchanges that produce optimal or near-optimal solutions, while providing strong
incentive guarantees for transplant centers to join.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2.
Dealing with crossmatches: Crossmatch tests require mixing samples of the blood
of potential donors and patients, and hence are only done after a matching is
computed. Unfortunately, crossmatch tests are quite likely to fail, leading to
the collapse of large portions of supposedly optimal exchanges. Optimization
that takes crossmatches into account offers significant gains compared to the
common practice today. The proposal contains plans to more broadly develop a
full theoretical and algorithmic understanding of the integration of crossmatch
tests into the optimization, and the fundamental tradeoffs involved.