* 1733578
* Collaborative Research: Working with Inuit Elders and Youth to Identify, Document, Quantify, and Share Human-Relevant Environmental Variables (HREVs) in Clyde River, Nunavut
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2023
* Glen Liston, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Erica Hill
* 04/30/2023
* USD 369,526.00

Paragraph 1 &lt;br/&gt;This award supports scientific research by
anthropologists, geographers, and atmospheric scientists to understand the
relationship between how weather is normally measured and the factors that
Arctic Indigenous peoples need to travel and work out of doors. In the same way
that wind-chill, a combination of temperature and wind speed has become a
commonly used composite of weather information used by many Americans, for Inuit
visibility and sea-state are critical factors in whether to travel or stay put.
For example, visibility is a product of cloud cover, wind, snow conditions,
terrain, and more. The research team will seek to quantify factors and test them
through camps for Elders and youth. In turn, the Elders and youth will train
scientists about the nuanced nature of safely and successfully traveling and
working in the Arctic. If successful, the team plans to share the factors with
forecast agencies and others to increase the production of actionable knowledge.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paragraph 2 &lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate
human-relevant environmental variables in close collaboration with an Inuit
community in the Eastern Arctic to co-produce knowledge on Arctic weather in
order to inform decisions that enable safe, productive travel on land, open sea,
and sea-ice required for acquiring food and other cultural purposes. In the
research team's work with the community of Clyde River, Nunavut, they have found
that synthetic environmental variables (e.g., visibility, blowing snow, wave
height) are more important than individual meteorological variables (e.g., air
temperature, wind speed). In addition, the work will be expanded and
strengthened by working with additional communities in the US and Greenland. In
short, Inuit synthesize complex variables representing the natural environment
to inform decisions that facilitate their life-way in this environment. The
research will be carried out in a setting familiar to Inuit and consistent with
Inuit social values and interactions, organized as a series of Elder-youth
science camps between Alaska Native and Eastern Arctic Inuit. This approach
overlaps with strong community interests in fostering interactions and knowledge
transfer among Elders and youth, as well as collaborating with visiting
scientists. As Elders consider what to do, they will also be teaching the youth,
making explicit many thoughts and considerations that otherwise typically remain
implicit. The youth, in turn, will help document this knowledge transfer by
keeping journals during the camps about their activities and what they are
learning and doing. Participant observation by the research team will give
insight into this process, so they can understand how awareness of weather and
related factors emerge, and will allow them to create mathematical descriptions
of those factors. In addition to the usual project publications and
presentations for academic audiences, the scientists will add to their existing
network of local weather stations and the associated Inuktitut (Eastern Canadian
Inuit language) and English public website that reports near-real-time weather
data&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.