* 1733542
* Multi-site Observations of the 2017 Eclipse Across America
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Shadia Habbal, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 08/31/2019
* USD 74,995.00

This project will support astronomical observations of the 2017 Great American
eclipse that will track across the United States on August 21, 2017. Total solar
eclipse crossings of the United States are extremely rare events; the last time
a total solar eclipse crossed the Continental U.S. from coast to coast was June
18, 1918. Eclipses offer a unique scientific opportunity to study the corona of
the Sun. The corona is the outer atmosphere of the Sun, which although very hot
(3-4 million degrees F), is very faint when compared to the light from the solar
disk. During a total solar eclipse the moon blocks the light from the solar disk
allowing scientists to study this tenuous corona where many of the phenomena
collectively known as space weather are generated. This project will observe the
2017 eclipse from three different vantage points separated by hundreds of miles
in order to minimize the risks due to weather and to maximize the potential
science. The project involves the training of students and the PI has a proven
track record of reaching out to the public regarding eclipse science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will take advantage of this total solar
eclipse to perform spectral line observations of the solar corona from its base
out to a distance of 8 solar radii. This lower region of the solar corona is
inaccessible to current ground and space-based facilities. The project will
explore the physical properties of the coronal plasma in the source regions of
the solar wind and potentially study any coronal mass ejections that might occur
during the observations. To perform the observations the PI will use three
identically instrumented telescope sites separated by hundreds of miles to
observe the eclipse. The telescopes will be equipped with triple-channel imaging
spectrometers with channels centered on coronal emission lines of Fe X 637.4 nm,
FE XI 789.2 nm and Fe XIV 530.3 nm with a bandpass of 70 nm for each channel.
This will provide information on the continuum light and line emission from
elements like Iron (Fe), Argon (Ar) and Nickel (Ni). These will be the first
ever observations of the spectral lines of Ar X, Ar XI, Ar XIII, Fe XV, Ni XIII
and Ni XV. The project also offers a unique opportunity of education and
outreach that will have lasting effects on STEM education well beyond the 2017
event. Students from PI's institution will be engaged in solar physics and
astronomy research and education. The project will, thus, serve to inspire and
train the next generation of astronomers. In addition the PI has been an
outspoken advocate for solar physics and eclipse science.