* 1733644
* A Pilot Investigation of Construction Workforce and Education Inequalities and Biases in Construction/Civil/Architectural Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Jaewon Lim, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 12/31/2019
* USD 49,988.00

The construction industry is one of the largest job providers in the U.S. and
plays a major role in producing well-paying, middle class, high-quality jobs.
Thus, many communities of color are underrepresented in the construction labor
force. According to a recent dataset from the U.S. Census Bureau (2014), male
workers in the construction sector, on average, comprise 16% more than their
female counterparts, and white workers, on average, comprise almost 24% more
than their black or African American counterparts. The challenges in the
construction workforce are many, and the solutions are complex. Increasing
racial and gender diversity in engineering is an imperative for the National
Science Foundation and a priority driven by the changing demographics and need
for high-quality engineering workforce, including in the construction industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using multiple data collection methods, the investigators
propose to obtain initial data studying inequalities and biases in
construction/civil/architectural engineering. More specifically, the
investigators aim to study the current inequality situation within the
construction workforce by race/ethnicity and gender, along with the spatial
distribution of wage gaps among U.S. metros/trades by utilizing nationwide data
sources and structural inequalities and biases within the national educational
system as they relate to AEC by surveying high school students about their
perceptions/ interests/ images/understanding on the AEC industry. In particular,
this study will focus on African American, Hispanic, and women. The timing of
this study is optimal because it possesses great promise in addressing an
imminent labor shortage issue while helping the construction industry recruit a
more diversified labor workforce.