* 1733854
* Collaborative Research: A Survey of post-fire Ascomycete and Basidiomycete Fungi in an Eastern Deciduous Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Andrew Miller, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 03/31/2019
* USD 44,091.00

Forest health and productivity are directly linked to fungi in the forest
environment. Fungi are necessary to recycle fallen leaves, twigs, logs and other
organic matter, returning essential nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus to
the soil so they are again available to plants. Mycorrhizal fungi play a second
essential role; they associate with plant roots and create a network beyond the
roots which provides plants with nutrients and water the plants could not
otherwise obtain. Fungi live in the soil and in organic matter. When fire
occurs, the normal fungi in the top layer of soil are destroyed by heat. What
takes their place to regenerate the soil and provide nutrients to plants so the
forest may recover? A small group of unique fire-resistant fungi replace normal
fungi for the first year or two following a fire. In eastern deciduous forests,
what these fire-response fungi are and how they function are largely unknown.
The devastating fires in the Great Smoky Mountains National Park offers an
opportunity to collect and document the unique post-fire fungi in burned areas
and to evaluate their role in rehabilitation of the forest. This study will
contribute to a deeper understanding of the exceptional biodiversity of the
southern Appalachian region by including these rarely seen fungi in biodiversity
estimates for the All Taxon Biodiversity Inventory (ATBI) in the National Park.
Additionally, several students from the University of Tennessee Knoxville will
be trained in this project and local citizen scientists will be involved in
various aspects of fieldwork and identification of fungi.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Documentation of fire-response fungi will involve a
network of biologists, students and citizen scientists. Five regions within the
fire-burn area of the Great Smoky Mountains National Park have been selected for
evaluation ranging from light burn (litter removed by the burn but tree damage
is limited) to intense (near total destruction of trees and complete organic
debris removal). The burn patterns are such that for four of these areas, there
are adjacent unburned areas that can act as unburned controls. The burn areas
and unburned control areas will be visited every two weeks. Three additional
collection events involving professional biologists, undergraduates associated
with the project, and citizen scientists will be organized. All fire-response
fungal fruiting structures will be collected and documented by date,
geographical area (latitude/longitude), habitat (the forest type before the
burn), degree of burn in the immediate area, and morphology of the fungi.
Fruitbodies and other fungal structures will be preserved in herbaria. DNA
sequences from several molecular markers will be generated. Cultures will be
obtained where feasible. DNA sequences will help confirm identity and
phylogenetic placement of fire-fungi. DNA sequences may also inform
environmental studies based on soil or substrate DNA profiles carried out by
other researchers.