* 1733594
* Investigating the Formation of Engineers and the Future Professoriate: Linking Writing Approaches and Attitudes to Doctoral Socialization, Persistence, and Attrition
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Catherine Berdanier, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2021
* USD 350,000.00

Though doctoral engineering education is understudied as a whole, attrition in
graduate engineering education is particularly unexplored. Recent reports by the
Council of Graduate Schools reported that in engineering, the 10-year completion
rate for doctoral programs for domestic students was only 59%. Attrition is
problematic for several reasons. First, since many domestic students are funded
by federal grants (through NSF, for example) and through domestic industry, each
domestic student that leaves academia prematurely represents a lost investment.
Second, graduate students are required for the continued quantity and quality of
engineering research and development that supports all facets of engineering,
impacting defense, biomedical applications, and energy technologies, and will be
future thought-leaders in engineering industry and academic research. Even
though engineering is usually represented solely as a mathematical and
scientific discipline, being able to successfully write for an academic
engineering audience can be the difference between completing a Ph.D. or leaving
without a degree. However, to date, no research has studied the linkage between
engineering writing, attrition/persistence and career goals for engineering
graduate students. This study employs both qualitative interview techniques and
statistical methods to study domestic graduate students who have decided to stay
in graduate school and those that decided to leave academia.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;According to Academic Literacies Theory, Role Identity
Theory, and Vygotskian Sociocultural Theory applied to graduate students and
academic writing, the ability to communicate as a member of a discipline (i.e.,
develop disciplinary discourse) is critical to the development of disciplinary
identity and feelings of belonging to a research community. Other studies have
linked these characteristics to persistence in graduate school; however, no work
to date explores student attitudes and concepts of writing in engineering as it
relates to attrition, persistence, and goals of careers in academia for graduate
students. An exploratory embedded mixed methods approach with a qualitative
emphasis is being conducted over the three years of this grant. This research
design seeks to examine the writing approaches and attitudes of graduate
students in graduate programs and in students who decided to leave academia
before completing their graduate studies (non-completers). With the broader
purpose of forming competencies and identities for future domestic faculty from
graduate students, the guiding research questions for this study are as follows:
(1) How do graduate students at various stages in their Ph.D. programs in
engineering perceive the role of academic writing as it relates to academic
persistence and the desire to pursue academic careers? (2) How are these
perceptions different or similar for graduate students who are considering
leaving or have left their Ph.D. programs before graduating? (3) Can writing
concepts, attitudes, and self-efficacies (measured through survey constructs)
predict or correlate strongly with graduate engineering students' attrition or
persistence? The intellectual merit of this work lies in the fundamental
advancement of theories of engineering formation and socialization at the
doctoral level, which to date are underexplored. Furthermore, the role that
writing plays in the socialization process, including its potential relationship
with the decision to leave academia has not been explored in a rigorous
quantitative way in any discipline. As the broader impacts of the study, the
findings of the study will facilitate the development of writing based
interventions to increase the persistence of U.S. doctoral engineering students.
Broader impacts activities include dissemination of research results via
academic courses for graduate students, and workshops, webinars, and resources
for graduate students and faculty.