* 1733636
* Professional Identity Development in Civil Engineering Students with Disabilities
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Marie Paretti, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 05/31/2022
* USD 400,388.00

Currently available statistics suggest that between 11 and 15% of U.S. college
students identify as individuals with disabilities, yet little work addresses
identity development within this population broadly, and even less explores
their experiences within engineering. Calls from both disabilities studies and
national organizations such as the American Institute for Research consistently
ask educators to broaden participation in Science, Technology, Engineering and
Math fields to include individuals with disabilities. Therefore, this work
targets an urgent need in engineering education research. The study lays a
foundation for broadening participation in engineering by enabling us to better
understand the supports and barriers students with disabilities experience.
Educators will be able to use the findings to develop inclusive educational
experiences that promote identity formation, diversity, and universal design. At
the same time, because the students will are followed into the workplace, the
findings can benefit engineering employers as they hire engineers with
disabilities, again focusing on systems and structures that support inclusion
and accessibility. Moreover, the project will build bridges between the
engineering education and disabilities studies community by establishing
partnerships and bolstering ongoing conversations within engineering that help
to move disability from the margins to the center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project addresses the call for studies on the "development of identity as an
engineer and its intersection with other identities" by conducting a
longitudinal study of students with disabilities in civil engineering. The
project will use constructivist grounded theory to study two cohorts over three
years. The first cohort follows 20 students from the fall of their first year
through the spring of their junior year, with interviews twice a year (early
fall and late spring). The second cohort, run concurrently, follows 20 students
from spring of their junior year through their first year in the workplace,
again with interviews twice a year. This approach spans the full undergraduate
experience as well as the transition to work, and provides a rich data set from
which to develop a theory of identity formation for this population.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Consistent with grounded theory, the project does not
impose an existing theory on the data; however, the understanding of identity
broadly draws on social identity theory (SIT), which treats identities in terms
of group membership developed through comparisons of values and behaviors
members make with one another and with individuals belonging to other groups.
This approach is consistent with existing studies of individuals with
disabilities in college as well as with studies of professional identities, and
allows the project team to situate the work within the broader landscape of
identity research in engineering. The project addresses a significant gap in
research on the professional formation of engineers by extending an emergent
theoretical model of identity development in civil engineering to students with
disabilities as they advance through their degree program and into the
workforce. It provides significant contributions to research on identity
development in engineering broadly, research on diversity and inclusion in
engineering, and research on disability studies in higher education - issues
that, to date, have seen little integration. The longitudinal approach advances
our understanding of undergraduate development by capturing both how and why
individuals with disabilities merge and negotiate personal and professional
identities through these changes over time. The model developed in this study
can then be used by researchers in other engineering fields and, potentially,
beyond engineering to facilitate a more robust and nuanced understanding of how
students with disabilities develop identities in college.