* 1733896
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Epigenetics of primate longevity
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2019
* David Watts, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2019
* USD 25,200.00

Humans are long-lived compared with other mammals, including our closest living
biological relatives, the chimpanzees. Yet the genetic and physiological bases
of our remarkable longevity, as well as the processes underlying human aging,
remain poorly understood. This project uses a comparative molecular approach to
elucidate the unique human pattern of aging and long life by comparing the
genetic regulatory changes that occur with age in chimpanzees with those
observed in humans. Specifically, researchers will investigate the chemical
alterations to DNA called methylation. Methylation is proving to be an important
mechanism, via the adjustment of gene expression levels, in the control of
temporal biological processes, including development and potentially aging.
Results of this project will allow for the identification of genes that are
differently regulated with age in the two species and thereby help identify
which physiological mechanisms (for example, DNA damage repair or immune
function) play critical roles specifically in human survival to advanced ages.
This project has important current relevance because human populations are aging
demographically at an unprecedented rate, and the need to manage and treat age-
related medical issues is rapidly growing. This project will contribute to the
training of graduate and undergraduate students in laboratory and analytical
techniques and will relay results related to aging to members of the public
through free educational programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A growing body of
recent research demonstrates a strong pattern of change in methylation levels at
sites across the genome with age in humans that are so predictable that they can
be used to estimate individual chronological age. Moreover, slight deviations
among individuals in "methylation age" seem to reflect biological aging:
elevated methylation age is associated with mortality risk, increased frailty,
decreased grip strength and lung function, diminished cognitive performance, and
increased cancer and cardiovascular disease risk. Thus, methylation age
represents a valuable new approach for measuring biological aging, identifying
factors that influence aging rate, and potentially uncovering the genetic
regulatory changes that underlie physiological aging. The current study will
generate genome-wide methylomes from 100 chimpanzee DNA samples collected from
individuals aged 0 to 59 and identify which sites show changes in methylation
levels with age. These data will be compared with existing human datasets to
discover differences in the methylome landscape and methylation aging rate
between the two species. Thus, this project extends the study of methylation age
to a cross-species comparative context to illuminate the evolution of
fundamental differences in life history between humans and other primates.