* 1733872
* AiTF: Collaborative Research: Algorithms for Smartphone Peer-to-Peer Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Nitin Vaidya, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2021
* USD 318,735.00

The growing ubiquity of smartphones, combined with the rapid improvement of
operating system support for direct wireless communication between nearby
devices, creates a compelling opportunity for the emergence of easy to deploy
and widely used smartphone peer-to-peer applications. There are several use
cases for such applications. For example, in many user environments, cellular
data minutes are bought in small blocks and carefully conserved by users,
generating an interest in networking operations that can avoid infrastructure.
In addition, smartphone peer-to-peer networks can bring connectivity to settings
such as disaster zones, festivals, or wilderness where traditional cellular and
WiFi coverage is compromised, overwhelmed, or non-existent. This project aims to
develop network algorithms and tools that simplify the design of useful
distributed systems on top of local peer-to-peer connections. The project has
the potential for significant societal impact by enabling compelling new
applications for smartphone peer-to-peer networks. The project is also expected
to have significant educational impact.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project
focuses on designing and analyzing provably correct and efficient network
computation algorithms that can run on top of existing smartphone peer-to-peer
services, and simplify the design of peer-to-peer systems that can be deployed
on existing smartphone hardware. The project consists of two major research
directions. The first research direction is experimental in nature. It will
study and evaluate peer-to-peer services available in commodity smartphone
operating systems and define a small number of validated abstractions that
capture their capabilities and behavior. The second research direction is
theoretical in nature. It will describe and analyze solutions to well-motivated
network computation primitives using these abstractions. The problems studied
will include consensus, leader election, rumor spreading, gossip and function
computation. The project will seek both provably correct and efficient
algorithms as well as lower bounds that establish fundamental limits for useful
computation in this setting.