* 1733800
* WORKSHOP:  Doctoral Consortium at the IEEE FG 2017 Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Yan Tong, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2018
* USD 12,500.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) of approximately 8
graduate students from U.S. educational institutions, along with unpaid senior
members of the research community as mentors, to be held in conjunction with the
twelfth IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition
(FG 2017), which will take place May 29-June 3, 2017, in Washington DC. The IEEE
FG conferences are the premier international forum for research in image- and
video-based face, gesture, and body movement recognition. Their broad scope
includes new algorithms for computer vision, pattern recognition, and computer
graphics, as well as machine learning techniques relevant to face, gesture and
body motion for a variety of applications. The conferences present research that
advances the state of the art in these and related areas, leading to new
capabilities in interactive systems, biometrics, surveillance, healthcare, and
entertainment, and they play an important role in shaping related scientific,
academic, and educational programs. More information is available online at
http://www.fg2017.org/. The Doctoral Consortium will provide an opportunity for
Ph.D. students whose dissertations are on topics related to automatic face and
gesture recognition to present their proposed research, and receive constructive
feedback from an invited committee of faculty and industry researchers, as well
as from other students working in these areas. The event will give students
valuable exposure to outside perspectives of their work, and provide a
comfortable forum in which to discuss and fine-tune their career objectives with
members of the international research community, and identify areas that need
further development. The workshop will also enable these young researchers to
develop a network of contacts at a critical stage of their careers, and will
foster a supportive community of scholars and spirit of collaborative research,
which will have broad impact because graduate students who are conducting
creative and groundbreaking work are the foundation and future of the community.
The organizers will make a particular effort to recruit and include students
from underrepresented groups (women and underrepresented minorities) and from
smaller schools.

The Doctoral Consortium will be a half-day event during the conference. There
will be five distinct aspects to the event. Each student participant will be
assigned a mentor based upon similarity of research interest and experience, who
will discuss the work one-on-one with the student and provide constructive
comments and guidance. There will be an oral session in which all participants
present their research to the group. And there will also be a Doctoral
Consortium poster session during the main conference, which will afford the
students an opportunity to present their research to the rest of the community.
Extended abstracts (up to 4 pages long) of the students' research will be
published online on the FG 2017 website. Finally, students and mentors will all
share a working lunch, in which mentors will briefly describe their career paths
and student participants will ask the mentors questions about the different
career paths. The combination of these five activities will provide an excellent
and structured way for students to communicate with other students as well as
with established members of their research community.