* 1733634
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Technology Adoption during Environmental Jolts: Mobile Phone Use and Digital Services Appropriation during India's Demonetization Crisis
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Aditya Johri, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 12/31/2018
* USD 49,974.00

Occasionally, events such as crises or new laws force a rapid change in the
technologies people use in their daily lives. These jolts often raise concerns
about peoples' access to and ability to use these new technologies, and about
the stress they put on the infrastructure that supports them. This proposal
studies the impacts of a rare "natural experiment" caused by the recent policy
decision in India to remove certain currency from circulation, which is leading
to a sudden and massive push toward the use of digital tools for managing money.
The research team plans to work with students, businesspeople, and people with
visual impairments in India to address two main questions: (1) how financial
technologies such as phone-based payments are adopted and adapted to respond to
new legal requirements; and (2) how the usability, availability, and necessity
of using a given technology interact to shape its success. Better understanding
of how the social and technical elements of the financial system adapt to this
jolt will advance our understanding of technology infrastructures in general and
inform the design of accessible technologies and technologies for contexts where
financial, educational, and technology experience resources are limited.
Studying this in India will provide important insights for U.S. companies
looking to enter the Indian market or already operating there, and will also
offer key insights on prospects and challenges in broadening the cashless
economy in the U.S. The project will also provide educational experiences that
cross both intellectual and national borders that will help train a diverse and
globally competitive STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on an
integration of ICTD and infrastructure studies, this project will develop better
understanding of how people adapt to technology in forced or deterministic
contexts. The team will study and compare three different user populations: 1)
college students; 2) people working in the informal sector; and 3) people with
visual impairments. These populations were chosen to highlight different aspects
of the broader population: college students are less reliant on the cash economy
and more educated; those in the informal sector are more cash-reliant and less
educated; and those with visual impairments may gain transactional benefits from
not having to handle cash, but also have to overcome inaccessibility of
mainstream technology. The research will employ a two-stage plan that starts
with interviews to capture nuance and inform questions that can be asked in a
second, survey stage; the team plans to conduct the research twice, once in the
first 6 months and again (with improvements based on the first round) in the
last 3 months of the year-long project, to capture both relatively fresh and
longitudinal experiences of the jolt. Leveraging existing relationships with
payment providers, visually impaired groups, and informal workers, the
researchers will study the ecosystem of payment technologies people use, the
ways their specific design affects people's ability to use them, and how their
social network both supports (through intermediation) and affects (through
network effects) the ways they can use those technologies. This will provide
lessons for understanding and improving innovation and technology use in
marginalized communities, lessons that may transfer to other contexts such as
the rapid adoption of mobile health apps and the use of technology in natural
disaster situations.