* 1733942
* Digging into High Frequency Data: Present and Future Risks and Opportunities
* SBE,SMA
* 03/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Mila Sherman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2021
* USD 196,518.00

During the past decade, global equity markets have been fundamentally altered
due to the vast increases in the speed of trading and the consequent
fragmentation of market activity. The resulting changes have led to intense
debate and scrutiny from investors, market makers, exchanges, and regulators.
The first objective of this project is to structure, verify and homogenize
multiple existing datasets and to create a transatlantic securities markets
database that can be easily used for research in Europe and the US. The second
objective is to analyze, compute and build models based on high-frequency data
to improve our understanding how electronic markets work. This project will help
with interpreting the data, understanding global interconnectedness between
securities and financial stakeholders, and providing new insights for
understanding financial crises and constructing effective financial
regulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first objective of this project is to
structure, verify and homogenize multiple datasets already available to the
researchers of the project and to create a transatlantic securities markets
database (for common stocks but also for other securities such as bonds, options
and futures) that can be easily used for research in Europe and the US. The
primary goal is to set up the basic infrastructure to clean up and link the US
and European datasets and to make these data accessible and exploitable for the
research team and to provide knowledge on how to merge these data to other
researchers and regulators. Such data in their raw form are unsuitable for
analysis and the limit-order books need to be recreated in the first place,
taking into consideration the peculiarities of each exchange and alternative
trading venue. At present, no such database exists. The second objective of this
project is to analyze, compute and build models based on high frequency data to
improve our understanding how electronic markets work. As demonstrated by
successive financial crises in the last twenty years, the lack of empirical
financial data in research and regulation is a hindrance to the wider
understanding of these events. It is important to have a holistic data in order
to understand causes, financial contagion, and consequences of financial
turbulence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was made as part of Round 4 of the
Digging Into Data Challenge, an international funding opportunity designed to
foster research collaboration across countries and to encourage innovative
approaches to analyzing large data sets in the social sciences and humanities.
The U.S.-based researchers will collaborate with scholars in Finland, France,
Germany, Italy and the U.K. to achieve the goals of this project.