* 1733857
* AITF: Learning and Adapting Sparse Recovery Algorithms for RF Spectrum Sensing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Peter Kinget, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 09/30/2022
* USD 649,963.00

Wireless communications technology plays a critical role in society, supporting
personal communication, business, defense and security, family connectivity, and
entertainment. As new applications emerge, the demand for connectivity is
increasing at a rapid pace. This development has put a strain on the available
resources for communications: the spectrum is a finite natural resource; the
most useful portions for mobile applications lie roughly from 700 MHz to 6 GHz.
Large portions of it have been allocated to primary users, many of whom play
socially critical roles. To accommodate the growing demand for wireless
connectivity, there is a need for devices that can sense and utilize available
spectrum in an opportunistic manner, while not interfering with primary users.
The challenge is to do this in a time- and energy-efficient manner, on mobile
devices. A general approach, which promises order-of-magnitude improvements in
energy efficiency for rapidly detecting large interfering signals, uses a
combination of new hardware to take a small number of measurements of the
spectrum as a whole, and nontrivial algorithms to interpret those measurements.
This project develops from machine learning to learn algorithms that are adapted
to the specific characteristics of the hardware sensor, improving handling of
non-linearities, yielding lower power sensors with improved sensitivity. The
researchers are mentoring graduate and undergraduate students, whose work
crosses disciplinary boundaries, and disseminating the results through new
course development and a new textbook. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project studies
methodologies for learning and adapting algorithms for sparse recovery for RF
spectrum sensing, leveraging a known connection to artificial neural networks,
in which the structure of the algorithm dictates the topology and weights of the
network. These weights can then be adapted and optimized to fit the
characteristics of a physical sensor. A major promise of this approach is the
ability to adapt to modeling errors, while simultaneously producing recovery
methods that are more sensitive, more robust, and implementable in a simple and
efficient manner. The project is developing a principled and transparent
methodology, including theoretical characterizations of when and why it is
possible to learn reconstruction and support recovery procedures that are
effective in both typical and worst-case senses. The project studies these
problems both for linear inverse problems and for nonlinear problems, both for
sensing the spectrum at a single time, and for integrating information over
time. The project experimentally evaluates the impact of these methodologies on
the efficiency and sensitivity of hardware sensors, realized as integrated
circuits.