* 1733575
* EAGER: Bio-Mimetic Molecular Machines Driven by Brownian Motion of Synthetic Peptoid Polymers
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Markita Landry, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 12/31/2018
* USD 130,000.00

Proteins form the core arsenal of life, in signaling how living organisms
behave, grow, and interact with their environment. To accomplish this range of
biological functions, proteins have evolved remarkable attributes to interact
specifically with other proteins, or with DNA. Recent discoveries have shown
that certain conserved protein sequences have evolved the ability to "walk"
along DNA in search of their target sites to enable this site-specific activity.
The extraordinary speed and precision with which proteins accomplish this task
remains a mystery, one that could have many benefits for engineering if the
molecular precision of protein-DNA interactions could be reproduced in nanoscale
synthetic systems. The research team will synthesize and characterize novel
nanoscale materials that will behave like natural proteins in their ability to
"walk" along DNA. This work could enable better understanding of how to design
enzymes for bio-energy applications, antibodies for biological nanosensors, and
protein-DNA interactions that drive all underlying cell processes. As a core
component of the proposed research, the primary investigator will collaborate
with Society for the Advancement of Chicanos and Native Americans in Science
program at UC Berkeley to recruit two undergraduate students representing
minority communities to the primary investigator's lab.

Brownian 1D diffusion of proteins along DNA enables protein-mediated cellular
processes to occur on biologically-relevant timescales. Recent discoveries in
protein biophysics have identified conserved sequences to facilitate
1-dimensional Brownian motion along DNA to expedite the target search process to
a biologically-relevant timescale. Synthetic nanostructures have not been well-
explored as bio-mimetic tools. Now that the "blueprints" for 1-dimensional
Brownian diffusion are less elusive, the investigators propose an orthogonal
study to apply these blueprints from biophysics to bioengineering. Here, the
investigators seek to exploit these evolved features of site-specific proteins'
1-dimensional diffusion along DNA to build synthetic peptoid-based molecular
machines. To-date, the study of synthetic motors has relied on the input of
external sources of energy (chemical, photonic, etc). The investigators seek to
exploit random (Brownian) mobility as a tool to build molecular translocators
from synthetic bio-mimetic structures. Ultimately, the prediction is that the
synthetic "Brownian machines" might carry molecular cargo, of potential
applicability to fundamental and applied molecular and cellular research alike.
This project combines high- resolution single-molecule fluorescence microscopy
with robotic peptoid synthesis to develop a new class of synthetic materials
capable of exploiting electrostatics for synthetic molecular machines. This work
could be akin to the proof-of-principle exploratory research in scaffold-and-
staple DNA-assembly that led to the field of DNA Origami. As a member of the
underrepresented scientist community, the PI is both a strong supporter, and
active leader in organizations supporting underrepresented scientists. This
research effort will be integrated with the UC Berkeley Latino/a American
Graduate Students in Engineering and Science program at Berkeley, and the
Society for the Advancement of Chicanos and Native Americans. Prof. Landry will
also organize and host the first nanobiosciences conference in Cuba, in
collaboration with Prof. Dionisio Zaldivar Silva, Dean of the Faculty of
Chemistry at the University of Havana Cuba. This NanoMEDD conference in Havana
will be held using extramural funding that has already been secured.