* 1733907
* The Institute for Quantum Information and Matter: Advancing the Entanglement Frontier
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* John Preskill, California Institute of Technology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mike Cavagnero
* 02/29/2024
* USD 12,150,000.00

Understanding, controlling, and utilizing the quantum world is challenging but
holds great potential for designing new forms of matter and new paths for
information processing. The Institute for Quantum Information and Matter (IQIM)
will explore phenomena that arise in complex quantum systems. Through this
Physics Frontiers Centers award, the IQIM will engage experimentalists and
theorists in research to understand and harness quantum systems with the goals
of developing new materials, new communication and computation methods, and new
insights into the structure of the universe. The IQIM will also advance
education and outreach, both for the scientific community and general public,
with a broad portfolio of activities including online activities such as YouTube
videos and animation, and on-campus activities such as summer programs for girls
and under-served middle school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IQIM research
activities are organized into three areas. The first connects ideas drawn from
computer science, information theory, engineering, and mathematics to
experimental quantum information platforms such as superconducting circuits,
ultracold atoms, and electron spins. The second spans a wide variety of
topological phenomena in many-particle systems emphasizing the prospects for
topologically-protected quantum information processing. The third area focuses
on information scrambling in quantum many-body systems, dynamics of localized
quantum phases, and ephemeral quantum phases of matter.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Physics Frontiers Centers award is co-funded by the
Division of Physics within the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
Sciences, and by the Division of Computing and Communication Foundations within
the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.