* 1733874
* AitF: Collaborative Research: Automated Medical Image Segmentation via Object Decomposition
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Matthew Gibson, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 07/31/2021
* USD 366,250.00

Medical image segmentation, the process of dividing a medical image into
meaningful objects such as organs, tumors, etc., is a critical tool that allows
medical professionals to provide customized medical care to patients. In the
past this highly technical, individualized care has required experts to manually
analyze the images, a process that is very expensive in both time and money.
Over the past decade, enormous technological advances have been made in
biomedical imaging, leading to a large amount of new and improved medical data
which has created a demand for algorithms which can process this data faster and
more thoroughly. Researchers have worked extensively to develop these medical
image segmentation algorithms, but current algorithms suffer from the following
drawbacks: 1) they do not have the capability of effectively representing
diverse shapes of a wide variety of medical objects and/or 2) they require
substantial interaction from an expert user. This research will develop a novel
medical image segmentation algorithm that can be applied to various types of
medical images and will be able to be executed by any user with basic computer
literacy. Many important objects will be able to be handled with the same
algorithm, such as livers, prostates, and vertebrae. This research allows
medical experts to spend less time analyzing a wide variety of medical images
and more time directly working with patients. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
algorithm will work for any medical imaging object of interest whose shape can
be decomposed into a small number of components with a very simple geometric
structure. For example, livers may be slightly different from person to person,
but almost all livers can be represented as a union of two or three "star-
shaped" components. A component is defined to be star-shaped if there is a
center point in the component such that the line segment connecting the center
to every other point in the component is contained within the object. If the
center of a single star-shaped component is known, then the whole component can
be very quickly identified by computer algorithms, but as the number of
components increases, the simultaneous computation of all the components becomes
much more difficult. This research will develop algorithms which can
automatically compute the centers of the star-shaped components for many medical
imaging objects such as livers, prostates, and vertebrae, and further will
develop algorithms that can simultaneously identify all the components for the
objects. The result will be a single algorithm that will be applied to many
scenarios and can be executed by non-technical users.