* 1733990
* Dynamic Risk Perception and Action in Response to Forest Insect Disturbance in North-Central Colorado
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2021
* Hannah Brenkert-Smith, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 05/31/2021
* USD 431,958.00

This study builds upon research conducted in 2006-2007 in north-central
Colorado, a region in which the forests have been devastated by a massive
mountain pine beetle (MPB) infestation that has affected more than 3.4 million
acres. While it is well established the environmental conditions change over
time, research that examines how risk perceptions and risk mitigating actions
may evolve in relation to changing environmental conditions is lacking.
Communities dependent on natural resources are especially sensitive to
environmental changes, particularly when such changes increase hazard
vulnerability and adversely affect livelihoods and recreation. In analyzing risk
perception and response to forest disturbance by MPB, the original study found
notable variation across communities, and that residents with higher levels of
perceived disturbance and community interaction were more likely to participate
in local actions in response to the MPB outbreak. The current study builds on
the previous work by revisiting the original study communities and focusing on
the temporal dimension of local responses. More specifically, it examines the
relationships between forest risk perception and various aspects of local
human?nature interactions including one?s sense of place, environmental values,
perceptions of disturbance intensity, experience with relevant emergencies, and
satisfaction with key actors tasked with managing forest resources. As such,
this study explores the dynamic relationships between hazard experience, risk
perception, and related actions that may shape future vulnerabilities and
adaptations of natural resource-dependent
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental risk perception and risk-related
behavior constitute an important topical area in both disaster risk reduction
and vulnerability to environmental/climate change studies. Despite the inherent
dynamic nature of risk events, the temporal dimension of risk perception has
been understudied in existing risk analysis. Natural resource-based communities
provide a key backdrop for analyzing dynamic risk perceptions and decisions in
changing social-ecological systems. Responding to the need for more longitudinal
studies in risk research, this study examines the dynamic risk perception and
action in response to forest disturbance by mountain pine beetles (MPB) in
north-central Colorado. Empirical research based on data collected in 2006-2007
on local responses to the MPB outbreak is replicated and expanded for nine
original study communities (Breckenridge, Dillon, Frisco, Granby, Kremmling,
Silverthorne, Steamboat Springs, Vail, and Walden). The study adopts a mixed
methods design combining secondary socioeconomic and biophysical data, media
analysis, key informant interviews, and mail surveys. Four main research
objectives guide this project: (1) to conceptualize the role of dynamic human-
nature relationship experience in framing risk perception over time using an
experience-based approach; (2) to assess temporal changes (and their spatial
variations) in hazard experience, risk perception, and beetle-related activeness
of local residents; (3) to analyze key factors influencing changes in perceived
forest risks; and (4) to explore the dynamic relationship between risk
perception and action in response to the MPB outbreak. Research findings can
contribute to increased local public awareness of the MPB outbreak and community
members' engagement with science and forest management. The project culminates
with a participatory process using community forums to articulate lessons
learned from community experience with forest insect disturbance over time.