* 1733640
* An Ethnographic Investigation of  Recent Shifts in Migration from the Global South
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Mahir Saul, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 136,091.00

The research supported by this award will investigate recent changes in the
mobility patterns of migrants from the global South. Over the past few decades,
flows of international migration have not only increased in volume, they also
have created ties between a wider range of countries than ever before. The
shifts appear to have multiple causes, including: new industrial production
centers; changing trade flows; improved incomes in countries outside Western
Europe and North America; greater access to long-distance travel; and new
technologies of communication. However, these generalizations mask considerable
diversity of migrant motivations and outcomes. If policy is to be developed that
will serve the needs both of the migrants and of the many countries that may or
may not welcome their arrival, much more needs to be known about why migrants
choose to leave home and where to go, and what becomes of them. The goal of this
research is to fill that need.

The researcher will focus on the understudied population of migrants from Sub-
Saharan Africa. He will base the research in the Eurasian city of Istanbul,
Turkey, an emerging manufacturing zone that has attracted increasing numbers of
non-refugee migrants. The researcher will employ qualitative methods to collect
data on the subjective attitudes of migration actors, their socioeconomic
characteristics, their perceptions of structural factors affecting their
prospects in Turkey and other potential destinations, their migration decision
histories, and the consequences of these decisions for individuals and their
families. Targeting a sample of 400 migrants, he will collect data through
participant observation, intensive extended interviews, and the compilation of
life histories. These data will be used to evaluate the researcher's hypothesis
that sub-Saharan migration is a middle-class phenomenon, which is misrecognized
because of the large national income level differences between origin and
destination nations. Findings from this research will contribute to developing
dynamic approaches to understanding the complexities of migration in the
contemporary worlds. This will be of importance for policy makers concerned with
migration and is in the United States national interest.