* 1733071
* Strongly Correlated Fermi Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Gabriel Kotliar, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education to advance understanding of strongly
correlated materials which have unusual properties and to improve their
theoretical description. Materials are ubiquitous in our daily life and
improving them is key for future technological progress. This project advances
the methods, concepts, techniques and computer codes needed to understand and
predict the properties of strongly correlated electron materials. In these
solids, the strong interactions among electrons lead to correlations in their
motions that are challenging to describe in standard theoretical frameworks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strongly correlated electron materials display a wealth of
new and unusual physical properties, ranging from superconductivity at unusually
high temperature to materials that transform from metals to insulators, a
process that depends sensitively on external conditions. Superconductivity
enables the flow of electric currents without resistance, while metal to
insulator transitions are used in fast switches and new memory devices. A goal
is to advance the predictive power of the theory to accelerate the process of
material discovery and design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project enables
multiple educational activities, such as the training of undergraduate and
graduate students, as well as postdoctoral associates, in the use of analytical
and computational methods, and the use of computational facilities. Research
will be disseminated through journal publications and the internet, as well as
through seminars, conferences and schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical and computational research and education to advance
understanding of strongly correlated materials and to improve their theoretical
description. This award supports developing methods, concepts, theory,
algorithms and computer codes to understand the physical properties of strongly
correlated materials in and out of equilibrium. A long-term goal is to enhance
predictive power to accelerate the process of material discovery and design
utilizing strongly correlated materials. Simplified many-body Hamiltonians will
be constructed and used to understand qualitative aspects of strong correlation
phenomena at low energies with computationally intensive calculations that model
more accurately the microscopic complexity of real materials. Computational
methods include combining electronic structure and dynamical mean-field theory.
This project will continue the development and testing of this non-perturbative
approach on materials of current experimental interest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
materials proximate to the Mott transition, the physics is governed by charge
blocking. The PI will explore the implications of strong correlations near a
Mott transition in nonequilibrium steady states in the presence of dissipation
and electric fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Hund's metals, the physics is
governed by spin blocking while the charge fluctuates strongly. The PI aims to
develop the theory of Hund's metal and apply it to prototypical systems such as
the iron pnictides and chalcogenide high-temperature superconductors and the
ruthenium oxides. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project enables multiple
educational activities, such as the training of undergraduate and graduate
students, as well as postdoctoral associates, in the use of analytical and
computational methods, and the use of computational facilities. Research will be
disseminated through journal publications and the internet, as well as through
seminars, conferences and schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.