* 1733665
* Defining and Assessing Systems Thinking in Diverse Engineering Populations
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Lisa Lattuca, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2022
* USD 460,153.00

Engineers play an important role in addressing the complex problems of our
global society, such as access to water and global health care. Employers,
policy makers, and educators agree on the need for engineers who can identify
and incorporate into their decision making relevant aspects of systems in which
their work is embedded. To date, there is limited research to guide educators in
fostering systems thinking, and few of these studies offer clear and
comprehensive definitions that can be translated into teaching approaches and
learning assessments. This project will develop and test a definition of systems
thinking as a holistic approach to problem solving in which linkages and
interactions of the engineering problem with its constituent parts, the larger
sociocultural context, and potential impacts over time are identified and
incorporated into decision making. In the field of engineering, research on
systems thinking tends to emphasize the ability to recognize potentially
relevant components of an engineering problem, rather than how these components
are embedded in broader economic, sociocultural, and temporal contexts that must
also inform decision making and solutions. Furthermore, elements of systems
thinking, such as an awareness of a particular sociocultural context or the
ability to coordinate work among members of a cross-disciplinary team, are not
always recognized as core engineering skills. Considering these professional
skills as lying outside the core of engineering can alienate individuals whose
strengths and passions are related to, for example, engineering systems that
consider and impact social change. A broader consideration of what constitutes
engineering may be particularly relevant for women and racially/ethnically
minoritized students who are more likely to be drawn to work where the social
impact is relevant. This study examines systems thinking among diverse
individuals across a range of expertise to develop a scenario-based assessment
tool that educators and researchers can use to evaluate engineering students'
systems thinking competence and can help broaden understandings of what is a
core engineering skill. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The primary aim of this study is
to expand current conceptions of systems thinking within engineering. The
project will define and assess systems thinking across a range of expertise and
identify life, educational, and work experiences that contribute to this
expertise. The study will consist of three phases. Phase 1 consists of
interviews with engineering students and practitioners to understand
individuals' concrete experiences with systems thinking, the approaches they
have used to solve complex engineering problems, and the relationship of their
prior life, educational, and work experiences with their systems thinking
practice and skill. Phase 2 involves think-aloud interviews in which
participants are presented with an open-ended engineering problem scenario and
asked to discuss how they would explore a possible solution. This phase allows
for the comparison of the strategies individuals with different levels of
systems thinking skill employ as they are solving a problem and their rationales
for decision making. This phase will yield an in-depth understanding of
different levels of systems thinking ability and provide the empirical
foundation for a systems thinking assessment tool. Phase 3 will build on
findings from Phases 1 and 2. First, using the empirically grounded
classification of the problem-solving approaches associated with different
levels of systems thinking ability, Phase 3 will develop and test a scenario-
based written assessment tool. This assessment tool will distinguish between
levels of systems thinking expertise. Phase 3 will also build on the ongoing
examination of how educational and life experiences may be associated with
differences in systems thinking ability.