* 1733897
* SBP: The Roots of Female Underrepresentation in STEM and Beyond: Exploring the Development of Gender Stereotypes about Intelligence
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Andrei Cimpian, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,181,554.00

This project examines the development of a key factor leading to women's
underrepresentation in science and technology. Specifically, it examines the
development of the cultural stereotype that links males but not females with
intellectual brilliance and genius. Previous research has found that academic
disciplines that are believed to require a "spark of genius" tend to have the
largest gender gaps. Because many science fields are portrayed in such terms,
the "brilliance = males" stereotype may be an important factor in explaining the
persistent gender gap in these disciplines. The primary goal of this research is
understanding how this stereotype is acquired over the course of development.
Investigating the development of this stereotype will inform how the stereotype
might steer capable young women away from pursuing careers in science and
technology and may also inform the optimal timing of potential interventions to
block its adverse effects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of three
studies to examine three crucial developmental issues. First, it investigates
the development of children's knowledge of the cultural stereotype that males
are more likely to be brilliant than females. Second, it investigates the
development of gender differences in children's motivation to engage in
activities portrayed as requiring high levels of intellectual aptitude. Finally,
it investigates longitudinally whether internalizing the stereotype against
females' intellectual abilities undermines young girls' subsequent motivation to
engage in activities that are said to require brilliance and giftedness. This
research explores the development of a set of processes that ultimately limit
opportunities for women. As such, these studies will improve parents',
educators', and policy-makers' ability to intervene at the root of the problem
to promote greater gender equity in those domains of academia and industry in
which women have traditionally been underrepresented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal is being co-funded by Developmental and Learning Sciences, Social
Psychology, and Science of Broadening Participation within the Social,
Behavioral, and Economic Sciences Directorate and by the Education and Human
Resources Directorate's Core Research program and the Research on Gender in
Science and Engineering program.