* 1733551
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Effects of Warfare and Violence on the Development of Social Complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Omar Alcover, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 10,565.00

Doctoral dissertation student Omar Alcover Firpi will examine how war shaped
settlement design and social organization among early, small-scale villages. In
particular, he will examine how networks of communities in defensive positions
formed in response to real, or perceived, external threats in pre-modern
societies. Previous archaeological scholarship on violence has focused on the
formation and maintenance of large states with formalized armies, yet few
studies have addressed the role of war in the emergence of social and political
complexity among modest sized groups. Because archaeologists can identify long-
term social trends in human activity the field is well-suited to answer how
societies engaged with, and were altered by, war. In this project, researchers
will answer how and why fortresses built and used among early Maya communities
in Guatemala, as well as the long-term effects warfare had on the regional
development of authority and defensive networks. Building on the premise that
collective violence is not an innate human condition, this project will evaluate
how war is socially and situationally employed by communities to defend
themselves from perceived threats. Results from this investigation provide
critical insight into why small communities engage in violence and the long-term
effects of such negative encounters. The project will provide educational and
professional training for American and Guatemalan students, furthering
collaborative ties between the two countries. Moreover, the interdisciplinary
dataset will integrate methods in remote sensing analysis along with
archaeological survey, excavation, and material analysis to determine the long-
term effects of violence during the establishment of early communities in the
Americas. A research team including local community members will examine how
fortresses and other defensive features were constructed and used by Maya
villagers during the Preclassic period (400BC- AD250) at the hilltop fortress of
Macabilero. Macabilero is located on the banks of the Usumacinta River in
northwestern Guatemala, in a region that has been continuously occupied since
the 4th century BC. Previous archaeological research in the Usumacinta Valley
has produced abundant archaeological and historical evidence for warfare during
the 6th through 8th century AD, when royal dynasties strove with one another for
territorial control. Focusing on the community at Macabilero in the Preclassic
period, before the rise of dynastic kingdoms, this research will clarify the
intensity and effect of warfare in the emergence of state society in the region.
The investigators will lead an interdisciplinary team that includes
archaeologists, remote sensing specialists, and environmental scientists to
clarify how violence shaped settlement organization in this fractured landscape,
and how defensive features relate to different ecological zones in the region.
Through excavation of this ancient fortress, in addition to extensive pedestrian
survey of the region, and detailed remote sensing analyses, the project will
determine how ubiquitous defensive settlements were, and what their role was in
the development of political complexity in the region.