* 1733835
* Leveraging Auxiliary Information on Marginal Distributions in Multiple Imputation for Survey Nonresponse
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Jerome Reiter, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

This research project will develop methods and practical tools for leveraging
the information from auxiliary data sources, such as administrative records and
databases gathered by private-sector data aggregators, to adjust for nonresponse
in surveys. Modern surveys have seen steep declines in response rates. These
declines threaten the validity of secondary analyses based on those incomplete
data. Government agencies and survey organizations are under increasing
budgetary pressures, however, and the result is fewer resources available for
extensive nonresponse follow-up activities. In this environment, government
agencies and survey organizations need new options for handling missing data.
This project will provide such options, enhancing the ability of data producers
to create high-quality public use datasets that account for missing data. The
project will benefit data users, including scholars who use survey data and
those interested in methods for evaluating and correcting for biases due to
nonresponse. An open-source package will be developed and made widely available
via the Comprehensive R Archive Network. This package will enable agencies and
other users to take advantage of the methodological advances. The project will
train two Ph.D. students from underrepresented groups, one in statistical
science and one in political science. The project also will engage two
undergraduate students in a data science summer research
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methodological developments to be addressed
in this project will focus on the following question: How can survey
organizations take advantage of information about the marginal distributions of
survey variables that are available in auxiliary data sources when adjusting for
nonresponse? The project will develop methods that enable users to posit
distinct specifications of missing data mechanisms for different blocks of
values. The project also will develop multiple imputation routines based on
machine learning techniques to handle imputation with auxiliary information in
databases with large numbers of variables. The multiple imputation framework is
leveraged to propagate uncertainty not only from the missing data, but also from
population-based auxiliary marginal information with potentially non-trivial
uncertainty. The project will fuse features of Bayesian modeling and classical
survey-weighted estimation to ensure imputations account for complex survey
designs. The methodology will be illustrated on an application examining voter
turnout among subgroups of the population in the Current Population Survey
(CPS). The application will use population-based auxiliary data from government
election statistics available in the United States Elections Project and voter
files available from Catalist, a leading national vendor of voter registration
data. The information in the auxiliary margins will be used to adjust the CPS
data for nonresponse with a more reasonable set of assumptions than previous
analyses of voter turnout based on the CPS. The CPS voter turnout application
will inform scholars and policy makers about inequalities in electoral
participation and provides insights about possible policy alternatives for
improving voter turnout.