* 1733885
* RAPID: Fire Effects on Soil and Aquatic Organic Matter in a Southern Appalachian Hardwood Forest.
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Jeff Hatten, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 02/28/2019
* USD 159,482.00

The effects of forest fires are often thought of in terms acreage of trees lost
or impacts on wildlife. But fires can also have an important influence the
amount, kinds, and transport of organic matter that is in forest soil, with
potentially large ramifications for forest productivity. However, studying the
effects of wildfire is very difficult due to the rapid post-fire changes to the
environment and often the lack of robust pre-fire data in locations that have
recently burned. This project will take advantage of data on soil organic carbon
collected prior to and immediately after the recent fire in the Great Smokey
Mountains National Park to examine immediate post-fire effects on organic carbon
cycling across the terrestrial-aquatic interface. The fire burned two sites with
the park that are part of the National Ecological Observatory Network so it will
be possible to couple a detailed pre-fire assessment of soil carbon with post-
fire changes in the same locations. In doing so, this project will fill in gaps
in our understanding of how fire affects forest ecosystems in the Eastern United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fire introduces a spectrum of thermally-altered
carbon (C) such as black C (condensed-aromatic residue produced from incomplete
combustion of organic matter), poly-aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), and low
molecular weight organic acids (LMWOA) to terrestrial, atmospheric, and aquatic
systems. This thermally-altered material can have important effects on quantity
and quality of soil organic matter (SOM) as well as terrestrial and aquatic
ecosystem function. The effects of fire on soil stocks and quality of dissolved
organic matter (DOM) are poorly understood, however many streams have higher DOM
concentrations post-fire, suggesting that soil concentrations of DOM increase
and are mobile within the soil profile. Several pathways are available to this
highly labile, hydrophilic DOC, including: (1) efficient transport to a stream
where it may become an important source of carbon to aquatic organisms; and (2)
efficient transport to deeper parts of the soil profile where naked mineral
surfaces dominate and the sorptive capacity is highest and therefore this
material can be sequestered as deep soil carbon. The partitioning of DOC between
these pathways has important implications for predicting the impacts of fire on
ecosystem function and services including, drinking water quality and soil
carbon sequestration. The process of post-fire incorporation of these solid
residues can be quite rapid but remains poorly understood. This work represents
one of the first studies to examine the immediate post-fire dynamics of both
particulate and dissolved classes of thermally-altered C in adjoining soils and
aquatic systems.