* 1733552
* EAGER:  Engineering synthetic organelles to power formate-based microbial cell factories
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2020
* Cheryl Kerfeld, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 03/31/2020
* USD 298,900.00

Industrial scale biotechnology is a potential growth industry in the US. One
area of particular interest is the development of specialized bacteria that can
consume industrial waste products and convert these compounds into molecules
that can be used to produce fuels, plastic monomers and other commercially
important chemicals. This project focuses on re-purposing a naturally occurring
subcellular factory found in common bacteria into a specialized compartment for
the conversion of an industrial byproduct (formate) into a versatile molecule
(pyruvate) that can be used by bacteria as a precursor to many desirable
compounds. The project exemplifies a "build it to understand it" approach, by
emphasizing bioengineering based on structural information. Moreover, it will
provide a crucial test of our understanding of bacterial microcompartment
assembly and whether enhancement of enzyme function can be achieved by
encapsulation in a microcompartment. The project will provide interdisciplinary
training to early career scientists in computational, structural, molecular, and
synthetic biology.

The project involves computational protein and microcompartment design via
structure-based modeling to engineer a synthetic metabolic pathway, the PFK-PKT
pathway. The project is grounded in a theoretical pathway that can be realized
with pyruvate formate lyase, an oxygen-sensitive enzyme that restricts the
synthetic pathway to anaerobic or microaerophilic conditions. To solve this
limitation, an organelle to encapsulate pyruvate formate lyase and the requisite
supporting enzymes will be built and the permeability of the repurposed
bacterial microcompartment shell engineered. Several complementary strategies
will be pursued, including a top-down approach to repurpose naturally occurring
glycyl radical enzyme microcompartments and a bottom-up approach to construct
the requisite protein core for encapsulation in the microcompartment shell. The
Broader Impacts of the project include the training of undergraduates and
Postdoctoral Fellow who will take part in an international collaboration between
the groups of an established synthetic biologist and a theoretician. Moreover,
the project demonstrates modular engineering based on structural synthetic
biology, an approach that is poised to play a significant part in the
development of sustainable chemistries to meet pressing global needs.