* 1733798
* AitF: Collaborative Research: Topological Algorithms for 3D/4D Cardiac Images: Understanding Complex and Dynamic Structures
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2017,10/31/2020
* Yusu Wang, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 10/31/2020
* USD 273,032.00

The interiors of ventricles of a human heart are spanned by a fine net of muscle
fibers that are difficult to resolve, even in high resolution CT images. An
accurate account of these structures, however, could improve diagnosis of
cardiac disease, evaluation of cardiac function, assessment of stroke risk, and
simulation of cardiac blood flow. Topology is the branch of abstract mathematics
that deals with connections; this project uses the theory of persistent homology
to identify crucial topological handles that can be useful for accurate
reconstruction and analysis of the complex cardiac dynamics from these CT
images. The outcome of the project will not only advance our understanding of
cardiac function, but also generate novel computational topology methods that
are more efficient and effective for practical applications. This project not
only bridges the gap between the theory of computational topology and the
practical problem of cardiac image analysis, but also trains the next generation
of researchers and educators to do so by a carefully integrated education plan.
The PIs will engage undergraduate students, high school students, women and
other underrepresented students in their proposed research.

The goal of this project is to develop a topological approach to unveil the
intrinsic structures from complex and dynamic 3D/4D cardiac data, and
furthermore, to provide principled tools to quantitatively analyze these
structures. The PIs will create new computational topology methodologies and
algorithms to extract rich information from the intrinsic structure of cardiac
data. They will develop novel methodologies to extract localized topological
features and to track them based on their spatial and temporal coherence. They
also plan to design new algorithms to untangle ambiguous and uncertain
situations for tracking structures through time sequence data. The resulting
techniques and software will be validated on cardiac CT data to produce
quantitative assessments of accuracy and to characterize the advantages and
limitations of these approaches. Domain experts will validate the quality of the
approaches via scientific hypotheses and data exploration. The methods to be
developed are general and will impact other scientific fields where intrinsic
complex and dynamic structures exist.