* 1733572
* Innovations in Statistical Methodology for Complex Surveys
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Jae-Kwang Kim, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2021
* USD 430,000.00

This research project will modernize survey sampling tools for inference from
survey data that can be used for complex problems such as survey integration or
small area estimation. Increasingly, data sources have characteristics that
traditional sampling tools are not readily designed to handle. The project will
address important inference problems, such as model selection and hypothesis
testing, based on data from complex samples and will extend the methods from
parametric models to more flexible nonparametric models, such as quantile
regression. The new methodology will have broad applicability to surveys in
diverse disciplines, including agriculture, health, and demographics. Products
of this research will include resources to equip practicing survey statisticians
with tools to better meet the demands of policy makers and the public. Software
and metadata produced by this project will be made publicly available. Graduate
students will receive education and training, with an emphasis on the
relationships between design-based and model-based
inference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will develop innovative
methods that will enable survey statisticians to exploit modern data structures
and models in a statistically defensible way. The project will focus on three
areas: (1) the use of inverse sampling and reweighting to obtain valid
inferences from nonprobability samples, (2) methods for prediction and analytic
inference under complex sample designs, and (3) hierarchical modeling strategies
that are feasible to implement with large, diverse data sources. Methods to
obtain approximately unbiased inferences from non-probability samples are highly
relevant because of increases in nonresponse and use of non-survey data, such as
administrative sources and satellite information. This examination of inference
under complex sample designs will further research on hypothesis testing and the
use of semiparametric models, particularly for situations in which the sample
design is informative for the specified model. The investigators will further
develop a hierarchical modeling approach that aggregates estimates obtained for
sub-divisions of a large data source. The investigators have vetted this
procedure using non-survey data and will apply the approach in a large-scale
survey context.