* 1733893
* The Utility of Shell Temper for Ceramic Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Virginie Renson, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2020
* USD 54,341.00

Dr. Evan Peacock and Dr. Brenda Kirkland, Mississippi State University, along
with Dr. Virginie Renson, University of Missouri, will undertake research to
test a new method for tracing past human population movements and trade
networks. Understanding ancient demographic trends and economic links is key for
unraveling the history of any particular area. How interconnected were
settlements in the past? Where were goods produced, and how did they flow from
market to consumer? Did particular settlements gain prominence due to an ability
to control the flow of goods? How do ancient population movements relate to the
historically known distribution of Native American or other descendant groups?
Interest in such topics has grown as new instruments for chemically analyzing
artifacts have been developed. For example, archaeologists chemically analyze
ancient pottery sherds using a variety of methods and try to match them to clay
samples taken in the field, to determine where the pottery clay was originally
obtained. While this approach has produced some exciting results, it is
complicated by a number of factors. Many different clay beds can occur over a
small area, a clay bed can be chemically homogenous over a very large area, or
potters may have mixed different clays together when making pottery. Addressing
this problem is necessary if the promise of ceramic sourcing for addressing
questions of anthropological and historical import is to be more fully realized.
The research will contribute to understanding the prehistory of United States
Native Americans and serve to inform Americans on an important part of the
country's past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An alternative to chemically sourcing
pottery clay is to analyze other materials mixed with the clay by potters; such
extra materials are called "temper." Beginning about AD 1000, crushed freshwater
mussel shell was used as pottery temper over a huge expanse of eastern North
America. As freshwater mussels grow, they build the chemical signature of the
stream waters they inhabit into their shells. Shells from different drainages
therefore are chemically distinct. By chemically comparing shells discarded as
food waste with temper from pottery at different sites, archaeologists
theoretically can pinpoint the precise stream, or even stream segment, where the
pottery was made. Dr. Peacock and his colleagues will test this new method by
analyzing shells and shell-tempered pottery recovered from several sites in the
Yazoo Basin of Mississippi, a vast landscape drained by many different streams
that connected the mid-continent with the Gulf of Mexico and provided ready
travel routes along which pots or other artifacts may have been traded centuries
ago. Analysis will be done using an Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass
Spectrometer, for which only small amounts of shell or shell temper are needed.
The use of individual elements, such as isotopes of Strontium, to refine the
method, also will be explored. As a particular archaeological test case, pottery
previously identified as stylistically "exotic" and discarded shells from the
Lake George site, a massive, ca. 1,000 year-old settlement in Yazoo County,
Mississippi, will be analyzed. If successful, this method should be applicable
to any place in the world where shell-tempered pottery was produced.