* 1733924
* Ecological Identity and Solid Waste Governance
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Jordan Howell, Rowan University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 178,341.00

This project will look at the history of waste management in New Jersey to study
individuals' and communities' relationships with their physical environment. The
goal of the study is to contribute to a new approach to environmental governance
that takes ecological identity into consideration. The project will develop a
public, interactive website allowing users to explore the past, present, and
future of waste management in New Jersey. This project will yield generalizable
findings with applications for researchers, policymakers, and publics across the
country that are concerned about the effectiveness of existing approaches to
environmental problem-solving. It will provide research experiences for
undergraduate students.

By being grounded in scholarships about risk, governance, and scale, this
project will reconstruct environmental policy and governance around the concept
of ecological identity. The project thus focuses on two major questions. First,
how do choices regarding waste management reflect differing understandings of
ecological identity in New Jersey (and vice versa)? And second, how does
articulation of ecological identity transform policymaking processes and aid
efforts to protect the natural environment from pollution? By analyzing a range
of data to identify connections between ecological identities and waste
management strategies in New Jersey the project will articulate how these
connections have resulted in both successful and unsuccessful attempts to manage
wastes. Documentary and quantitative historical data about waste management in
New Jersey will be used along with interviews from key figures in the state's
waste management history and community focus groups the project will examine
interconnections waste management practices and ecological identity. In
addition, data collected from an interactive website and forum will help to
develop a systematic means for incorporating ecological identity into
environmental policy and governance processes.