* 1733873
* AITF: Applied Algorithmic Foundation for Scheduling Multiprogrammed Parallelizable Workloads
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* I-Ting Lee, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2022
* USD 650,000.00

Most modern computing systems contain multiprocessor hardware which is shared by
many applications. In these systems, good scheduling algorithms that decide how
to allocate resources among applications are crucial to ensure good quality of
service and efficient use of system resources. This project will design
foundational algorithms and prototype implementations of scheduling algorithms
that provide guarantees of performance and resource utilization for these shared
machines. This work will shape the efficiency of critical computing
infrastructure by improving performance of parallel systems from personal
computers to data centers to supercomputers. All results, including published
articles and software artifacts, will be released to the public via world-wide
web. The PIs will integrate research with education by incorporating this
research into the PIs' graduate courses and training PhD, MS, and BS students in
applied and theoretical parallel computing research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will involve designing practically efficient schedulers guided by
theoretical foundations. The PIs will design a theory of multi-programmed
scheduling for parallel programs by considering a variety of scheduling
objectives important to system designers. In particular, the research will focus
on optimizing latency objectives that are used in servers, clouds, and
interactive systems. The PIs will also explore efficient mechanisms that can be
used to implement these algorithms in practice and perform empirical validations
of their designs. By combining theoretical analysis with feedback from empirical
evaluations, the proposed work will gain insights that will advance the state of
the art of both theory and practice of parallel job scheduling.