* 1733633
* RESEARCH-PGR:  Elucidating Maize Gene Regulatory Networks to Accelerate Translational Genomics
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Erich Grotewold, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 01/31/2024
* USD 4,884,272.00

Maize is one of the most widely grown cereal crops that supports growing
populations across the world. Through improvements in agriculture over the last
century, corn yields have increased significantly across the U.S. Despite these
advances, agriculture currently faces significant environmental challenges, from
increasing water stress to spread of new diseases. New breeding approaches are
thus needed to produce resilient plants and to maintain the health and
productivity of maize agriculture. Major new advances in this arena come from
recent discoveries in maize genetics and genomics: Researchers have identified
key factors in the genome that serve as "master regulators" to control
expression of important traits. Currently, little is known about when or where
these factors function or how they control traits. The project uses all-new
technologies to find and characterize hidden sites of expression control in the
genome, and tests their function. The breakthroughs from this research will
provide new ways to generate crop resilience and will improve the breeding
potential of maize. Through public websites, outcomes from the project are made
available to other researchers, growers and breeders, thereby ensuring a
coordinated community effort to improve maize research and agriculture. Students
and post-doctoral researchers are trained in crop genomics to maintain the
strength, continuity and security of the scientific enterprise in the U.S.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elucidating gene regulatory networks involves linking the
cis-regulatory code (cistrome) with the trans-acting factors through
identifiying protein-DNA interactions. The cistrome hinges on where
transcription initiation starts, which must be empirically defined. Differences
in gene expression between inbred lines contribute to hybrid vigor, and are
ultimately a consequence of cis- and trans-acting variations that affect the
protein-DNA interaction space. Understanding these variations provides
opportunities to accelerate crop breeding. Building on the team's previously
developed tools to identify protein-DNA interactions, this interdisciplinary
project has three main objectives: 1) Establish the genome-wide landscape of
transcriptional initiation in maize, 2) develop a comprehensive catalog of maize
gene regulatory interactions, and 3) incorporate functional transcription factor
information to accelerate trait discovery. The project will continue to develop
genome-wide tools necessary for plant gene regulatory network dissection, and
build the knowledge necessary to enable similar studies in other crops. Data
will be visualized through the Web-accessible knowledge base GRASSIUS
(www.grassius.org) and MaizeGDB (www.maizegdb.org) to ensure the broadest
possible dissemination of results. The interdisciplinary nature of the research
will be integrated with the training of undergraduate students through the FIRE
(Fostering Integration of Research and undergraduate Education) program, and
recently graduated students from underrepresented groups through the SIGuE
(Success In Graduate Education) program.