* 1733546
* Novel Methods for Incorporating Sample Design in Bayesian Inference
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Michael Elliott, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

This research project will develop methodology to account for complex sample
designs when making statistical inference using Bayesian methods. Social
scientists often rely on surveys to provide information about the U.S.
population. The National Health Interview Survey, for example, is used to
address health-related questions. Researchers use such data to provide baseline
or population descriptive statistics and to develop and assess statistical
models to predict social outcomes. The increasing complexity of these
statistical models makes them well suited to a Bayesian setting, but there is no
standard method to account for sample designs in Bayesian models. This project
will provide a general approach to incorporate complex sample designs in
Bayesian inference. The investigators will incorporate their methods into the
general purpose IVEware software for analyzing survey data, which is freely
available to the public at the University of Michigan website. They also will
provide an educational training opportunity to a promising doctoral
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will build on the methods
the investigators recently have developed to incorporate complex sample designs
in a weighted finite population Bayesian bootstrap procedure. They will extend
this methodology to incorporate design effects into Bayesian analyses via
importance weighting. The new methods will have very general application, and
the project will consider three specific applications. The project will explore
accounting for complex sample design in a joint longitudinal data model of mean
and variance trajectories to predict onset of senility from short memory tests
using the Health and Retirement Survey. In the setting of small area estimation,
the project will develop county-level estimates of risky behavior using a
combination of data from the National Health Interview Survey and the Behavioral
Risk Factor Surveillance Survey. In a missing data setting, the project will use
observed data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey to
accommodate both sample design and measurement error when imputing diet and
biomarker measures.