* 1733678
* Collaborative Research: Identifying the Interplay of Expertise Development, Creativity, and Learning in University Makerspaces
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Robert Nagel, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 08/31/2022
* USD 156,263.00

Makerspaces are collaborative and open work environments which are becoming
increasingly popular on university campuses. As students work in makerspaces
they traverse and integrate a wide variety of skills that create a dynamic
relationship between the learning processes, creative exploration, and expertise
acquisition. This work provides an initial examination of this interplay between
learning and expertise. It begins to answer the question of what and how
students learn in university makerspaces. At present, it is unclear what
university students actually learn in university makerspaces and how this
compares with other hands-on learning opportunities such as competition team
projects, undergraduate research, or similar experiences. Educators hope
makerspaces are effective learning environments that can 1) enhance lifelong and
self-directed learning skills, 2) expand engineering curricula, and 3) motivate
while simultaneously educating the next generation of STEM students. However,
there are few studies on the development of expertise and learning or their
impact on creativity in makerspaces because these spaces are complex, dynamic,
non-standard environments that provoke unprecedented challenges when it comes to
their study. In addition, most work on expertise and creativity compares novices
and experts but fails to create detailed accounts of how one moves from novice
to expert nor how this transition influences the ability to be creative within
the domain. Most studies of expertise are comparison studies or simply snapshot
of groups at certain points in time. These studies overlook the development of
expertise. In makerspaces, students are often motivated by an idea to make a
creative project, and in turn they thereby develop expertise and undergo
learning. This learning that takes place in makerspaces is natural, organic, and
uncontrolled. This study of makerspaces will examine these phenomena as they
naturally occur, rather than altering the environment to conform to a typical
controlled experiment. This approach enables the study of the evolution of
making as engineering makers mature and evolve on two different
campuses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will focus on two very different
makerspaces at two different universities. Both spaces feature many of the
commonly found making equipment (e.g., 3D printers, electronics equipment, wood
and metal working equipment, etc.), but each has its own unique culture and
placement into the programs at their respective universities. Further, the
differences between the universities create a unique opportunity for comparison.
To study the makerspaces at these two universities, the following methodological
procedures will be used: 1) ethnographic observation in making activities, and
2) observations and interviews with student groups and individual students who
are making in the engineering makerspaces. This work is also envisioned as a
springboard for future studies in understanding makerspaces including makerspace
culture, barriers and pathways to entry, tensions produced in the space, student
design processes, innovative approaches, and collaborative efforts.