* 1733927
* The Emergence and Global Development of Niche Economic Sectors
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Attiya Ahmad, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 180,521.00

To better understand the factors that contribute to the emergence, development,
and success of niche economic sectors, this project asks, what are the economic
and social implications of recent changes in international tourism? Since its
development beginning in the late 19th century, consumer-driven mass tourism
(international tourism) has become a vital global industry. International
tourism accounts for 10% of global gross domestic product (GDP), 9% of jobs
worldwide, and constitutes the largest global circulation of goods, services,
information and populations of our time. The international tourism industry is
also central to many countries' economic development plans, including their
attempts at fostering job growth in multiple sectors (e.g. service sector, craft
industries), generating foreign currency, stimulating national and international
investment, and improving national infrastructure such as roads, ports and
airports. Over the past decade, the international tourism sector has undergone
significant changes, marked by shifts in sites of tourism and the demographic
composition of tourists. In the Middle East, conflicts have not only rerouted
where tourists seek to go, but actors in the region have also begun to develop
niche markets to attract growing populations of middle class Muslims from
throughout Asia, the Middle East, North America and Europe. This industry (which
is colloquially referred to as 'halal tourism') is massive, expected to grow
from $140 to $230 billion over the next five years. Understanding the factors
that account for the development of niche markets like halal tourism, and the
impact they are having on global tourism is critical for developing economic
programs and policies that will benefit all Americans in the face of changing
global economic relations and processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
be conducted in the greater Istanbul area, a hub of the nascent halal tourism
niche industry, and will focus on a transnational network of halal tourism
purveyors and consumers from the Gulf Cooperation Council states, South-East
Asia and the United Kingdom. This is a particularly apt research milieu because
the investigator has conducted extensive preliminary fieldwork over the past
five years to lay the groundwork for this project, and has over fifteen years of
research experience in the greater Middle East region, and of researching Muslim
networks that span the Middle East, South Asia, Europe and North America. As
such, the investigator can leverage existing infrastructure and support, which
allows a small amount of funding to produce significant research impact. The
investigator will assess how the halal tourism niche sector is developing in
relation to conventional forms of mass tourism and what religious understandings
and practice shape the emergence of this sector. In examining these issues, the
investigator will research three dimensions of this niche sector: purveyors,
consumers, and sites of halal tourism. The investigator will attend trade
conferences; interview entrepreneurs, tourism officials and consumers; and
collect information on hotels, tours, restaurants and other halal tourism
infrastructure. Findings from this research will provide insight into factors
that promote the development of niche economic sectors by examining the extent
to which religious understandings and practices impact entrepreneurs' and
consumers' economic activities and decision-making processes.