* 1733639
* A Symposium on Challenges at the Interface of String Phenomenology and Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* James Gray, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 04/30/2018
* USD 5,000.00

The two day "Symposium on Challenges at the Interface of String Phenomenology
and Geometry" will take place on July 6th and 7th, 2017 as part of the events of
the 16th International String Phenomenology 2017 conference that will be held
July 3-7, 2017 at Virginia Tech. The goal of the symposium is to promote and
facilitate interdisciplinary research in mathematics and physics. The symposium
will bring together talented researchers from a diverse range of institutions
and backgrounds to address pressing problems at the interface of
algebraic/differential geometry, commutative algebra, and string theory. The
symposium will consist of one day of invited plenary talks from leading
researchers in the field, along with an afternoon of parallel sessions which
will invite the contributions of junior and other researchers from around the
world. The broader impacts of this event will include the training of graduate
students and the increase of interdisciplinary dialog between mathematicians and
physicists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since its inception in 2002 at the University
of Oxford, the annual String Phenomenology conference series has grown immensely
and become a focal point for researchers working across a wide range of topics
in string theory, particle phenomenology, cosmology and mathematics. It provides
a forum to bring together active, young researchers from around the world to
address the pressing question - Can string theory provide a model of observable
physics? However, any path towards an answer to this question must lead to the
cutting edge of modern mathematics. In string compactifications the unanswered
questions of physics become those of geometry and lead to novel approaches to
questions ranging from invariants of singular spaces to birational
correspondences and the classification of algebraic varieties, from Mirror
Symmetry to the Geometric Langlands program. A symposium to foster such
interdsiciplinary dialog between mathematicians and physicists is timely and
important. Topics covered by the symposium will include Differential Geometry,
Algebraic Geometry, and Computational methods in Commutative Algebra. The
conference website is available at
http://www.cpe.vt.edu/stringpheno17/index.html.