* 1733991
* Collaborative Research: Tracking middle-late Paleozoic global-ocean redox conditions using uranium isotopes in marine marbonates
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Maya Elrick, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 08/31/2022
* USD 331,235.00

The goal of the funded proposal is to determine the relative amounts of oxygen
dissolved in ancient oceans during a unique geologic time interval (300 to 420
million years ago) when three major mass extinctions occurred and the Earth was
significantly warmer than today. Understanding the history of oxygen levels in
ancient oceans is important because oxygen concentrations influence all marine
animal life, control the formation and preservation of petroleum and many
economic mineral deposits, and affect important biochemical reactions in the
oceans and atmosphere. This project utilizes the relatively new geochemical tool
of uranium isotopes to develop the most detailed history of changing ocean
oxygen concentrations to date. The funding supports the training of the next
generation of Earth scientists, will provide hands-on field and laboratory
experience for first-generation college students, and will support multiple
primary school science teachers to conduct real-world science to gain confidence
and provide new ideas for their own classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project goal is to develop a global-ocean redox curve using uranium isotopes
from Devonian-Mississippian marine carbonates. The ~100 million year study
interval, which bridges the transition between poorly oxygenated Precambrian-
Early Paleozoic oceans and well-oxygenated Late Paleozoic-Recent oceans, is
important because of: 1) a doubling of atmospheric oxygen levels, 2) a
transition from greenhouse to icehouse climate and intensifying ocean
circulation, 3) the occurrence of three mass extinctions, two of which are
attributed to marine anoxia, and 4) multiple large positive carbon excursions.
The uranium-isotope composition of marine carbonates has the potential to record
mean global-ocean redox conditions owing to the long residence time (~500
thousand years) of uranium in seawater. Samples will be collected from
biostratigraphically well-dated successions in Nevada and Utah at spacings that
range from ~100 thousand years/sample to &lt;20 thousand years/sample through
specific event intervals. To assess samples for local redox influences, we will
analyze redox-sensitive metals, Fe-speciation, and Corg:P ratios. To verify the
global nature of the composite curve, we will sample and compare to selected
shorter stratigraphic intervals on other continents.