* 1733917
* Testing Multiple Approaches for Understanding Adaptive Functions of Cultural Institutions: Towards More Robust and Reliable Social Science
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Bram Tucker, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 286,317.00

The research supported by this award tests alternative explanations for
understanding how culture produces adaptive behaviors. Some social scientists
argue that culture contains information that helps people adapt, through
mechanisms, such as taboos, dietary rules, and social norms, that guide people
to avoid harm and reap benefits. Other theorists hypothesize that the specific
information content of a given culture is not necessarily what is important.
Instead, just having a shared culture is in itself adaptive because it binds
together cohesive groups that can cooperate to solve common problems and in
other ways promote survival. A third theory is that culture acts more on the
level of the individual by providing psychological benefits that help people
undertake difficult tasks and navigate misfortune. The researcher has designed a
project to compare the explanatory power of these and other commonly proposed
explanations using real world cultural and behavioral data. This research will
help us understand the potential costs and benefits of different adaptive
strategies. Findings will be of use to planners and policy makers, as well as to
social science theorists. In addition, by testing multiple explanations against
each other using empirical data, the researcher's innovative approach will
provide a model for other researchers who seek to improve the robustness and
reliability of social science research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
be conducted by anthropologist Dr. Bram Tucker (University of Georgia) in
southwestern Madagascar. Dr. Tucker has chosen this research site because it has
one of the most unpredictable climates in the world, which means that local
cultural institutions are likely to be strongly adapted to subsistence risk. The
extremeness of this situation also will heighten adaptive stresses and
responses, making them easier to identify and study than they would be in most
environments in the United States. A team of American and Malagasy researchers
will collect data on causal models and social norms through vignette
elicitations, extended laddering (to get at causation chains), interviews with
adults and children, economic inventories, cultural consensus analyses,
psychosocial stress questionnaires, and focus groups. A survey of a
representative sample of adults will discover whether individuals or groups with
a greater knowledge of, and commitment to, particular cultural norms and causal
theories have better subsistence outcomes. A survey of children will reveal at
what ages children first learn adaptive cultural knowledge. The researcher will
use the data to test ten different functionalist, mechanistic, and social
learning hypotheses about culture and adaptation. The research is in the
national interest because findings will help to devise programs for Americans
who are living in stressed environments.