* 1733595
* The interplay of emotion, cognitive, and authority factors in the legal socialization model
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Ellen Cohn, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 373,597.00

This project examines why some adolescents are more likely to break rules than
others. Specifically, it tests an expanded version of legal socialization theory
that incorporates emotion to help us better understand why some teenagers misuse
drugs, bully their peers, act violently, and/or steal. Research about legal
socialization theory finds that people's perceptions of fairness and their
reasoning about legal matters shape their trust of authorities (police, parents,
teachers) and their attitudes, which, in turn, influence their rule-breaking
behaviors. Research, however, has yet to examine how emotions like shame, guilt,
anger, and fear might fit into the legal socialization model of rule-breaking
behavior. The present study proposes to address the role that such emotions may
play in the legal socialization process to either promote or inhibit rule-
breaking behavior. In particular, it seeks to collect longitudinal data from a
new cohort of middle school adolescents and from an older sample of emerging
adults who have previously been interviewed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study
will first examine how emotions change throughout adolescence and emerging
adulthood. Second, it will examine how these emotions predict later rule-
breaking behavior. Third, it will compare the emotions, reasoning, and attitudes
of: (a) abstainers who never engaged in rule-breaking behavior during
adolescence; (b) adolescence-limited desisters, who only engaged in rule-
breaking behavior during adolescence; and (c) life course rule-violators who
continue to break rules in emerging adulthood. Fourth, our study will
investigate the degree to which legal reasoning, attitudes, and trust in
authorities affect rule-breaking behavior via their effects on various emotions
in adolescence and in emerging adulthood. Ultimately, the findings will provide
important information for school-based intervention design and policies aimed at
reducing behaviors like bullying and substance misuse by addressing both the
cognitions and the emotions that promote or inhibit such behaviors.