* 1733865
* Intercellular Signaling in Pollen Tube Reception
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Sharon Kessler, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2019
* USD 505,673.00

How do cells sense and establish communication with other cells in order to
allow for beneficial or compatible interactions as opposed to harmful
interactions? Plant pollination is an excellent system for gaining insight into
this question because intercellular communication between male and female
tissues is critical for the recognition of compatible pollen. In plants a pollen
tube (PT) grows from a pollen grain that has landed on the surface of a flower's
female reproductive tissue. The tube extends through that tissue towards the
egg-containing ovary. Upon entering the ovary the tube stops growing and bursts
open, releasing sperm that fertilize an egg, which in turn develops into a seed.
In order to deliver the sperm cells to the ovary, the PT must sense that it has
arrived at the right place and change from tip-growth to explosive release of
the sperm it contains. This project seeks to determine the molecular signals
that communicate to a PT that it has entered the ovary and must stop growing and
release its sperm. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Female gametophytic mutations in
FERONIA (FER), a receptor-like kinase, and NORTIA (NTA), a member of the MILDEW
RESISTANCE LOCUS O (MLO) family of 7-transmembrane proteins, cause PTs to
continue growing inside of the receptive synergid instead of rupturing to
release the sperm, indicating that these genes form part of a signaling network.
This project is aimed at further elucidation of the molecular mechanisms used
for communication between the synergid and PT during PT reception, using NTA as
the anchor molecule. Synergids are highly specialized cells whose sole function
is to communicate with PTs. Experiments will be performed to define the cell
biology of the synergid cells before, during and after PT reception and to
determine which domains are necessary for NTA localization and function and to
determine how NTA fits into the dynamic cellular changes that occur during PT
reception. The second goal of the project is to identify new members of the PT
reception pathway and determine how they act in the signaling pathway. Enhancer
and suppressor mutants of the gene nta will be characterized for roles in PT
reception and NTA will be used as bait in yeast-2-hybrid screens to identify
other members of the pathway. The results of this project will provide a clearer
picture of the signaling pathway involved in PT reception and may also be
transformative in our understanding of how self/non-self recognition takes
place. A graduate student, post-doc, and undergraduate student will be trained
in the fields of plant genetics and cell biology during this project. Students
in a cell biology lab taught by the Principal Investigator will investigate
proteins that are predicted to be involved in PT reception in an inquiry-based
lab module and an outreach program will be conducted to encourage rural Oklahoma
high schools to incorporate plant science research in their curricula.