* 1733637
* SusChEM: EAGER - The occurrence and distribution of hexavalent chromium and other contaminants in groundwater from aquifers of the Eastern United States
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Avner Vengosh, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2019
* USD 137,657.00

Federal and international drinking water standards do not specifically address
hexavalent chromium despite its known carcinogenic effects. Evidence for
naturally occurring sources and ubiquitous distribution of hexavalent chromium
and other contaminants in aquifers in North Carolina has increased public
awareness and calls for regulation of hexavalent chromium in drinking water. Yet
the lack of data on the overall distribution and sources of hexavalent chromium
in groundwater has caused ambiguity in the decision making process. The proposed
EAGER project will provide state and federal agencies the needed information to
evaluate and predict the occurrence of hexavalent chromium and other naturally
occurring contaminants such as arsenic and vanadium in drinking water wells in
the Eastern U.S. This information is critical for assessing the risks of
hexavalent chromium and other naturally occurring contaminants and thus will
provide better assessment on the associated human health
implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed EAGER project aims to evaluate
the factors that control the occurrence of hexavalent chromium, arsenic, and
vanadium contaminants in groundwater from different aquifers in the Eastern U.S.
The project will establish a comprehensive geochemical database, combined with
isotopic fingerprints (87Sr/86Sr) for tracing the aquifer lithology from which
the contaminants are mobilized. The project will establish a geochemical model
for the prediction of the occurrence of hexavalent chromium and other naturally
occurring contaminants in groundwater that incorporates multiple factors
(geology, hydrogeology, redox state, pH, water chemistry) that control the
speciation and solubility of these contaminants in groundwater resources.