* 1733877
* Collaborative Research:  SAVANT--Stable Atmospheric Variability ANd Transport
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* David Kristovich, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2022
* USD 592,240.00

Stable boundary layers (SBL) are still a relatively problematic component of
atmospheric modeling, despite their frequent occurrence. While general agreement
exists that Monin-Obukov similarity theory is not applicable in the SBL due to
the non-homogeneous and non-stationary flow, no universal organizing theory for
the SBL has been presented. This poses a problem when examining aerosol movement
as a function of atmospheric dynamics. It is known that stable air
stratification results in katabatic downslope winds, even in very shallow
topographic airsheds. These downslope winds can converge with background flow,
and it is hypothesized that this convergence provides a starting point for
specific events, such as internal gravity waves (IGW). Even though the stable
boundary layer is normally shallow, internal gravity waves can propagate at an
angle from the horizontal plane, and modify local shear, thus generating
periodic turbulent mixing in space. Few studies have examined this in low relief
topographic areas. This project will conduct measurements to address these open
issues. The major objective of the project is to quantify the effects of shallow
cold air drainage on aerosol transport and dispersion. While the measurement
campaign will result in a rich dataset, the research here will focus on
answering the following questions:&lt;br/&gt;1.Under what mesoscale and
microscale conditions (i.e. cloud cover, threshold wind speed, surface cover,
stability regime, background flow, slope ratio and length, and gully volume) do
converging flows exist?&lt;br/&gt;2.What is the spatial and temporal scale of
turbulence forced oscillations and/or gravity waves generated by converging
flows, and do these and do these oscillations/gravity waves follow the linear
theory of IGW?&lt;br/&gt;3.How are aerosol dispersion and transport influenced
by turbulence forced oscillations and/or gravity waves generated from a
converging flow?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel aspect of this work is the
ability to identify turbulent events and features with aerosol lidars to add the
missing spatial component to our current
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The project
will provide new knowledge on drainage and converging flows and their effects on
aerosol transport in areas of low topographic variability. Especially of
interest is how cloud cover, threshold wind speed, turbulence intermittency,
topography, and stability regime affect the flows and aerosol transport. This
project will fill the significant gaps in current model parameterizations of the
flows and transport in SBL. It will provide new parameterizations and
modifications to extend existing to the SBL theories. The project will also
identify an empirical relationship between this resulting dispersion and the
intensity of the convergence event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Scientific broader impacts will include a rich dataset as
well as empirical relationships defining when and where convergence is likely to
occur. These can be adapted in forecast models that are currently missing these
relationships. The larger benefits to society are to a rich field data set to
researchers interested in microscale meteorological impacts on agricultural crop
security and those interested in predicting impacts of hazardous releases. In
addition to this intrinsic benefit of scientific enquiry, the work will also
seek to expand public knowledge in understanding the nature of scientific
enquiry with a specific focus on instrumentation. The project will create a
series of video modules for use in undergraduate classes and public education
where traditional meteorology programs are not available.