* 1733984
* Collaborative research: role of the motor system in phonological and phonetic processing
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Iris Berent, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2022
* USD 284,772.00

Across the world's languages, certain sound combinations occur more frequently
than others. However, the basis of these regularities is unknown. Some
researchers have suggested that combinations such as "lbog" are rare because
they require more complex articulatory gestures than combinations like "blog."
Another possibility is that combinations such as "lbog" tend to be avoided
because they violate much more abstract linguistic constraints on allowable
syllable structures. The investigators will evaluate these possibilities by
examining the role of the articulatory motor system in speech perception using
both noninvasive brain stimulation and behavioral methods. Clarifying the
relative contributions of speech motor processes and linguistic knowledge is
critical to the diagnosis and treatment of speech language disorders, to first-
and second-language acquisition, and to reading. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research explores the role of embodiment and abstraction in speech perception.
It proposes that speech is represented at multiple levels (embodied phonetics
and abstract phonological rules) with different susceptibility to motor
simulation, depending on (a) the level of analysis and (b) a speaker's
linguistic experience. The proposed experiments test this hypothesis by
combining brain stimulation and behavioral experiments. Using MRI-guided
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS), the research team will disrupt activity
in brain regions linked to motor action (the cortical representation of the left
orbicularis oris muscle in BA4) and brain regions linked to combinatorial
phonological operations (left pars triangularis, PTr, BA 45), and assess the
impact on two tasks that rely differentially on phonetic processing or the
putatively abstract phonological computation of syllable structure. While it is
unlikely that either task or brain region is selective to a single level of
analysis, these experiments gauge whether they differ in their degree of
participation. If phonetic categorization requires motor simulation, then
disruption of BA4 should affect phonetic categorization more than it affects the
computation of syllable structure. Alternatively, if the computation of syllable
structure relies on disembodied processes effected by the PTr, then the
disruption of BA45 should produce a stronger effect on syllable structure than
on phonetic categorization. Projects 1 and 2 examine these predictions with
speakers of English and Russian (languages that contrast in their syllabic
inventory). The group comparison evaluates experience-dependent plasticity or
uniformity in the engagement of the motor system across tasks. Projects 3 and 4
suppress articulation mechanically. If the greater contribution of BA4 to
phonetic categorization reflects its role in motor simulation, then results from
disruption of the orbicularis oris muscle by TMS and mechanical suppression
should converge.