* 1733832
* AitF: Collaborative Research: Algorithms and Mechanisms for the Distribution Grid
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Evdokia Nikolova, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2022
* USD 479,985.00

The electricity distribution grid --the low-voltage line networks that
distribute power to end consumers--is about to undergo a major transformation.
More and more consumers are becoming "prosumers", namely consumers and producers
of power at the same time, by installing solar panels (PVs) on their home roofs
and by purchasing electric vehicles, which may be used for energy storage.
Traditionally, power in distribution grids has flown one way: from the
substation to the end consumer. In the new world of prosumers, distribution
grids need to accommodate flow in both directions. This is challenging the
existing wire and transformer abilities to serve load at acceptable quality
levels. Moreover, the increasing number of prosumers is resulting in
dramatically higher uncertainty in demand forecasting, which, with further
prosumer increase, may prove unsustainable and ultimately threaten the utility
companies' operation and business viability. This research advances the fields
of computation and economics as well as the power systems domain, by
contributing with novel algorithmic and mechanism design problem formulations
and techniques, and with solutions that can enable improved distribution grid
planning and operation. In terms of broader impact, this research has the
potential to improve aspects of the grid such as planning for increased
integration of renewable energy resources, mitigation of risks associated with
variability of renewables, better management of congestion in the face of
strategic prosumers and ultimately provide for more reliable, cost effective and
efficient operation of the grid. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to help the distribution grid and its participants transition from its
current functionality of serving mostly traditional consumers, to the future
grid that needs to sustainably integrate prosumers, renewables and distributed
energy resources, via: (1) Developing simplified mathematical models to solve
combinatorial and incentive problems that will enable the future power grid to
sustain massive growth in renewables and distributed energy resources; (2)
Designing new algorithmic and mechanism design approaches that reduce
congestion, and improve the investment and operational efficiency of the grid
while further enhancing its reliability; (3) Working with Distribution Utilities
for real-world models and operational advice, while facilitating the transfer of
research findings to practice. The scope of the project includes (i)
distribution network reconfiguration, (ii) distribution system upgrades and
(iii) market mechanisms for supply-demand balancing. The research relies on
methods from approximation algorithms and mechanism design, such as submodular
optimization, stochastic combinatorial optimization, and price of anarchy
analysis.