* 1734267
* Collaborative Research: Turbulence and Wave Dynamics from the Mesosphere to the Lower Thermosphere above the Andes
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Gary Swenson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John Meriwether
* 07/31/2018
* USD 147,265.00

This award would support the continued operations of the Na wind-temperature
lidar at Andes Lidar Observatory (ALO) in Cerro Pach√≥n, Chile (30.26S, 70.74W,
elev. 2530 m) to study the mesosphere and lower thermosphere (MLT) dynamics and
ion-neutral coupling processes. The lidar at ALO is a state-of-the-art Na
resonance-fluorescence Doppler lidar, capable of measuring 3D wind, neutral
temperature and Na density profiles at high vertical (500 m) and temporal (1
min) resolutions in the 80-105 km altitude range with high accuracy. Two key
advancements of ALO lidar capabilities featuring the extension of lidar
observing profile into the lower thermosphere, with wind and temperature
measurements up to 140 km altitude, and the ability to detect turbulence scale
perturbations in temperature and wind would enable investigations focused on
scientific topics that are at the forefront of MLT science. The physical
processes that define the dynamics, structure, and variability in the MLT also
operate throughout the atmosphere and in all stratified and sheared geophysical
fluids, e.g., oceans, lakes, other planetary atmospheres and stellar interiors.
This project would provide opportunities for a postdoc researcher, graduate and
undergraduate students to participate in the science, engineering and
observations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data acquired with the Na lidar at ALO
will serve a broad community interested in research from the lower atmosphere to
the upper thermosphere. Possible science goals that would be studied through the
application of the measurements collected are: determination of turbulence
fluxes and eddy diffusion coefficients of heat and momentum and the Prandtl
number; investigation of the vertical transport of heat and energy caused by
dissipating gravity waves at various scales,quantification of the interactions
among gravity waves, tides, and planetary waves at different seasons;analysis
and modeling of gravity wave evolution process through variable background
atmosphere; and understanding the ion-neutral coupling processes underlying the
formation of thermospheric Na layers.