* 1734120
* Bimodal Bilingual Code-blending: Language Synthesis
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Diane Lillo-Martin, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 01/31/2023
* USD 374,769.00

There are many questions for linguistic research about the nature of
bilingualism, and especially concerning the ways that a bilingual person handles
their two languages. It is frequently noticed that bilinguals conversing with
each other may rapidly switch between their languages in a system known as
"code-switching". Linguistic research has shown that code-switching is actually
a sophisticated and rule-governed kind of language use, even though it is often
thought of as mixing up languages. It is important to know about the ways that
code-switching is constrained so that how our mental linguistic system works is
better understood, and so that the linguistic needs of bilingual people are
adequately addressed. This research project looks at a special kind of
bilingualism, bimodal bilingualism, which occurs when a person knows both a
natural sign language such as American Sign Language (ASL), and a spoken
language such as English. Bimodal bilinguals also combine their two languages in
sophisticated and rule-governed ways, but they have the unique option to use
code-blending, the simultaneous production of aspects of speech and sign. This
project is an in-depth study of the types of code-blending that are produced and
accepted by bimodal bilinguals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participants in the
project are adults with normal hearing who grew up in households with at least
one Deaf parent using sign language - such adults are sometimes known as Codas:
children of deaf adults. Participants in our study will include Codas in the
U.S., (bilingual in spoken English and American Sign Language or ASL) and Brazil
(bilingual in spoken Brazilian Portuguese and Brazilian Sign Language or
Libras). As a comparison, some of the studies will involve Deaf native signers
to provide a baseline against which the performance of the Codas is measured.
Participants will interact with a Coda researcher to produce a variety of
different kinds of code-blending. By studying what linguistic structures permit
code-blending and which ones do not, the investigators will build a model of
bilingualism that should help to explain the types of rules governing code-
switching as well as code-blending, leading to an improved understanding of
bilingualism.