* 1734954
* Broadening Participation: A Summit to Engage PK-12 Teachers in Engineering Experiential Learning
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2017,09/30/2018
* Marcus Ashford, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 09/30/2018
* USD 49,720.00

Broadening participation in Engineering is a topic of importance at the National
Science Foundation and other U.S. governmental agencies. Throughout popular and
scientific literature, engineering educators, industry leaders, and policymakers
have recommended more efforts are needed, at the K-12 level, to increase
representation in engineering among students of color. With this in mind, the
investigator proposed developing and coordinating a Rockets and Racecars
Teachers Summit, an extensive workshop for PK-12 teachers in underserved school
districts and communities in the State of Alabama. The Summit will be a platform
for sharing exemplary practices for science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) teaching and learning and strategies for assessment and
program evaluation. It will also provide time for teachers to develop detailed
unit plans related to current Alabama content standards, with the support of
STEM and education faculty from the University of Alabama. Additionally,
teachers will have ample opportunities to interact with other teacher peers and
learn from each other. Equally as important, it is expected that the teachers
will gain firsthand practical experiences from their participation in hands-on
demonstrations, a toolkit of materials to immediately support engineering
instruction within their classrooms and lesson plans to effectively engage their
students in standards-based STEM instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop
builds on the Rockets &amp; Racecars Experience, which was created in 2012 at
the University of Alabama. The focus of this three-day inaugural Summit is to
introduce Rockets &amp; Racecars to a broad audience and incorporate teachers
directly into the planning and execution of the workshop. The overarching goal
is increase the participation of minorities and girls in engineering and other
STEM-related fields by supporting teachers who provide their instruction.