* 1734733
* A Meeting to Address Collaboration for Telescopes Observing Extrasolar Planets
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Joshua Pepper, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Faith Vilas
* 04/30/2018
* USD 14,608.00

The Kilodegree Extremely Little Telescope (KELT) project uses two small
telescopes to discover planets that move in front of their stars in their
orbits. The KELT Follow-Up Network (KFUN) is made up of astronomers who then
follow these discoveries of planets with more observations of the planets. The
KELT Collaboration Meeting will bring together about 60 people from the KELT
team, the KFUN scientists, and community astronomers interested in using KELT
data. These scientists will talk about how to use the KELT data we have now, and
how to adapt the KFUN to support the NASA Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite
(TESS) that is expected to launch within a year. This conference will serve the
national interest by promoting the progress of science when plans are discussed
to make the best use of the existing KELT and KFUN data, and to develop the KFUN
to serve the success of the future TESS satellite in the most productive way.
The conference will last three days and have talks mixed with group discussions.

The Principal Investigator requests support for a conference entitled KELT
Collaboration Meeting. The conference will assemble 55 to 65 Kilodegree
Extremely Little Telescope (KELT) science team participants, KELT Follow-Up
Network (KFUN) collaborators, and community astronomers interested in making use
of the KELT data archive to confirm both KELT and Transiting Exoplanet Survey
Satellite (TESS) transiting exoplanet candidates. The KELT and KFUN efforts
currently exist; the NASA TESS satellite is expected to launch within a year.
The participants will address the KELT exoplanet discoveries, the utility of
KELT datasets for non-transit science, the development and expansion of the
KFUN, and the transformation of KFUN from a primarily KELT-centered effort to a
core element of TESS follow-up confirmation. Between 35 to 45 participants will
attend in person, with another 20 participants connecting by teleconference. The
conference is planned to last three days and will contain a series of individual
talks interspersed with group discussions on selected topics.