* 1734151
* Organizing a Workshop Series on Future Research Directions for Mobile Computing and Wireless Networking Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2019
* Suman Banerjee, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 04/30/2019
* USD 49,999.00

The project is to host a series of two workshops during 2017, at the IEEE
Infocom 2017 conference and the ACM MobiCom 2017 conference respectively. The
workshops are expected to bring together about 40 members of the wireless
networking and mobile computing community for an integrated workshop spanning a
half-day, to be held at these two venues. The IEEE Infocom event will
tentatively be held on May 5, 2017 in Atlanta, Georgia, USA and the ACM MobiCom
event will be held in mid to late October 2017 in Salt Lake City, Utah. The
workshops will help influence future research and development in wireless
networking and mobile computing systems. The award outcomes will fuel inter-
disciplinary collaborations between members of various communities (e.g.,
wireless communications, application developers, systems, security, etc.). The
reports generated by the workshop can also educate the general public on the
importance of wireless research, the challenges, and the enormous potential.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Attendees at the workshops organized as part of
this project will discuss and debate the critical challenges in wireless
networking and mobile computing systems, and articulate a vision for conducting
fundamental and inter-disciplinary research in the area. A tangible outcome of
the workshops will be reports that will (i) identify major issues affecting
future wireless research; (ii) expose the research community to new and exciting
interdisciplinary problems; and (iii) stimulate far-reaching future research
initiatives, and collaborations that would help along the evolution of the
wireless research community. A core group of participants will be invited
individually in each workshop, will the rest will be picked through an open
call-process. The workshop will have a combination of researchers and
practitioners, across core wireless and mobile systems areas, as well as from
some application areas. Invitees will also include a combination of junior, mid-
level, senior researchers from academia, industry, and government agencies, with
women and underrepresented members of the community being especially encouraged
to attend and contribute to the workshop.