* 1734402
* Scholars Award: Observables in Hamiltonian Dynamics
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* James Brian Pitts, Pitts                   James Brian
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 89,779.00

This award supports a technical project in the philosophy of physics. The PI,
who has a PhD in both Physics and History and Philosophy of Science, will
address an issue in the philosophical foundations of the General Theory of
Relativity concerning the equivalence of two formulations of the theory. One
tends to be preferred because it is much closer to how quantum mechanics is
standardly formulated, which is better for the purposes of finding a viable
theory of quantum gravity. However, that formulation seems to imply that change
is an illusion; observables (what the formulation designates as real physical
quantities) do not change with time. The other formulation of the theory is more
in line with common sense; observables (within that formulation) do change with
time. Nevertheless, this difference between the two formulations of the theory
borders on the paradoxical; it is not clear what it means to say that they are
equivalent. The PI proposes to resolve this tension by giving a novel and
compelling argument for a new definition of observables that vary locally
resolving the problem of time while maintaining the equivalence of the two
formulations.  In addition to publishing the results of his research in three
planned journal articles (and eventually in a book), the PI plans to make his
work accessible to a wide audience through a series of six public lectures and
through his relevant teaching at Cambridge.

This project examines the equivalence of the Hamiltonian formulation of General
Relativity with the Lagrangian formulation to resolve the problem of time.
Hamiltonian General Relativity has been associated with a lack of change in
physically real observables since the mid-1950s, whereas the more fundamental
Lagrangian treatment (Einstein's equations), like common sense, exhibits
changing observables. Many leading physicists have commented on this
unacceptable situation, but for various reasons an adequate solution has not
been found. Two new definitions of observables have been proposed, one by the PI
and another by Pons, Salisbury, and Sundermeyer. The PI seeks to take the
crucial next step, of taking the recently-proposed definition of observables and
testing them, by studying whether they correctly render equivalent formulations
of various theories equivalent in their observational content. The project will
shed light on research programs in quantum gravity, exhibits the fruitfulness of
interaction between General Relativity and particle physics, and shows the
utility of integrated history and philosophy of science for current science.