* 1734877
* Preparing Future Minority Faculty for the Professoriate
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2017,11/30/2020
* Christopher Doss, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 11/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

The Preparing Future Minority Faculty project at North Carolina Agricultural and
Technical State University is a three-year project to develop and implement a
networked improvement community (NIC) and address broadening the participation
of underrepresented minorities holding faculty positions in engineering. There
is a disproportionately small number of faculty members from underrepresented
groups who hold positions in US colleges and universities, particularly in
fields related to science, technology, engineering, and math. To meet this
challenge, the project develops strategies, training materials, and a structured
mentoring program to increase the capability of graduate students and
postdoctoral research fellows who intend to become tenure track faculty members
in engineering, engineering technology, and the sciences. Participation in the
project will enable graduate students and postdoctoral research fellows to
become more effective faculty members. An emphasis is placed on the development
of participant's portfolio in the areas of teaching, research, and service well
in advance of beginning their career. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The network
improvement community brings together an alliance of Historically Black Colleges
and Universities and Minority Serving Institutions, researchers, practitioners,
industry partners, community stakeholders, school districts, and mentoring
organizations. Working together the community will develop a model to
comprehensively support the mentoring and training of underrepresented
minorities to become effective faculty. The goals of the project are to: 1)
implement an evidence-based comprehensive professional development model; 2)
train graduate students in the core competency skills needed to effectively
navigate the graduate and postdoctoral training process and to successfully
achieve careers in the engineering professoriate; and 3) collaborate, promote,
and plan activities to enhance and complement existing efforts of an alliance of
HBCUs and MSIs to achieve the common goal of increasing the representation and
preparation of underrepresented minorities in the professoriate. A quasi-
experimental research design with matched groups will be used to the
effectiveness of the project.