* 1734892
* NCS-FO: Extracting Functional Cortical Network Dynamics at High Spatiotemporal Resolution
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Behtash Babadi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2023
* USD 909,153.00

This project is funded by Integrative Strategies for Understanding Neural and
Cognitive Systems (NSF-NCS), a multidisciplinary program jointly supported by
the Directorates for Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE),
Education and Human Resources (EHR), Engineering (ENG), and Social, Behavioral,
and Economic Sciences (SBE). Neuroscientists have been remarkably successful in
understanding the function of numerous brain regions by studying them in
isolation and characterizing their individual roles in behavior. Growing
evidence in recent years, however, suggests that sophisticated brain function
emerges from the co-activation of multiple brain regions that exhibit networked
activity. These networks organize rapidly in order to allow the brain to adapt
to changes in the environment, resulting in robust behavior. Deciphering the
neural mechanisms underlying these network dynamics is therefore crucial in
understanding how the brain carries out cognitive processes such as attention,
decision-making and learning. Recent technological advances in noninvasive
neuroimaging have largely addressed the experimental challenges in studying
these dynamic networks in humans and have provided abundant neural data under
countless clinical and experimental conditions. However, the sheer high-
dimensionality of these data together with the complexity of these networks has
created various bottlenecks in data analysis, modeling, and statistical
inference. In order to exploit the unique window of opportunity provided by the
abundance of noninvasive neural data, this project is (1) developing a unified
methodology for inferring the dynamics and statistical characteristics of these
cortical networks, in a computationally efficient fashion, and (2) applying this
methodology to magnetoencephalography (MEG) data from behaving human subjects to
address several fundamental questions about auditory processing. This work
brings new insight as to the dynamic organization of brain networks at
unprecedented spatiotemporal resolutions, and can thereby affect technology in
the areas of brain-computer interfacing and neuromorphic engineering. It also
allows for the creation of engineering solutions for early detection and
monitoring of cognitive disorders involving auditory perception and attention.
The outcome of this project will be disseminated to the broader scientific
community in the form of publicly accessible data analysis toolboxes accompanied
with tutorials and webinars. The research plan is complemented by educational
activities at the K-12, undergraduate, and graduate levels, including workshops,
undergraduate projects, and course development, with an emphasis on the
involvement of women and underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
existing paradigm for extracting cortical functional network dynamics faces
challenges, including loss of temporal resolution due to the common sliding
window processing, loss of spatial resolution due to the constraints of
noninvasive recording, and statistical bias due to the heavy usage of linear
estimation techniques given that network properties are intrinsically non-
linear. This project provides a unified research plan for addressing these
challenges, by combining high temporal resolution non-invasive recordings with
high spatial resolution in a statistically robust way, using modern signal
processing techniques. This methodology will specifically be applied to MEG data
acquired from behaving human subjects, and will be used to decipher the neural
mechanisms of adaptive auditory processing.