* 1734513
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Shared Knowledge, Practice and Identity in Semi-Sedentary Populations
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2020
* Patricia Crown, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2020
* USD 29,742.00

Semi-sedentary groups often live on the peripheries of more complex societies,
interacting with those groups through various mechanisms including exchange and
conflict. The semi-sedentary groups may emphasize or mask aspects of their
identities in such boundary situations to facilitate movement and interaction
across the borders. Dr. Patricia Crown and Miss Jacqueline Kocer of the
University of New Mexico will conduct archaeological research to understand how
semi-sedentary groups located on the periphery of more complex societies
negotiated these social boundaries, particularly in a setting of ongoing
violence. This research is relevant to understanding how "alien" groups
manipulate symbols and either try to blend or resist assimilation into a more
powerful society. The study also examines the level of cohesion among groups
along the borders and how they might band together or factionalize. This broad
perspective can inform on United States policies and strategies used to
ameliorate violence along the borders today. The project provides educational
opportunities including the co-PI, who is a female scientist of Hispanic and
Native American ancestry and undergraduates of similar heritage from the
University of New Mexico, who will assist in laboratory analyses. Results will
be shared with the public through lectures, a museum exhibit, a blog available
through the UNM anthropology website, and with the scientific community through
publication. All data generated from this project will be made available to the
public through digital repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Do semi-sedentary
groups living in dispersed settlements share practices and knowledge broadly? Do
these groups also emphasize a shared group identity? When such groups live on
the periphery of a more socially complex polity, do they share, borrow, or copy
practices from their more complex neighbors? The researchers will evaluate the
extent of intergroup interaction (village, zone, or across the culture area) and
group identity through models of communities of practice and communities of
identity. Groups participating in the same community of practice share a
background of learning and their "ways of doing" are similar. Low visibility
attributes are used to examine the scale of communities of practice based on
shared knowledge and practice in the sequence of production for ceramics. High
visibility attributes will be used to examine the scale of communities of
identity, wherein groups asserted their identity with shared symbols through
ceramic design. The Gallina culture (A.D. 1050-1300) of northwestern New Mexico
is an ideal case study to examine these issues as they constituted
disaggregated, semi-sedentary groups bordering the more socially complex
polities on all sides. They created artifacts distinct from their neighbors and
are lived in an area with high levels of violence evidenced by burned structures
and skeletal trauma. Analysis from six sites from the Gallina area will
determine how proximity to group boundaries affects community cohesion. This
project is of broad anthropological significance because understanding how
patterns of interaction are related to shared knowledge and practice has
implications for how peripheral semi-sedentary groups interact at multiple
scales throughout the world.