* 1734557
* NRI: FND: Scalable Multimodal Tactile Sensing for Robotic Manipulators in Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Peter Allen, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2021
* USD 750,000.00

The research focuses on sensors and software to enable robots to have an
artificial sense of touch. Current robot hands and grippers rarely have the
ability to sense their environments; they operate by precisely repeating pre-
programmed motions. This prevents the use of robots in applications where the
state of the world is unknowable in advance, since such use requires a robot to
sense and react to unexpected events. The project will design novel and
sophisticated touch sensors and equip robot hands with them. The sensors will
include multiple types of touch sensors and integrate them to detect different
types and characteristics of contacts: fast versus slow, transitory versus
maintained, etc. These data will be interpreted by software algorithms that
learn how to make use of the newly acquired touch data. This approach takes its
inspiration from the human hand, which is also equipped with multiple types of
tactile sensing elements relaying information to the nervous system. The
proximate goal of the work is to build tools for material handling in cluttered
environments, a task that can enable e-commerce and supply chains to run more
efficiently, help manufacturers become more efficient and competitive, and
reduce injuries to workers by assisting with repetitive tasks that are known to
cause injuries.

Novel sensor design, computation and planning will be integrated to endow robots
with a sense of touch, thereby enabling manipulation in cluttered environments.
At the hardware level, the sensors will combine piezoelectric and resistive
strain sensing to capture both transient, high-frequency responses and absolute
strain measurements. Sensor sheets will be stacked in multiple sensing layers to
provide a rich signal set that departs from the "one location, one taxel"
approach that is normally taken and maximum use will be made of the rich data by
combining model-based and data-driven approaches to define motor control
primitives. These will be combined to implement algorithms for motor control and
planning that use the tactile data in a target task: bin-picking and kitting in
manufacturing. The overall goal is a compact, multi-modal, scalable tactile
sensing system for robotic manipulators, along with the low-level motor skills
and high level planning algorithms that use tactile data for manipulating in
clutter.