* 1734916
* Collaborative Research:NCS-FO:Volitional modulation of neural activity in the visual cortex
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Byron Yu, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2022
* USD 498,410.00

This project is funded by Integrative Strategies for Understanding Neural and
Cognitive Systems (NSF-NCS), a multidisciplinary program jointly supported by
the Directorates for Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE),
Education and Human Resources (EHR), Engineering (ENG), and Social, Behavioral,
and Economic Sciences (SBE). Even basic perception of the world is not as simple
as light coming into the eyes or sound coming into the ears. Rather, perception
involves combining the incoming sensory information with cognitive processes
such as past experiences, knowledge about the world, and personal tendencies. In
other words, two people observing the same events (i.e., receiving the same
sensory information) can arrive at different interpretations of what is
happening in the environment. How the brain combines sensory information with
these cognitive processes, and where this occurs in the brain, is incompletely
understood. The key innovation of this project is to use a brain-computer
interface (BCI) to tease apart which aspects of the brain's activity are sensory
versus cognitive and how the two are combined in the brain to produce perception
of the world. BCIs are widely-known for their ability to help paralyzed patients
and amputees by allowing them to move a computer cursor or robotic arm simply by
thinking about moving. Few studies have used BCIs as an experimental tool to
understand sensory areas of the brain, as this project seeks to do. This work is
likely to lead to a deeper understanding of how we perceive the world, as well
as insights into how BCI can be used to help treat psychiatric disorders and
recover function after injury. Furthermore, the investigators are developing
BCI-based lab exercises for undergraduate courses, training researchers to
become well-versed in experimental and computational neuroscience, and involving
undergraduates, including women and underrepresented minorities, in the
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on visual area V4, which is
known to be a crossroads for sensory and cognitive processes during visual
perception. To dissect what aspects of neural activity are sensory versus
cognitive, the investigators train animal subjects to volitionally modulate
their V4 activity. The BCI provides subjects with moment-by-moment auditory
feedback of their V4 activity. This project assesses what aspects of V4 activity
can be volitionally (i.e., cognitively) modulated, how volitional modulation of
V4 activity affects visual perception, and how malleable is the interaction
between V4 and another brain area (prefrontal cortex) during visual perception.
The key advantage of using BCI for this study is that it allows the
investigators to challenge the subjects to produce particular patterns of neural
activity. The investigators can specify in the BCI which patterns of activity
yield a reward. This technique allows them to assess what aspects of the neural
activity can be volitionally controlled by the animal (i.e., cognitive), and
what aspects are hard-wired to the outside world (i.e., sensory). The
applications of this BCI paradigm are extremely broad, and can be used to study
other sensory, cognitive, and motor systems.