* 1734907
* NCS-FO:Collaborative Research:Decoding and Reconstructing the Neural Basis of Real World Social Perception
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Avniel Ghuman, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 460,043.00

Social and affective perception is the critical input that governs how we
interact with others during everyday life. Consequently, having a model of the
neurobiological basis of social and affective perception is critical for
understanding the neural basis of human behavior. The overwhelming majority of
our understanding of the neural basis of social and affective perception comes
from studies done in artificial lab settings, which cannot capture the richness,
complexity, and salience of real-world social interactions. This project aims to
fill this gap in knowledge. To accomplish this goal, the researchers will record
electrical brain activity from patients undergoing neurosurgical treatment for
epilepsy. To determine the region of the brain responsible for their seizures,
these patients are implanted with electrodes in various parts of their brain and
then they spend 1-2 weeks in the hospital during which they interact with
doctors, nurses, friend and family visitors, etc. This award will support
research into using the recordings from their brains to understand how these
patients perceive and understand the actions, emotions, and communication during
these interactions on a moment-to-moment basis. The results of these studies
have the potential to transform our understanding of social and affective
perception by illuminating the neural basis of these processes during real life,
meaningful interactions. The lack of models of the neural basis of natural, real
world social and affective perception is a critical impediment to understanding
these processes and ultimately a developing treatments for debilitating
neurological and psychiatric disorders of social and affective perception, such
as autism, post traumatic stress disorder, etc. In addition, through education,
mentoring, and teaching, this award will provide an avenue for new researchers
to take advantage of the rare and valuable opportunity for basic neuroscientific
research provided by direct recordings from the human brain. This research is
supported by the EHR Core Research Program, providing funding for fundamental
research in STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in
STEM, and STEM workforce development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Models of social
visual perception developed using unnatural stimuli often assume that neurons
have unchanging response sensitivity and are organized into bottom-up
hierarchies. While some recent models acknowledge the role of feedback, they
remain simplistic with a relatively limited number of core systems and often
neglect of the role of social context and dynamic prior knowledge. These models
are unlikely to fully generalize to natural social vision where the system can
rapidly and actively adapt its response to optimize processing of rich and
complex natural visual input. The PI and colleagues will combine intracranial
EEG (iEEG) recordings captured during long stretches of natural visual behavior
with cutting-edge computer vision, machine learning, and statistical analyses to
understand the neural basis of natural, real-world visual perception. The goal
of their program of research is to develop the first fully ecologically
validated models of social perception. The researchers will use recent advances
in iEEG in combination with cutting-edge gaze tracking technology, video
analysis tools, and big data statistical and machine learning tools to
understand the rapid, complex neural information processing that occurs during
real-world social vision. The project will involve decoding the spatiotemporal
patterns of neural activity and reconstruct the expressive features of people
they see at these different levels on a moment-to-moment basis. The
multidisciplinary nature of this project provides an excellent environment for
students and postdocs to be trained in computational methods, statistics, and
neuroscience. Given the rapid advance of high-level computational and
statistical methods in neuroscience, this multidisciplinary training is critical
for modern neuroscientists. Enhanced understanding of the mechanisms involved in
social cognition has implications for teaching and learning. For example,
knowing more about how people form impressions of one another can inform
teachers' abilities to recognize and respond to students and other stakeholders
in educational settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by
Integrative Strategies for Understanding Neural and Cognitive Systems (NSF-NCS),
a multidisciplinary program jointly supported by the Directorates for Computer
and Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Education and Human Resources
(EHR), Engineering (ENG), and Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences (SBE).