* 1734983
* A Novel Cu/CNT Material System for Through Silicon Via Interconnects
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/06/2017,08/31/2019
* Leila Ladani, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2019
* USD 114,660.00

This award is for research supporting the development of a new material system
for micro/nanoelectronic interconnects. The material system under study is
expected to overcome several issues associated with copper interconnects. This
material system will make it possible to fabricate nanoscale interconnects that
possess low electrical resistance and high mechanical strength to provide a
robust next generation of nano-interconnects. Utilizing advanced
micro/nanofabrication processes, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) will be grown inside
through-silicon vias (TSVs) and a copper matrix will be added to enhance the
density, strength and conductivity of the CNTs. Electrical resistance of
individual vias and daisy-chained vias will be measured and an analytical
approach will be used to determine the preferred path of current and obtain
insights on interface resistance of copper and CNT bundles. Mechanical strength
will be investigated through bend tests and thermal expansion of wafers
containing TSVs while the electrical resistance of TSVs will be monitored for
resistance variation for failure detection. Finite element simulation will be
used to verify and calibrate the experiments. Mechanical and thermo-mechanical
fatigue durability will be examined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interconnects are an
essential component of any electronic system. In particular, TSVs are key
interconnects necessary for fabrication of three-dimensional integrated circuits
(3D-ICs). Therefore, advancements in the area of interconnects will enhance
three dimensional (3D) integration of complex electronic devices. If successful,
this research will result in a new material system that is capable of resolving
several performance and reliability issues that exist with copper interconnects
today, such as high resistivity at very small dimensions and electromigration.
The research conducted in this study will lead to new directions taken in the
manufacturing and fabrication of micro/nanoelectronic devices and systems by
facilitating miniaturization of sub-systems and providing a path for a high-
yield, high-volume manufacturing process. Outreach activities include a college
workshop for K-12 students, the recruitment of women and minorities into the
research program in collaboration with the University of Alabama's LSAMP
Program, and participation in an REU Site.