* 1734313
* NSF Student Travel Grant for the 2017 Security and Human Behavior Workshop (SHB)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Alessandro Acquisti, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 04/30/2018
* USD 5,000.00

The Security and Human Behavior workshop's goals are to discuss, in an informal
and interdisciplinary setting, issues where security, psychology, and behavior
interact. The scope is broad: topics that have been covered in the past include
the misperception of risk, security usability, deception, security and privacy
decision making, and so forth. As the SaTC program has expanded to include
social sciences in addition to its core in computer science, gatherings such as
SHB provide a key venue for interaction between the different communities. This
award supports student attendance and participation in the 2017 SHB workshop.
Students from U.S. universities, or U.S. students from other universities, will
greatly benefit from participating in the workshop, where they will interact
with research leaders from a variety of disciplines and will be exposed to the
most recent developments in information security and privacy research. In
particular, the first rule of the SHB Workshop is that everyone who attends
actually participates in the discussion. This will ensure that students get more
value from attending SHB than many conferences and workshops where they can
simply listen. Further, the organizers will ask invited senior scholars for
suggestions of student participants who are from underrepresented groups to
invite, increasing the chance that the workshop will broaden participation in
the SaTC community.