* 1734347
* Explaining Choice, Persistence, and Attrition of Black Students in Electrical, Computer, and Mechanical Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Catherine Brawner, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Regina Pope-Ford
* 08/31/2023
* USD 477,915.00

This project aims to identify policies and practices that lead to increased
representation, persistence, and graduation as well as attrition for Black
students in Electrical Engineering (EE), Computer Engineering (CpE), and
Mechanical Engineering (ME) and to make actionable recommendations for
policymakers regarding best practices. The project team is investigating why
Black students choose and persist in, or leave ME, EE, and CpE; how their
academic pathways vary by gender and institution type; and what policies and
practices promote greater retention of Black engineering students. The project
will ultimately broaden understanding of the factors that have limited the full
participation of Black students in EE, CpE and ME, and identify the positive
factors that can attract and retain them in these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's intellectual merit is based on a
mixed-methods research design that combines the quantitative power of large
sample sizes (currently 300,000 students at 17 institutions) available from the
Multiple-Institution Database for Investigating Engineering Longitudinal
Development (MIDFIELD), the qualitative richness of in-depth student interviews,
department and college administrator interviews, and detailed content analysis
of institutional policies and contexts at two Historically Black Colleges and
Universities and two Predominantly White Institutions. The researchers integrate
three theories that have been used in prior work on under-represented minority
students: critical race theory, community cultural wealth theory, and
intersectionality. This approach will strengthen institutional and individual
explanations of engineering student pathways and outcomes. A comprehensive
dissemination plan will ensure that the study results reach a variety of
audiences interested in diversifying engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.