* 1734870
* NCS-FO: Collaborative Research: Ground-Truth Analysis and Modeling of Entire Individual C. elegans Nervous Systems
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Max Tegmark, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2019
* USD 707,296.00

How does the brain compute? Understanding this process could lead to many
advances in science and technology. The Boyden, Flavell, Barabasi, and Tegmark
groups propose to examine how the cells within the brain of a simple animal work
together to generate the computations that underlie behavior. The teams will
study C. elegans, a small worm with just a few hundred neurons, yet capable of
learning and adaptive behavior in complex real-world environments.  The teams
will apply new technologies to measure and control the neural circuits of C.
elegans, in order to investigate how they works. The project will also generate
new mathematical tools to analyze the data that is collected - tools that could
help analyze how the brain goes wrong in disorders such as Parkinson's or
Alzheimer's. Using the data acquired, the project will reveal how brain circuits
compute, which could inspire new algorithms for machine learning and computer
information processing. These in turn could have broad impact on economic
prosperity as well as in advancing human quality of life.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Boyden, Flavell, Barabasi, and Tegmark groups will
launch a novel integrative endeavor to reveal how entire nervous systems - from
sensory input neurons, to motor output neurons, and including the networks that
underlie learning, decision making, and other processes - work together as
emergent wholes to generate the computations that underlie behavior. They will
utilize C. elegans, with just 302 neurons, yet capable of learning and adaptive
behavior in complex real-world environments.  They will optimize and deploy
novel technologies, including a new fluorescent voltage indicator for C.
elegans, and a method for 3-D visualization of entire nervous systems with
molecular information via physical expansion by up to 10,000 fold in volume.
They will record neural and behavioral dynamics, imaging the activity of neurons
throughout entire brains and even entire nervous systems of freely moving as
well as fictively behaving C. elegans engaged in complex decision-making tasks,
or forming new memories. They will then use expansion microscopy to map the
structure and molecular profiles of entire individual nervous systems. They will
analyze the resultant network structures to determine how individual variation
in these features connect to details of an individual's behavior, and make
mathematical models of the relevant neural circuits capable of predicting how
the nervous system would respond in complex contexts. The outcome of their work
will yield radical new theories of how nervous systems operate, as well as a
diversity of tools for the neuroscience and computational
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by Integrative
Strategies for Understanding Neural and Cognitive Systems (NSF-NCS), a
multidisciplinary program jointly supported by the Directorates for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Education and Human Resources (EHR),
Engineering (ENG), and Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences (SBE).