* 1734519
* Collaborative Research: Evaluating the Impact of Teaching Function in an Engineering Design Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 08/16/2016,09/30/2020
* Matt Bohm, Florida Polytechnic University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 09/30/2020
* USD 106,520.00

This Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) project will help improve the
ability of engineering students to design systems and processes to meet consumer
needs. Continued innovation in science and engineering is critical to national
security, economic growth, and achieving a sustainable society. It is crucial
that engineering education move beyond teaching only engineering science and
analysis: engineers must be able to design, create, and innovate. Functional
modeling is a tool that improves engineering design skills, but little empirical
data can be found that demonstrates how functional modeling improves engineering
designs or how to teach functional modeling in a way that makes students better
designers. The overall objective of this proposal is to determine the impact of
teaching function on engineering students' design synthesis abilities. Results
will improve the ability of engineering education programs to develop
engineering graduates that are able to effectively innovate and develop new
products to meet emerging national needs.

Most engineering design texts discuss and prescribe functional recognition and
some form of modeling as a step in the engineering design process, yet it is
only anecdotal evidence that suggests that students who are taught functional
modeling during the design process become better designers. This project will
investigate the relationships between functional modeling skill and design
outcomes by measuring the ability of students to (1) explore the solution space
during ideation, (2) generate high quality designs, and (3) represent and
understand engineered systems. This work will test three hypotheses: (1)
Functional modeling skills increase the quantity, variety, quality, and novelty
of design alternatives during the concept generation phase of a design task; (2)
Functional modeling skills increase the quality of a final design in a capstone
course as judged by a group of faculty and industry experts; and (3) Functional
modeling skills increase students' ability to understand and represent a system.
The project includes efforts to disseminate the results of this work to the
broader engineering education community.