* 1734215
* Ultrafast High Brightnesss Electron Beams
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Pietro Musumeci, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

This project will study the fundamental limits in peak brightness of electron
accelerator beams set by the interplay between the properties of electron
sources, laser technology and beam physics. Beam brightness is a key measure of
performance of a particle accelerator, with electron accelerators at the core of
many scientific and industrial applications. One important characteristic of
these devices is that the brightness of an electron beam cannot be improved
along the beamline from the source to the end-use, and instead tends to
deteriorate. This is the fundamental reason why improvements to the quality of
the electron beam sources are critical to improving the end-use performance of
electron accelerators all around the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The figure of
merit for electron beam quality is the so called beam brightness or phase space
density which depends strongly on the accelerating field the electrons see as
soon as the particles are photo-emitted by a cathode surface. Increasing this
field, exploring the behavior of different photocathode materials in high field
environments, and developing novel diagnostics to assess the six dimensional
phase space beam properties after the source are the main components of this
project. Achieving unprecedented electron beam brightness will enable novel
e-beam source applications such as dielectric laser acceleration, time-resolved
electron microscopes and compact x-ray sources. This project will also enable
training of a new generation of accelerator scientists with broad
interdisciplinary preparation and full hands-on educational experience.