* 1734822
* Collaborative Research:  Professional Preparation of Underrepresented Minority PhD's and Post-Docs for a Career in Engineering Academia
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Teresa Cutright, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 06/30/2022
* USD 242,218.00

The National Science Foundation, U.S. Department of Higher Education, and
department administrators from universities across the country agree that
increasing underrepresented populations in STEM (science, technology,
engineering and mathematics) fields is an important national need. Most of the
recent activities to rectify the deficiency of underrepresented populations in
STEM disciplines have focused on initiatives from grade school to undergraduate
college degrees (K-16). These initiatives have made significant advances to
enhancing the diversity of the US work force, however they have had minimal
effect on the number of graduating PhD students entering professional positions
as faculty in academic fields. The lack of faculty diversification is alarming,
considering that the primary sustainable method for developing future college-
educated generations is a diverse STEM faculty. The goal of this collaborative
project led by the University of Akron, in partnership with Mississippi State
University and the University of Houston, is to increase the participation of
underrepresented populations in engineering that pursue academic careers.
Providing participants with additional training in STEM education will yield
more prepared engineering educators, which will lead to better-equipped
engineers entering the workforce. Similarly, affording additional skills to
obtain research funding will assist with participants' ability to succeed at all
stages of their careers. An increase in underrepresented faculty could have a
long-term sustainable impact on increasing the number of underrepresented
populations that enter and are retained in engineering disciplines by providing
academic role models/mentors. The research component of this study will add to
the national knowledge based on issues of career progression and inform
practices on training doctoral students and postdoctoral associates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project builds upon the findings of the
investigators 1.5 day workshops that focused on preparing PhD and postdoctoral
trainees for academia. Our findings, which supported previous outcomes,
determined that most new faculty members, whether they had postdoctoral training
or not, were not adequately prepared for academia. The proposed project will
provide expanded, intensive professional preparation for PhD and postdoctoral
students through a series of two-week intensive summer professional preparation
courses in conjunction with year-long activities to offer practical hands-one
training in the areas of teaching and research. Participants will be provided an
opportunity to write a travel proposal to receive funds to meet with a federal
grant coordinator or attend an educational/technical conference. Each year the
approach will be implemented and hosted at one of the collaborating institutions
with participants recruited from the host university, institutions within a 200
mile radius, as well as a two from each of the collaborating institutions. This
effort has potential to significantly increase the numbers of underrepresented
populations in engineering fields that pursue academic careers.