* 1734348
* Ship Operations - R/V SALLY RIDE Cy 17
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2017,12/31/2018
* Stephen Kelety, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rose Dufour
* 12/31/2018
* USD 1,880,260.00

Part 1: Boarder Impacts Scripps Institution of Oceanography (SIO) proposes to
operate the research vessel Sally Ride to support NSF-funded scientific research
in the year 2017. As a large shared-use facility scheduled within the
collaborative framework of the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory
System (UNOLS), Sally Ride will host scientists from across the United States
and undertake research in a variety of disciplines. The ship will be operated in
a manner that promotes efficiency, capability, and safety in order to maximize
NSF's investment in this shared-use facility, and the programs that are
conducted on board. A key element of our approach is preparing the vessel, crew
and technicians to rapidly accommodate radically different scientific missions
during brief in-port periods, involving extensive loading, offloading,
laboratory reconfiguration, and installation of project-specific deck equipment.
The operating tempo of expeditionary oceanography requires a carefully planned
yet flexible approach to vessel maintenance, regulatory compliance, foreign
clearance, crewing and working with scientists, which we will execute so that
projects can be completed successfully and on schedule. Part 2: Intellectual
Merit: The observation, measurement, and collection of samples and data are
accomplished on a global scale by operations aboard Sally Ride. SIO-operated
ships have played a critical role in the exploration of our planet since 1907,
and continue to contribute significantly to the U.S. ocean research effort. The
seagoing operations proposed here enable transformative scientific research in
physical and biological processes in the natural environment upon which human
well-being depends. The intellectual merit of this proposal is amplified by the
combined merit of research projects undertaken by scientists on board. During
2017, Sally Ride will support four NSF-sponsored research cruises in the eastern
Pacific Ocean to conduct research in marine ecology, marine chemistry, ocean
observing, and physical oceanography. NSFsponsored research (including Ocean
Observing Initiative research) will account for 19% (39 days) of Sally Ride's
work this year. The remainder of the work will be supported by the Navy (110
days, 55%), the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (26 days, 13%),
and the Scripps Institution of Oceanography (27 days, 13%). Each program
contributes its own distinct intellectual merit. Broader Impacts: The proposed
work constitutes strongly collaborative, multi-disciplinary and multi-
institutional use of shared-use research and education infrastructure. As a
charter member of UNOLS, SIO is actively involved in coordinating research
vessel operations with scientists and funding agencies so shipboard capabilities
can best meet the current and anticipated research needs of the entire
community. The spectrum of research projects enabled by SIO's operation of Sally
Ride achieves far-reaching broader impacts through the operation and maintenance
of infrastructure that is critical to the promotion of training and learning,
increasing the participation of underrepresented groups in research, advancing
scientific and technological understanding and informing policy making. SIO's
proposed operation of Sally Ride enables institutional programs to directly
advance NSF's mission to promote achievement and progress in science,
engineering and education for the benefit of the nation. In the five-year period
ending in 2016, 1,026 graduate students, 448 undergraduate students, and 131
K-12 and college educators obtained first-hand experience at sea aboard SIO
research vessels. Sally Ride is part of SIO's UC Ship Funds Program, which
enables graduate and undergraduate students, postdoctoral researchers and early
career faculty to pursue independent research and instruction at sea via an
internal peer-reviewed competitive process. The vessel is also integral to SIO's
K-12 education program In the Footsteps of Sally Ride, which integrates
classroom instruction, hands-on practical experience, and shipboard telepresence
to teach physical science to economically disadvantaged seventhand eighth-grade
students in coherence with national science standards. As a shared-use resource
for NSF-supported scientists, Sally Ride similarly contributes to the education,
training and outreach missions of those scientists and their home institutions.