* 1734189
* Program for Development and Demonstration of Pioneering Accelerator Technology
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Ivan Bazarov, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,500,000.00

Accelerators are powerful tools for science and engines for industry, with
enormous impact on society. This research program by Cornell University
implements innovative accelerator concepts in pioneering, working accelerator
devices. Specifically, this program focuses on two transformational topics: (1)
The development of very compact and energy efficient superconducting cavities
for particle acceleration, which will enable a new class of powerful, compact
accelerators, and (2) dramatic improvements in luminosity of particle colliders
via a technique called optical stochastic cooling which promises to
significantly improve the quality of particle beams. Cornell University's work
on pioneering accelerator technology paves the way for new accelerators that are
ever more powerful probes of materials, biological systems, molecules, atoms,
nuclei and the most fundamental particles in nature. This program will impact
accelerators for industry as well. In particular, the technologies that Cornell
will develop are essential for the accelerators that are critical tools for
medicine, national defense, and perhaps for safe nuclear energy. This research
also contributes directly to the education of undergraduate and graduate
students in cutting-edge science, engineering and technology, a skillset
urgently needed for the U.S. workforce. During summers, students from community
colleges will be mentored in research in an environment that would otherwise be
unavailable to them. For many it will be a life altering
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superconducting RF (SRF) is the gold-standard
for modern accelerators and the most energy efficient means of accelerating a
beam of charged particles, but complexity, size, and cost of the current SRF
technology until now have limited SRF cavity application to large-scale
scientific accelerators. However, recent developments have resulted in drastic
reductions of the RF surface resistance of SRF cavities, allowing for a new
generation of compact SRF cavities. The SRF research part of this program will
focus on the development of such very compact, high-frequency SRF cavities.
These will enable completely new SRF-driven accelerators for small-scale
university, industrial, national security, and medical applications, by offering
robust, compact, energy efficient, and high beam power capable accelerating
structures. Optical stochastic cooling promises many orders of magnitude faster
cooling rates than conventional stochastic cooling systems that operate in the
microwave regime. A cooler beam is more readily focused to high intensity. With
cooled hadron beams, proton and heavy ion colliders can achieve significantly
higher luminosities; and optical stochastic cooling is presently the only
candidate technology for active cooling of electrons, positrons, and muons.