* 1734361
* NRI: FND: Mutually Aware Social Navigation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Aaron Steinfeld, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Cang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 743,549.00

This project seeks to provide robots with the social intelligence to be aware of
the mutual&lt;br/&gt;dependency between their movements and the movements of
humans around them. To this&lt;br/&gt;end, the work will focus on (1) improving
the way robots reason about spatial behavior, and (2)&lt;br/&gt;developing
navigation methods that lead to understandable and appropriate motion patterns
in&lt;br/&gt;social environments. This project will build upon prior work in
robot perception and social&lt;br/&gt;behavior in crowds and groups. This work
will impact the future use of robots in many application domains,
&lt;br/&gt;especially for those where people untrained in robotics are present
(e.g., delivery robots, guide robots, etc.). &lt;br/&gt;Almost all robots that
move near people will need to behave appropriately, so it is necessary to
discover&lt;br/&gt;socially intelligent navigation techniques, thereby
increasing human acceptance and market&lt;br/&gt;success. The team will also
continue established and successful efforts in fostering
diversity,&lt;br/&gt;integrating education with research, disseminating new
knowledge to the general public,&lt;br/&gt;industry stakeholders, and other
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior work has identified the importance of
human-aware navigation, and has developed&lt;br/&gt;methods to incorporate the
social norms that govern human physical space into aspects of
robot&lt;br/&gt;path planning. Building on this foundational work, the team will
address three main social&lt;br/&gt;intelligence tasks: (1) enabling robots to
reason jointly about nearby human spatial behavior and&lt;br/&gt;their own, (2)
enabling robots to communicate their intentions as they navigate so that
their&lt;br/&gt;motion is understandable by nearby humans, and (3) giving robots
the ability to decide when it is&lt;br/&gt;acceptable to violate pre-established
social conventions. Research in these areas is&lt;br/&gt;incomplete since most
efforts do not include awareness or reasoning about mutual
dependency.&lt;br/&gt;This makes it difficult for a robot to reason
intelligently on how to alter crowd motions in a&lt;br/&gt;socially appropriate
manner. Methods discovered by the team will also support the case
where&lt;br/&gt;multiple robots must mix with multiple humans.