* 1734075
* Investigation of the Effect of Strong Currents on Superconducting Properties and Surface Resistance of High Performance Materials for Accelerator Cavities
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Jean Delayen, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2023
* USD 550,000.00

The primary aim of this project is to improve the performance of particle
accelerators, opening new possibilities for high-energy experiments on the
fundamental nature of matter. Currently, particle accelerators rely on
superconducting radio frequency (SRF) resonator cavities to accelerate and
control beams of charged particles in high energy collision experiments (such as
at the Large Hadron Collider at CERN) or in x-ray lasers (such as at the
Coherent Light Source at SLAC). Increasing the accelerating fields and reducing
power consumption of SRF cavities is essential for the development of the next
generation of accelerators. Two objectives will be pursued in this work. First
is the understanding of fundamental physical and materials science mechanisms
behind optimization of the state of the art superconducting cavities made with
alloys of Niobium (Nb). The second effort is focused on new accelerating
structures and superconducting materials which could significantly improve the
performance of the superconducting cavities as compared to Nb. This work will
suggest efficient ways of improving the performance of SRF accelerator cavities
and will engage undergraduate and graduate students in this area of great
interest to physics and future applications by providing them with training in
key technological areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is
to investigate the local quasiparticle density of states of SRF materials and to
correlate it with different materials treatments (such as low-temperature baking
and nitrogen infusion) and surface resistance measurements. The quasiparticle
density of states is a key characteristic determining the power loss and the
high-field performance of SRF cavities. The synergy of new experimental
techniques (low temperature scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy) and
theory will allow the group to address the underlying physics and materials
science mechanisms which are instrumental for achieving higher accelerating
gradients and lower power losses in SRF cavities.