* 1734760
* Mechanisms of Mediterranean Region Hydroclimate Variability and Change
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Edward Cook, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2021
* USD 922,707.00

Drought has long been a concern for the countries surrounding the Mediterranean,
from the Iberian Peninsula to Turkey on the north and from Morocco to Syria
along the southern shore. Much of the region experienced prolonged drying in the
second half of the 20th century, and the recent turmoil in Syria follows a
particularly acute drought in the Fertile Crescent. Moreover, climate models are
remarkably consistent in projecting a strong drying trend around the
Mediterranean over the 21st century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
understand the dynamical mechanisms that drive natural variability and forced
change in precipitation and evaporation over the Mediterranean region. The
observational record is extended through the use of tree ring - based climate
reconstructions to give long-term context to the drying of recent decades. Other
work considers the role of Mediterranean cyclones in regional precipitation
variability, along with changes in cyclone behavior that may contribute to the
future drying seen in climate models. The role of jet stream shifts in future
drying is examined using a linear stationary wave model and other diagnostic
techniques. A thorough moisture budget analysis is carried out using both
observationally-based reanalysis products and climate model output. Previous
work shows that much of the hydroclimate variability in the Mediterranean is
linked to the North Atlantic Oscillation, which involves a north-south shift of
the Atlantic jet stream and storm track. Preliminary work by the PIs suggests
that this variability can be distinguished from aridity occurring as a
consequence of a warming climate. The work also includes an effort to develop
probabilistic projections of Mediterranean hydroclimate that take into account
the skill of models in simulating past variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
noted above, the work has great societal relevance due to the human impacts of
widespread drying and the somewhat dire model projections of future
Mediterranean aridity. The projections are plausible given their consistency
from one model to another, but an examination of the underlying the mechanisms,
in the context of a long-term climate record, can do much to assess their
validity. The PIs engage with the Mediterranean climate and impacts communities
through MedCLIVAR, a research coordination network which conducts activities
including workshops, schools, and exchange programs focused on Mediterranean
climate. Closer to home, the project engages with undergraduate students through
the Lamont Summer Intern Program and conducts outreach through the biannual
Lamont Open House. The project also provides support and training for a
postdoctoral research scholar, thereby developing the workforce in this research
area.