* 1734383
* NRI: FND: Light-Powered Microrobots for Future MIcrofactories
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Dan Popa, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2021
* USD 778,259.00

The goal of this project is to use focused laser light as a method for powering
and remotely controlling millimeter-sized manufacturing microrobots suitable for
fabricating and assembling even smaller devices. Swarms of multi-legged, light-
driven microrobots, capable of operation in either dry or wet environments, will
be built and studied. This project will pave the way for the microfactories of
the future, enabling the production of nanopositioning and nanotransport devices
with applications to nanomanufacturing and biotechnology. Microrobots have long
been envisioned as a gateway for full human telepresence at the micro- and
nanoscales, where conventional tools cannot be used for manipulation or
assembly. Potential outcomes of this project include unprecedented manufacturing
capabilities in nano- and biotechnology, leading to new opportunities for US
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this project is to
study novel and efficient light-based wireless energy transfer and control
methods for collectives of microrobots that can accomplish precision nano-scale
positioning and manipulation tasks. The project will provide fundamental new
knowledge for programming multi-actuator locomotors with a single light source,
using differential responses of the robot limbs to generate multi-legged gaits.
The project will create new photo-thermo-dynamic robot models, and new learning
control algorithms suitable for physical inter-robot cooperation. To validate
the models and control schemes, a unique hardware infrastructure will be
prototyped and experimentally demonstrated to drive and test two types of light-
powered microrobots. The first type of light-powered microrobot, called "Micro-
laser-hopper," is an untethered microrobot with flexure legs that can accomplish
controlled stick-slip crawling over a dry surface using a single, large diameter
laser beam source. Micro-laser-hopper gait is controlled by changing temporal
laser parameters, such as intensity, pulse frequency and duty cycle. The second
type of light-powered microrobot, called "Micro-solar-one," is an integrated
microrobot containing a solar cell, in-plane microactuators, microassembled
legs, and a vertical electronic backpack. Micro-solar-one is powered by
concentrated, broad spectrum white light, and is able to store and execute
complex gaits, at the expense of more complex manufacturing and thermal
management challenges.