* 1734362
* NRI: INT: COLLAB: Robust, Scalable, Distributed Semantic Mapping for Search-and-Rescue and Manufacturing Co-Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Dario Pompili, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2020
* USD 442,161.00

The goal of this project is to enable multiple co-robots to map and understand
the environment they are in to efficiently collaborate among themselves and with
human operators in education, medical assistance, agriculture, and manufacturing
applications. The first distinctive characteristic of this project is that the
environment will be modeled semantically, that is, it will contain human-
interpretable labels (e.g., object category names) in addition to geometric
data. This will be achieved through a novel, robust integration of methods from
both computer vision and robotics, allowing easier communications between robots
and humans in the field. The second distinctive characteristic of this project
is that the increased computation load due to the addition of human-
interpretable information will be handled by judiciously approximating and
spreading the computations across the entire network. The novel developed
methods will be evaluated by emulating real-world scenarios in manufacturing and
for search-and-rescue operations, leading to potential benefits for large
segments of the society. The project will include opportunities for training
students at the high-school, undergraduate, and graduate levels by promoting the
development of marketable skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance
the state of the art in robust semantic mapping from multiple robots by 1)
developing a new optimization framework that can handle large, dynamic,
uncertain environments under significant measurement errors, 2) explicitly
allowing and studying interactions and information exchanges with humans with an
hybrid discrete-continuous extension of the optimization framework, and 3)
allowing an intelligent use and sharing of the limited computational resources
possessed by the network of co-robots as a whole by enabling approximations and
balancing of the computations. These developments will be driven by two
particular case studies: a job-shop (small factory) scenario, where robots and
fixed cameras are used to track and assist human workers during production and
assembly of parts; and a classic search-and-rescue scenario, where operators use
an heterogeneous team of robots to quickly assess damages and to discover
survivors. These two applications, when considered together, highlight all the
limitations of the currently prevalent geometric mapping solutions, and will be
used as benchmarks for the project's results.