* 1734521
* Standard Grant: Ethical Algorithms in Autonomous Vehicles
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Yuanchang Xie, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 556,650.00

This project supports a team of researchers, including experts in moral
philosophy and transportation engineering, who plan to address ethical issues
that arise in the development of computer algorithms for autonomous (self-
driving) vehicles. The project will address concerns over the expression of
ethical values in self-driving vehicle when (for example) the vehicle detects an
imminent and unavoidable crash and must select among navigation options, such as
colliding with a crowded bus or with a lone motorcyclist. It aims to develop
algorithmic representations of ethical decision-making frameworks for autonomous
vehicles, and then model these frameworks over a range of contexts for their
effect on risk management in traffic networks and for their expected public
health impact. The overarching aim of the project is to promote principled
approaches to ethical decision-making in complex, autonomous systems, and to
prepare designers and engineers to encode ethical behavior into such systems.
Research mentoring is to be coordinated through the host institution that will
enable undergraduate and graduate engineers to participate in the project. A
summer intensive will bring together students from diverse backgrounds to work
with the project team and invited scholars. A postdoctoral fellow will conduct
research on the ethics of autonomous vehicles, and assist in project
administration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two specific aims. It aims
to develop ethical algorithms that can be converted into computer code for use
in autonomous vehicles. Team members will review the literature on existing
decision-making for autonomous vehicles, and then develop conceptual,
algorithmic representations of ethical behavior that can be converted into
computer code. They will also model changes in traffic risk profiles and
expected public health impact of these algorithms; specifically, they will apply
injury severity and crash frequency modeling using algorithms developed in
meeting the first aim in a range of traffic contexts and market penetration
scenarios. They will also develop a model for the expected public health
benefits from these algorithms using model of resource and time-based triaging
as a starting point. Both aims support training of scholars and practitioners
sensitive to the ethical implications of autonomous vehicles. These pedagogical
aspects have been designed to promote diverse interactions between STEM students
and practitioners, and they will serve to improve STEM education and educator
development.