* 1734327
* Phase-Space Investigation of Laser-Driven Weakly Relativistic Electron Beams
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Bradley Shadwick, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 420,000.00

This research project will measure some of the most important attributes of
relativistic electron beams produced by interactions between a laser and a
plasma. Novel laser-driven electron accelerators have the potential to become an
essential part of future accelerator technology. In particular, laser-wakefield
accelerators, which use laser-plasma interactions to produce high quality
relativistic electron beams with an extremely short pulse duration of only a few
femtoseconds (a few millionth of a billionth of a second) have shown tremendous
progress. However, because of the exceptional challenge of characterizing these
extremely short electron pulses that move with velocities close to the speed of
light, their exact properties are still widely unknown. This investigation will
be accomplished through the use of additional laser pulses that interact with
the electron beam in such a way that the essential information about the
temporal distribution of the electrons and their initial trajectory can be
deduced. The experimental work will be supported by theoretical
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Low-emittance, few-femtosecond electron pulses
with weakly relativistic beam energies are highly interesting as injectors for
future electron accelerators or for ultrafast electron diffraction. It is
possible to generate such pulses using laser-wakefield acceleration. However,
the full time-resolved electron phase-space distribution of such pulses is still
largely unknown. In this project, the injection process and properties of laser-
wakefield accelerated electron beams with weakly relativistic beam energies of a
few megaelectronvolts will be studied experimentally and theoretically. The
comparably low beam energy allows the use of a temporal diagnostic that is
incompatible with higher-energy beams. More specifically, ponderomotive
scattering enhanced through a standing wave that has the potential to achieve a
temporal resolution of 1 femtosecond will be used. This will be combined with a
beam energy spectrometer to determine the energy-time correlation of the
electron bunches and thus allow the temporally-resolved investigation of their
6D phase-space density. Because the bunches have not been subject to a
significant net acceleration, this will also lead to invaluable information on
the process of electron injection into the plasma accelerating structure. The
properties of electron bunches generated via different electron injection
mechanisms will be investigated using this diagnostic. These measurements are
expected to lead to significant new insights into the physics behind laser-
wakefield acceleration and in particular into the injection process. The
experiments will be theoretically supported by particle-in-cell simulations.