* 1734244
* 2017 Atomic Physics GRC: From Quantum Control to Tests of Fundamental Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2018
* Marianna Safronova, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 05/31/2018
* USD 10,000.00

This award provides travel support for student participation in the Atomic
Physics Gordon Research Conference (GRC) titled, "From Quantum Control to Tests
of Fundamental Physics" and the co-convened Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) titled
"Hybrid Atomic Systems in the Quantum Regime." This conference program includes
many of the research topics central to Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics
and Quantum Information Science. The support of students through this award
makes a substantial contribution to the education and training of future
scientists. Students who graduate with a background in atomic, molecular, and
optical physics acquire a broad range of knowledge and skills that enable them
to contribute to progress in many areas of science and technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Atomic Physics Gordon Research Conference (GRC) and
Gordon Research Seminar (GRS), which this award supports, are scheduled to be
held in Newport, RI in June, 2017. This Seminar offers an opportunity for
students to present their research results and to interact with senior
scientists primarily from the United States, but also the broader international
community. The Gordon Research Conference offers students an opportunity to
learn about atomic physics applications in several fields of science. Support is
provided only for US students (students enrolled in US universities).