* 1734310
* Collaborative Research:  A Comparative Diagnosis of Policy Conflicts: Examining Unconventional Oil and Gas Development across the United States
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Tanya Heikkila, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2021
* USD 319,476.00

Every society experiences conflict associated with government policy making.
Such conflict affects the capacity of governments to address societal problems.
Unconventional oil and gas development that uses hydraulic fracturing is one
example of a contentious policy issue that is often associated with policy
conflict. Knowledge of the sources, characteristics, and effects of policy
conflict around these contentious issues, however, remains underdeveloped.
Additionally, while conflicts around oil and gas development appear to be
intense and growing, not all oil and gas policy issues are conflictual and not
all conflicts are intense or intractable. Therefore, this project explores
differences across state-level policy decisions related to oil and gas
development over the past decade in order to provide an understanding of how
different policy contexts influence the intensity of conflicts and their
outcomes. Through this research, the proposed project advances scientific
knowledge about policy conflicts. The new knowledge benefits stakeholders of
unconventional oil and gas development, individuals interested in understanding
how to diagnose and navigate policy conflicts, and scholars interested in
theoretical approaches to policy conflicts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a new
Policy Conflict Framework (PCF) as an analytical guide, the goal of the project
is to provide conceptual and theoretical clarification about the factors that
explain the variation in policy conflict intensity across policy decisions,
along with the expected effects of policy conflicts and policy decisions related
to the governance of oil and gas development. In doing so, the study tests newly
developed hypotheses related to: 1) how the policy conflict setting affects the
intensity of conflicts; 2) how the design of proposed policies affects the
intensity of policy conflict; and 3) how the intensity of conflict affects the
degree of changes found in proposed policies. The research also examines the
distribution of the intensity of policy conflicts, and evaluates processes and
outputs of policy decisions related to policy conflicts. The research methods
involve identifying the population of all policy decisions around unconventional
oil and gas development in state-level regulatory agencies and legislatures, and
coding news media related to these policy decisions. Then, the research team
takes a sample from this population and uses interviews, surveys, and
institutional analyses of policy decisions to collect key indicators of the
sources, characteristics, and effects of conflicts. In applying the Policy
Conflict Framework, this proposed project builds generalized and localized
knowledge about policy conflicts.