* 1734763
* NSF/DMR-BSF: Ceramic Electrode/Electrolyte Interfaces Fundamentals in all Solid State Li-ion Batteries
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Lia Stanciu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This Purdue University/Technion collaborative project
is exploring the fundamental science behind the formation of interfacial phases
between ceramic electrolytes and cathode materials for all solid-state
rechargeable Li-ion battery technology. Of great importance to this project is
the development of a basic science understanding of the effect of processing
parameters on ceramic materials with low interfacial resistance, stable
mechanical contacts, and low bulk and interfacial porosity. This knowledge will
help battery researchers find better ways to fabricate safe high performance
cells. Modeling, simulation, advanced processing science, and characterization
techniques are integrated to identify material and interface combinations that
are the best in terms of being commercially accessible, high performing and
reliable. This work provides the basic science foundation to design the next
generation solid-state batteries and enables the rational integration of ceramic
materials of complementary multifunctional properties for applications that go
well beyond energy storage devices of higher energy densities and longer
lifespans, such as those observed in fuel cells, super capacitors,
reprogrammable sensors and electronics. Graduate student researchers involved in
this project are gaining valuable experience by spending their summers learning
and performing experiments on electrochemistry and battery materials at
Technion. The concepts and tools developed herein are disseminated via nanoHUB,
peer-reviewed journals such as the Journal of the American Ceramic Society, and
undergraduate courses and research activities held at both institutions. The
battery science and engineering gained by students provides an ideal stepping-
stone for the development advanced energy storage materials and devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The processing conditions that control
the formation of structurally stable 2D interfacial phases that maximize the
conductivity, ionic diffusivity, and phase stability of lithium-ion batteries
(LIBs) are being explored. The goal is to gain a fundamental understanding on
the formation of disordered, ionically conductive, but electronically insulating
charged complexions at the interface between cathode and solid-state electrolyte
phases. In particular, a Li3PO4 model electrolyte and a series of model LIB
cathode materials: LiCoO2, LiFePO4, and LiMn2O4 are being studied. This
represents a significant advance in the area of design of the next generation of
all solid state batteries, where: modeling and simulation are used to predict
the formation and conditions of stability of favorable heterostructural
interfacial complexions; sintering experiments are combined with high-resolution
electron microscopy to create and characterize 2D and 3D layered systems; and
electrochemical characterization is used to extract the interfacial components
of the impedance spectra and differentiate the different bulk and interfacial
contributions for each of the processed configurations. The findings of this
project extend to solid oxide fuel cells, high temperature ceramic gas sensors,
and polycrystalline thermoelectrics.