* 1734878
* Engineering Youth Experience for Promoting Relationships, Identity Development, and Empowerment
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Jonathan Gaines, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 12/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Engineering Youth Experience Promoting Relationships, Identity Development, and
Empowerment (EYE PRIDE) is a three-year longitudinal study of a mentoring
program at the University of South Florida (USF) to assess the impact of the
project's STEM interventions on engineering identity. A novel aspect of the
project is to help develop the use of engineering design and life skills,
particularly for institutions in areas with high populations of black and
Hispanic youth. For the purpose of advancing national prosperity, EYE PRIDE
targets underrepresented minorities (URMs) that may not have a strong prior
interest in engineering. Thus, the program addresses the problem of insufficient
interest, preparation, and opportunities amongst black and Hispanic youth. In
addition, the program explores the value of strong interpersonal relationships
used to develop support systems, help raise awareness about engineering
pathways, and reduce structural inequalities and biases. In the long term, the
program aims to spark a cultural shift between USF and its surrounding community
that ultimately may lead to a pipeline of URM students for future enrollment and
the study of their matriculation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project considers
engineering identity theory to examine the nexus between the engineering design
process and literature on culturally responsive learning and mentoring.
Activities will be particularly relevant for broadening participation of black
and Hispanic youth in underserved populations. Using a mixed methods approach,
the effects of the program on engineering identity and development of
engineering skills of the following populations will be measured: 1) URM middle
school students and 2) undergraduate engineering students and URM novice
math/science teachers, who will serve as mentors. Activities are structured
through the program's novel Plan, History, Act, Shift, Evaluate, Success
(PHASES) design process that uses concepts from the culturally responsive
learning literature, Next Generation Science Standards, and engineering design
to concurrently teach both life skills and technical skills. The approach is
particularly unique because of its basis in "Topic Chaining" which develops
connections in three primary ways so learning is culturally relevant:
traditional scaffolding to build upon simpler ideas, storytelling through a
shared, interconnected narrative, and relevance to the practical realities of
participants. After interventions are completed, the investigators plan to
continue the mentor/mentee relationship and assessing the skill development and
engineering identity growth over time.