* 1734484
* Comprehensive Study of the Most Pristine Objects Known in the Outer Solar System
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Scott Sheppard, Lowell Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2022
* USD 288,816.00

The Solar System objects that formed farthest away from the Sun and remained in
these locations are also the objects least changed over the long period of time
since they were formed. They likely still keep clues to the conditions at the
time of the formation of the Solar System. These conditions could also be
present in other planetary systems. These astronomers will observe about 50 of
these objects over the life of the study to learn about the characteristics of
the objects, including their shape, the rate they spin, their coloring, and
whether two objects formed close enough to touch each other. Telescopes in
Arizona and Chile will be used in the study. This project serves the national
interest as it increases our scientific knowledge about the most pristine
objects in the Solar System. The Principal Investigator's home institution,
Lowell Observatory, will include the results in their public outreach programs,
which reach well over 100,000 people per year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will conduct a comprehensive observational study of the
dynamically Cold Classical (CC) trans-Neptunian objects (TNOs) to understand
their formation, evolution, composition, and rotational properties. They will
build an extensive data set of visible images for astrometry, lightcurve, color,
and binary object study. These data will be used as tracers of the formation and
evolution of this pristine population. They will regularly use the 4.3-m
Discovery Channel Telescope and the 6.5-m Magellan Telescope and plan to include
several NOAO facilities in case of interesting targets. Cold Classical objects
with a visual magnitude up to 23.5 - 24 mag in all size ranges will be targeted,
with priority given to objects that are potentially contact binaries. The
investigators plan to characterize 15 - 20 CCs per year, resulting in a sample
of about 50 objects at the end of the project. By studying these most pristine
objects in the Solar System, the investigators will determine primordial
constraints crucially needed to understand the entire TNO population, and, by
extension, the formation and evolution of both our own Solar System and other
planetary systems. Results from the research will be incorporated into Lowell
Observatory outreach programs including the visitor center which receives about
100,000 visitors every year, as well as the "Meet An Astronomer" and the
"Navajo-Hopi outreach" programs.