* 1734834
* Community Cultures: Broadening Participation By Understanding How Rural Communities Support Engineering as College Major Choice
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Marie Paretti, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 04/30/2021
* USD 257,205.00

A robust and diverse engineering workforce is essential to national security and
economic competitiveness, and current rates of higher education enrollment in
engineering are not sufficient to support the need. Thus, broadening
participation in engineering from underrepresented groups is a critical
priority. To meet this need, this project focuses on economically disadvantaged
rural students, particularly women and other underrepresented groups.
Traditional models of career choice stressing interest as a primary career
choice driver break down in rural contexts, where instead community values,
local economic drivers, and strong family networks often play a critical role.
As a result, this project shifts the focus from individual students to the
communities themselves to understand how key stakeholders and organizations
support the career choices of rural youth. With this knowledge, the
investigators will engage target rural communities in participatory design
workshops so that they might leverage their unique community assets to support
more of their youth, particularly underrepresented groups, to pursue engineering
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project begins with focus group and
individual interviews with undergraduate engineering students from selected
rural high schools that are known for producing high numbers of engineering
majors. These data lay the foundation for interviews with key members of
students' home communities and observations of salient programs or events to
provide a rich understanding of the beliefs, experiences, and values of each
community. Data analysis includes both within-case and cross case analysis.
Further, the results of the multi-case study will be used to guide participatory
design workshops with rural schools and communities in the region that do not
typically produce engineering majors. These workshops will foster dialogue that
explores factors that support or hinder transfer of practices to low-producing
schools and identifies policies and strategies that would enhance each
community's ability to better support engineering as a potential career choice.
The study uses the southwestern region of Virginia, in the Appalachian
Mountains, as its primary focus, but research on career choice among rural
students generally points to the potential transferability of the findings and
methods. This project advances knowledge about engineering career choice and
rural education by capturing the perspectives of community members who often
play key roles in students' career and academic decisions, particularly in rural
communities.