* 1734728
* EAGER:   Community and physiological ecology: Linking consumer homeostatic physiology and behavior to plant community dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2021
* Robin Warne, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 04/30/2021
* USD 199,997.00

An important focus of ecology is understanding how the interplay between the
environment and organisms shape ecosystems. For example, some studies have
explored how changes in temperature and rainfall influence the types of animals
and plants found within an area. Other studies have explored how organisms may
shape their environment by building structures, or changing the chemistry or
rate of nutrient processing within an environment. This study will directly link
how environmental changes may influence broader ecological patterns through
their effects on the physiology of animals. More specifically, this study
examines how changes in the environment directly influence the internal
physiology of small grassland rodents and how this physiological stress
influences their foraging behavior which in turn influences the types of plants
found in their habitats. New technologies will be employed to record and
manipulate the internal stress levels experienced by rodents in the field and to
track how this stress influences their movement, foraging and feeding patterns.
This research is important in developing a general understanding of how organism
physiology and behavior scale up to shape ecosystem properties. This study will
also inform conservation efforts by allowing land managers to develop strategies
that may reduce the negative effects of environmental change on the physiology
of animals. This project will support the research training of undergraduate and
graduate students and will provide opportunities for K-12 students and teachers.

The integration of animal homeostatic function into the field of ecology is
essential for characterizing and forecasting the responses of communities to
changing environmental conditions. Changes in the homeostatic function of
animals may, for example, play an important role in structuring the form and
function of ecosystems through shifts in animal physiology and behavior that
influence predator-prey interactions, levels of competition and rates of
nutrient cycling. Capitalizing on recent advances in radio-telemetry and
physiological manipulation techniques, this study will experimentally alter the
stress hormone and water physiology of granivorous kangaroo rats to track
associated shifts in their foraging behavior and habitat use. By applying stable
isotopes to flowering plants commonly consumed by these rodents, this study will
close the loop between the physiological response of consumers to environmental
stressors and its potential to alter seed dispersal and germination patterns.
Integration of these disparate approaches will demonstrate a new community
(physiological) ecology framework that may shift long-held research paradigms.
This ecological framework will provide new opportunities for researchers to
explore and test how diverse homeostatic processes (e.g. thermoregulation,
ecoimmunology, and nutrient stoichiometry) mediate community function and
structure across a variety of ecosystems.