* 1734940
* NCS-FO: Super resolution Mapping of Multi-scale Neuronal circuits Using Flexible Transparent Arrays
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Takaki Komiyama, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* John Zhang
* 07/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Understanding the structural and functional components of the brain that
underlie perception, cognition and action, is crucial for developing next
generation neural prostheses, brain machine interfaces, and discovering
preventive measures against neurological disorders. Optical technologies have
enabled us to record and infer neural activity with single-cell resolution.
However, they are limited by low temporal resolution, and often fail to
accurately capture the neural dynamics at the milli-second time scales.
Electrophysiology, on the other hand, provides higher temporal resolution, but
single-cell electrophysiology usually suffers from low throughput, and
recordings that cover larger spatial scales suffer from poor spatial resolution,
making it difficult to decipher neural activity at cellular scale from large
areas. Realizing that micro-scale optical imaging and macro-scale
electrophysiological recording possess complementary strengths in terms of
spatial and temporal resolution, this multidisciplinary project will combine the
two recording modalities using innovations in neural engineering, multi-modal
imaging and signal processing, to understand neural activity at previously
unattained temporal and spatial resolution. Such a capability will lead to new
discoveries on information processing in the brain and circuit dysfunctions for
neurological disorders (epilepsy, depression, memory disorders, etc.), affecting
one billion people worldwide. Recording and resolving neural activity with
enhanced resolution can drive the development of next-generation of brain
computer interfaces for restoring vision, hearing, and movement. The outcomes of
this project will also be integrated into developing interdisciplinary
educational materials for training the next generation of neuroengineers,
neuroscientists and signal processing experts. This project is funded by
Integrative Strategies for Understanding Neural and Cognitive Systems (NSF-NCS),
a multidisciplinary program jointly supported by the Directorates for Computer
and Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Education and Human Resources
(EHR), Engineering (ENG), and Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences
(SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three main technical components that
consist of development of novel electrode arrays, careful design of multi-modal
imaging experiments, and advanced signal processing techniques for solving ill-
posed inverse problems. Simultaneous multiphoton imaging and electrophysiology
experiments enabled by novel electrode arrays will generate brand new datasets
which will be processed by new data-driven super-resolution algorithms that
judiciously exploit the complementary strengths of the two imaging modalities.
The key idea is to cast the fusion problem within the mathematical framework of
bilinear problems, and exploit sparsity of the underlying neural activity as a
key ingredient in solving the inverse problem by fusing the datasets obtained
from optical and electrophysiological recordings. The mathematical principles
and algorithms used for creating super-resolution images by fusing signals with
complementary attributes have broader applicability beyond neural imaging, and
can be used for developing more efficient solutions for ill-posed inverse
problems that arise in diverse imaging applications.