* 1734424
* Collaborative Research: Paleoecology of Jurassic Terrestrial Landscapes
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Robert Eagle, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 07/31/2019
* USD 71,779.00

This project will study ancient ecosystems of the Jurassic and could provide
insight into how modern terrestrial ecosystems may respond to warmer future
climates. High atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases and warm global
temperatures make the Jurassic Period an appropriate analog for near-future
climates. The responses of plants and animals to changes in climate in ancient
ecosystems will inform predictions on long-term effects of changing climate for
modern biodiversity. The ancient soils will be sampled and analyzed to estimate
temperature and precipitation. This project will enhance STEM education through
mentorship of students, including funding for graduate student participation in
field work and involvement of undergraduate students in laboratory analyses, and
training a graduate student in new analytical methods. Broad dissemination of
results will be achieved through development of a project website and an
agreement with the Perot Museum in Dallas to feature this project in its
exhibits. By emphasizing the connections between climate and biodiversity in
modern and ancient environments, this project has the potential to inform the
public and policy discussions about the implications of global environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines the relationships among
faunal richness, primary productivity, and moisture availability in Late
Jurassic terrestrial ecosystems of the Junggar Basin in northwestern China.
Comparison of these results with previous studies will test if these ecological
factors are positively correlated in the Jurassic, as in the modern. This
project will 1) reconstruct Middle to Late Jurassic paleoclimate in the Junggar
Basin during the using paleosol (ancient soil) morphology and geochemistry, 2)
contrast Middle and Late Jurassic productivity within the basin, and 3) compare
the Late Jurassic productivity-richness-climate relationship in northwestern
China with previously observed patterns in North America and Europe. Paleosols
from multiple stratigraphic sections in the Junggar Basin will be measured,
described, and classified for mineralogical, elemental, and stable isotopic
composition to provide estimates of paleoprecipitation and paleotemperature.
Paleotemperature estimates will be derived from clumped isotope analysis of
paleosol calcite and hydrogen and oxygen isotope analysis of clay minerals. Soil
carbon dioxide concentration, a proxy for productivity, will be estimated using
the carbon isotope values of paleosol calcite and associated organic matter.