* 1734058
* I-Corps: Recording system for improving outcomes in preterm infants
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2017
* Joanna Parga, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 08/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is that the
project influences how care is delivered and improves outcomes for premature
infants in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU). Because preterm babies are
exposed to hospital surroundings that are very different from the environment of
the womb, sound stimulation in the form of loud equipment and staff interactions
creates an environment that can potentially negatively affect human development.
Premature infants spend weeks or even months in the NICU and are thus exposed to
these potentially nonideal environments for long periods of time. The technology
developed with this project can potentially provide a cost-effective and simple
method to improve outcomes and development of premature infants in NICU.

Leveraging a digital technique developed as part of this team's research, this
I-Corps project explores the commercial potential of neonatology research
applying recorded, individualized, intra-abdominal sounds from pregnant mothers.
The sounds are applied to infants in a NICU in order to improve their physical
and intellectual development outcomes. The work builds off research showing that
these low cost techniques can improve vital sign instability and stress levels
in premature infants. The I-Corps technology pursued with this project involves
a wearable device that can capture high fidelity recordings around the womb.
These recordings include biological sounds such as the heart, lungs and
intestines at a low pitch not captured in currently available commercial
products. When played back to infants in a specialized manner, these recordings
have the potential to positively influence human growth and development in
premature infants.