* 1734616
* Scholars Award: What Ought the Public Understand about Science?
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Matthew Slater, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 210,060.00

This award supports research to address deeply relevant questions about how to
structure goals for scientific literacy. There are yawning gaps between the
scientific consensus on a variety of issues (such as human-caused global warming
and the safety of common childhood vaccines) on the one hand, and what the
American public believes about such issues on the other. The PI will synthesize
recent work in philosophy of science and social epistemology in the context of
much social scientific research on science education and communication in order
to formulate a framework for thinking about scientific literacy. He will propose
a framework in which scientific literacy is construed as a certain kind of
understanding of science as a collective enterprise, which has the advantage of
emphasizing the role that scientific literacy can play in enabling members of
the public to recognize the significance of consensus in science. The results of
this project will disseminated so as to capture the interest of science
communicators (including scientists, educators and journalists), and to guide
discussions about science-based policy and science education, especially in the
context of democratic deliberation.

One of the main contributions of the project will be to connect recent work in
the philosophy of science on understanding with recent work in social
epistemology concerning testimony. Since social epistemology has primarily
concerned the transfer of knowledge, little has been done to consider
understanding in a social context or apply these accounts to the concept of
scientific literacy. At the same time, much of the social scientific work on
scientific literacy has been at a remove from relevant philosophical discussions
of understanding and its distinctive epistemological role. In making
intellectually significant progress on these theoretical issues, this project is
poised to promote synergistic interactions between pertinent research projects
in several other fields of research including science communication, science
education, and science policy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.