* 1734217
* CompCog: Reading as a rational process of visual information gathering
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Klinton Bicknell, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 06/30/2021
* USD 315,203.00

Reading is a near-ubiquitous behavior in modern industrialized societies and is
now one of the primary ways humans communicate. The goal of this project is to
advance the scientific understanding of reading and the language processing that
underlies it by rigorously testing a computational theory of reading. This
theory models reading as an implicit process of moving the eyes to most
effectively gather visual information for language processing. To accomplish
this goal, a set of open-source computational models implementing this theory
will be developed, implemented, and quantitatively evaluated against existing
datasets of human reading behavior and new experiments. This work will enhance
basic knowledge of reading and lead to more precise computational models of the
reading process, which will enable the development of technologies that improve
reading efficiency across the population. Additionally, reading is a highly
complex learned skill, requiring tight coordination between vision, language
processing, and motor control. Thus, the work will also advance knowledge of how
the brain learns to solve complex problems and will contribute to scientific
debates on the extent to which the brain learns maximally efficient solutions.
The open-source computational models developed in this project will allow
researchers who work on reading and language processing to formalize their
predictions for reading behavior more precisely and to perform more
sophisticated analyses of reading data. The investigator will train a diverse
group of undergraduate and graduate students to conduct interdisciplinary
research, requiring simultaneous proficiencies in computational modeling and
human experimentation and knowledge spanning the disciplines of linguistics,
computer science, and cognitive psychology. Finally, the results of this
research will be incorporated into courses taught to broad audiences at summer
schools, increasing the visibility and development of computational
psycholinguistics as a field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The external manifestation of
reading are eye movements, made as readers direct the high-acuity portion of the
retina to subsequent points of interest in a text. Although eye movements in
reading have an ultimate purpose of gathering visual information to identify the
text, dominant models of eye movements in reading do not represent the process
of text identification from visual information. By contrast, this project
develops a computational model of eye movements in reading that does directly
represent this process. Specifically, the theory formalizes reading as a process
of probabilistically identifying the text being read by combining the reader's
implicit statistical knowledge of the language with uncertain visual evidence.
Eye movements are then sequentially guided rationally to obtain the most useful
new visual evidence given the current state of text identification. To test the
predictions of this account, the project will develop a set of open-source
computational models instantiating the theory, each of which implements just a
single aspect of reading behavior. Each model will incorporate state-of-the-art
models of language knowledge and visual information and will make predictions
for the reading of arbitrary texts. These advances enable this work to evaluate
the theory robustly against human data and enable other researchers to extract
predictions for their own data.