* 1734458
* Gordon Research Conferences (GRC) Radiation and Climate: Connecting Observations to Global Circulation Modeling Challenges; Lewiston, Maine; July 15-21, 2017
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2017,09/30/2017
* David Turner, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 09/30/2017
* USD 19,000.00

This award provides funding for early career scientists to attend the Gordon
Research Conference on Radiation and Climate in Maine in the summer of 2017. The
title of this conference is "Connecting Observations to Global Circulation
Modeling Challenges." The goal of the conference is to bring modelers and
theorists together with observationalists to identify and tackle outstanding
questions and significant uncertainties that are present in current global
circulation models. The conference has a dual impact of improving models for
societal benefit and developing the next generation of scientists by allowing
them to fully engage in discussions about the state of the field and the next
steps forward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 10th Gordon Research Conference (GRC)
and 4th Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) will be held at Bates College in Lewiston,
Maine in July 2017. The main meeting is divided into eight sessions, each with
an invited discussion lead and two or three invited speakers covering an area of
outstanding challenges in radiation and climate. Sessions will be convened on
topics such as: stability and moisture, convective aggregation, cirrus clouds,
and mixed phase processes in Arctic clouds. The GRS, which is held immediately
prior to the GRC, will allow about 60 graduate students and early career
scientists to share and present their work.