* 1734032
* Weighing the Smallest Exoplanets: Support for An Interdisciplinary Workshop
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Jason Wright, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Faith Vilas
* 05/31/2018
* USD 30,000.00

In the study of planets around other stars, telescopic observations called
radial velocity measurements are needed for two reasons: First, these
observations are one of the best methods for finding planets that are located
very close to their stars. Second, for planets that move in front of their stars
in their orbits, these observations tell astronomers the weight of the planets.
The Third Workshop on Extremely Precise Radial Velocities will bring together
150 - 200 astronomers, engineers, and mathematicians to discuss ways to improve
instruments and computing methods so that they can find and study the smallest
Earth-like planets around other stars. This conference will serve the national
interest by promoting the progress of science when successes, challenges, and
plans to improve the precision of the telescopic observations needed to find
these Earth-like planets are discussed and shared. The conference will last four
days, and have talks and posters mixed with group discussions.



The Principal Investigator requests support for a conference entitled "The Third
Workshop on Extremely Precise Radial Velocities (EPRV III)." This international
workshop will emphasize the discipline of extremely precise (<1 m/s) Doppler
velocimetry of stars, focusing on specific challenges toward achieving the 10
cm/s radial velocity precision needed to detect and characterize Earth analogs
around G and K dwarf stars. The conference will assemble 150 to 200 instrument
team participants, including observational and theoretical astronomers,
statisticians, engineers, practitioners in high performance computing,
heliophysicists, and others bridging these categories. The participants will
address the significant hardware challenges specific to building EPRV
instruments, the successes and lessons learned from the latest generation of
EPRV instrumentation, new statistical and computational methods for signal
extraction, analysis and jitter mitigation, and physical models and spectral
diagnostics of stellar granulation and other sources of jitter. One planned
outcome is a white paper directed at the role of EPRV instruments for the
upcoming astronomy and astrophysics Decadal Survey. The conference is planned to
last four days and will consist of invited plenary talks with time allocated for
discussion between talks, breakout sessions on more specialized topics, and
posters that will be displayed for the entire meeting.