* 1734245
* SBE-RCUK: CompCog: Modeling the Development of Phonetic Representations
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Naomi Feldman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2021
* USD 520,058.00

Listeners' processing of speech is tuned to their native language. For example,
Japanese listeners categorizing English [l] and [r] do not rely on the same
aspects of the speech signal that native English listeners do. This project uses
computational models to investigate how children develop language-specific
perceptual strategies. A better understanding of this perceptual learning
process could lead to better diagnosis and treatment of developmental language
impairments that have a perceptual basis and can provide insight into the
difficulties that listeners face when learning a second language in adulthood.
Building computational models of how children learn their native language from
the speech around them can also lead to improved speech technology for low-
resource languages (languages that are not spoken by many people in the world or
that lack digital resources such as large-scale, annotated databases),
ultimately leading to systems that learn more effectively using little or no
transcribed audio. Such systems could become important tools for documenting and
analyzing endangered and minority languages and could help make speech
technology more universally available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A series of
simulations tests the hypothesis that children's processing of speech can become
specialized for their native language through a process of dimension learning
that does not rely on knowledge of sound categories. Two models that use
dimension learning are proposed, drawing on representation learning methods that
have performed well in low-resource automatic speech recognition, where
extensive labeled training data are not available. The first model relies on
temporal information as a proxy for sound category knowledge, while the second
model relies on top-down information from similar words, which infants have been
shown to use. Each model is trained on speech recordings from a particular
language and is evaluated on its ability to predict how adults and infants with
that language background discriminate sounds. The research will yield new
methods for training and testing cognitive models of language with naturalistic
speech recordings and has the potential to significantly impact theories of how
and when children learn about the sounds of their native language.