* 1734503
* Consumer product valuation and interorganizational collaboration and innovation in small manufacturing
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Paul-Brian McInerney, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tara Behrend
* 07/31/2021
* USD 199,951.00

This project will explain the role that consumer ratings play in how small-scale
manufacturing firms choose partners with whom to collaborate and how resultant
patterns of collaboration shape an industry over time. Collaboration is an
important way for firms to learn from one another and innovate. At the same
time, consumers signal approval of innovations through ratings platforms, such
as those found on online retail websites. The craft brewing industry is a
strategic research site for examining such industry-consumer dynamics in the
context of small-scale manufacturing. Interorganizational collaboration is
common within this industry. This industry also has a community of consumers who
actively rate products on public websites. Like organizations in many
industries, small-scale manufactures vary in their strategies for collaborating:
some collaborate with many other firms; others with the same firm repeatedly;
still others collaborate once and never again. Over time, patterns of
interorganizational collaboration structure industries. This project will
construct and analyze a dataset from two product rating sites to model the
network of collaborations among manufactures in three states in the U.S.
Combined with interviews with a random sample of organizational members from the
dataset, analyses will show how consumer ratings influence decisions to
collaborate among small-scale manufactures and ultimately shape the industry.
Findings will bring together and contribute to the literatures on valuation in
economic sociology and collaboration in organization science as well as inform
managers? strategic decisions regarding collaborations and their prospective
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project identifies and explains
a key mechanism by which industries are structured: the recursive relationship
between consumer ratings and interorganizational collaborations.
Interorganizational collaboration takes place when organizations cooperate in a
non-hierarchical relationship to share knowledge and resources and to innovate
in ways that would be too risky to do independently. Status plays an important
role in why firms choose certain others with whom to collaborate. Communities of
consumers increasingly take advantage of online platforms to rate producers and
products, creating an alternative measure of firm and product valuation and
status. This project will bring together the literatures on interorganizational
collaborations and valuation by determining and explaining the role of consumer
ratings in strategic decisions about collaboration. Data for this project will
come from a mixed methods study of the small manufacturing industry in three
states: California, Colorado, and Illinois between 2009 and 2016. These states
have been selected to provide robust samples of collaborations. The time frame
reflects the exponential growth in the industry nationally. Quantitative data
will come from two rating websites, which will provide evidence of
collaborations along with consumer valuations of the products resulting from
collaborations. Analyses of this data will provide dynamic network models of the
industry as well as concrete measures of status among firms. This data will be
supplemented with primary data collected from organizational members in the
sample. Investigators will also conduct key informant interviews with a random
sample to identify non-measurable features of status and motivations behind
choices of collaborators.