* 1734239
* Workshop: Engaging the Global Flux of Technoscientific Developments and Regulatory Responses
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Diana Bowman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 25,100.00

This award provides funding for the 8th annual meeting of the Society for the
Studies of New and Emerging Technologies (S.NET), which is to be held in October
2017, in Tempe, Arizona. The goal of S.NET is to foster interdisciplinary and
transnational scholarship on the societal dimensions of emerging technologies.
The workshop will promote broad ranging intellectual inquiry and contribute to
the continued development of diverse literatures on the mutual impacts between
societies and emerging technologies. The bulk of the funds will be directed to
graduate students, postdocs, scholars from underrepresented groups and junior
scholars from the US that are accepted to present at the conference and who have
little, or no other, travel support. Supported recipients will participate in
two workshops focused specifically on early career professional development of
the next generation of STS scholars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2017 conference
theme is "Engaging the Flux," which alludes to the ongoing flux of technological
developments, scientific knowledge productions, and societal alterations. The
proposed workshops will embody the conference theme, embracing it in two ways of
significance to junior scholars in the social studies of science, STS, science-
informed art practices, and STEM disciplines. The conference will gather a
projected 150-200 S.NET members (based on past attendance records), the vast
bulk of whom will present on research that directly engages flux. The requested
funds will enable scholarly work with applied benefits for the responsible
development of new scientific knowledge and technologies, product innovation and
commercialization, sustainable economic development, and (consequently) the
long-term material and physical betterment of humankind. The funds will also
fuel the professional development of the recipients at a crucial stage in their
careers during a historic moment of intensified sociotechnical, political and
professional uncertainty.