* 1734605
* I-Corps: Transmedia publishing platform and service system
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2017,08/31/2018
* Andrea Hickerson, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 08/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will benefit
news and broad media consumers, as well as the publishing and printing
industries. The project augments print publications with digital interactive
media content, both curated and created collaboratively by users. Media rich
reading experience will enhance interest in reading and news media consumption.
The data obtained during the project may lead to new approaches on engaging
different audiences with news media consumption. The project?s commercial impact
stems from extending the viability of print media communication industry by both
improving reader retention and increasing circulation. A larger audience and the
ability to closely target a market based on hard data increases revenue from
advertising. Corporations and their advertising agencies will benefit by
providing more relevant advertising to end users, delivering more impact per
dollar spent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project uses Augmented Reality
to integrate multiple information channels including both physical print and
digital media. The digital media assets are hosted on a server and accessed by
users through an adaptive interface that selectively displays controls based on
the available content and user preferences. Scanned publication pages are
classified using a machine learning algorithm trained on a document database and
further identified using image matching to allow necessary efficiency and
precision. The system collects usage data and interaction history to learn about
reading habits and media interaction. These data are used for analytics and also
as an input for the image matching workflow. The prototype was developed using
iterative user-centered design and tested in experiments for preferred
functionality and user experience.