* 1734840
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impact of Lateral Channel Confinement on River Morphology
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Mark Fonstad, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 06/30/2020
* USD 15,912.00

This doctoral dissertation project will address the complex ways in which the
lateral, or riverbank, boundaries of a river impact the river's form. This
includes how tributaries and hillslope erosion processes contribute sediment,
and how laterally confining features such as roads, railroads, and bridge
abutments alter both sediment contributions and channel morphology by modifying
the flow regime of the river, thus altering the effectiveness of the river to
erode or deposit material. This project will also provide new insights into how
river shape and form is organized in terms of the distribution of sediment type,
as well as channel width and depth in the downstream direction. The student will
focus on investigating the role of tributaries and hillslope erosion processes
as sources of additional sediment, and riverbank constrictions as locations
where human activity has altered the natural river flow, often degrading habitat
for culturally and environmentally important aquatic and riparian species. The
findings of this project will contribute to the understanding of how rivers
respond to changing lateral conditions. This information can be used in river
restoration projects to enhance the health of river ecosystems. Additionally,
the information gained from the research has the potential to inform future
construction along rivers by providing a more thorough understanding of the
importance of the link between a river and its floodplain. The methodologic
approach to this project is designed to be low-cost and widely accessible, with
the objective of showing the wide applicability of this approach to river
conservation and restoration efforts across the country. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Improvement award, this project will also provide support to enable
a promising young scholar to establish a research career.

This project focuses on deepening the "sediment links" concept. This theoretical
approach frames river tributaries as sediment links, creating a series of
distinct river sections, defined by local changes in channel slope and gravel
size. The student proposes that lateral channel constrictions can be thought of
as "sediment breaks" within this context, as places where the increase in shear
stress at the channel bottom, due to a lack of floodplain access during high-
flow events, will result in a similar morphologic change as sediment links, but
due to an increase in erosion, rather than a surplus of supply. The methods used
in this project research include the use of a small unmanned aerial system as
well as underwater photography to generate primary data which will be used to
quantify particle size distributions, channel depth, and channel width. Existing
aerial imagery and LiDAR data will be used to classify channel constriction
severity using accepted definitions. The data sources will be used to address
several research questions relating the severity of channel constriction to the
magnitude of departure in channel morphology variables from a natural control
reach. The research questions will also further analyze the relationship between
tributaries and local changes in channel morphology and patterns of water
surface roughness and velocity vectors. This research will be conducted along
the Rogue River in Southern Oregon, USA but its findings will be broadly
applicable in other river systems.