* 1734537
* International Collegiate Cyber Defense Invitational (ICCDI) Competition
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Amelia Phillips, Highline Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2019
* USD 55,557.00

Keeping computers and information systems secure is a major challenge both in
the United States and abroad. Business, industry, and government need a well-
prepared workforce that can prevent, detect, and investigate cybersecurity
breaches, and the growth of cyber-threats has created a need for many more
workers who have appropriate, specific knowledge and skills. The cybersecurity
challenge does not respect national boundaries. The Internet has global reach,
and many companies do business and employ technical workers around the world. To
address cybersecurity concerns in the United States well, educators and
employers need to build cooperation and understanding with their international
counterparts. In this project, Highline College, in collaboration with
CyberWatch West, will organize and host the first International Collegiate Cyber
Defense Invitational (ICCDI) competition during the summer of 2017. This event,
which will be modeled after the U.S. Collegiate Cyber Defense Competition
(CCDC), will bring together approximately ten student teams and their coaches
from nations around the world to tackle real-world cybersecurity challenges in
the context of a simulated corporate network. This hands-on experience and
competitive practice cannot be replicated in a typical classroom, and it will
provide students with better training and preparation for the workforce. The
interaction of students and faculty who have different educational backgrounds,
as well as experiences with different technologies, will prepare the students
for the global cybersecurity environment in which they will work. During the
competition, conference sessions will also be held to allow representatives from
companies, governments, and educational institutions to share knowledge about
cybersecurity challenges and solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ICCDI planning
committee will build into the competition's structure opportunities for the
students to broaden their knowledge of cybersecurity as it is taught and
practiced around the world. These technical features of the competition
environment will be supplemented by the opportunity to meet cyber-defenders from
other countries face-to-face to discuss both unique and common challenges and to
establish new lines of communication. Colleges and universities that have
participated in the U.S. Collegiate Cyber Defense Competition have discovered
weaknesses in their current curricula and have designed changes to address them.
By following a similar approach, the ICCDI will enable participating colleges
and universities to adjust their curricula to meet cybersecurity demands in
their region and in the international arena. Each team will receive a detailed
report about how it performed in the competition, along with a debriefing from
the judges and the cybersecurity experts on the Red (penetration testing) Team.
The project evaluator will use aggregated data on the performance of the teams
and surveys of participants to answer such questions as: How did the students
and faculty benefit from the exposure to participants from other countries? What
particular nomenclature and skills did participants learn in the international
context? What cross-cultural issues emerged as significant during the
competition? How will faculty and students use the knowledge and skills that
they gained? What curricular changes will be implemented?