* 1734266
* NRI: FND: Scene Understanding and Predictive Monitoring for Safe Human-Robot Collaboration in Unstructured and Dynamic Construction Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* SangHyun Lee, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 750,000.00

The construction industry has the highest number of fatalities and injuries due
to hazardous working conditions. The introduction of robots on construction
sites has the potential to relieve human workers from dangerous and repetitive
tasks by making machines intelligent and autonomous. However, robotic solutions
for construction face significant challenges. This project will develop
technologies of automated monitoring and intervention through computer vision to
provide a means to dramatically improve the perception of construction safety in
the presence of co-robots. The new methods developed in this project will impact
computer vision, machine learning, and effective human-robot collaboration in
unstructured environments, while significantly contributing to safety. Further,
the developed methodologies can be broadly applicable in situations where robots
are deployed in human-centered environments (hospitals, airports, shipyards,
etc.) and have other priorities such as productivity and efficiency as their
objective. This project will engage a diverse group of individuals by training
graduate and undergraduate students (including women and underrepresented
minorities), reaching out to K-12 students, and interacting with industry
professionals for broad dissemination of the research
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate new computer vision
based methods that can be coupled with other sensing modalities for holistic
understanding and predictive analysis of jobsite safety on co-robotic
construction sites. The project will consist of two main research thrusts.
First, holistic scene understanding will be pursued on construction sites using
graphical models to enable joint reasoning of various scene components. This
holistic understanding in turn will help evaluate compliance with established
safety rules expressed as formal statements. Second, predictive analysis will be
investigated by exploiting the fact that, for safety intervention, the complex
dynamics of a construction scene make it necessary to simulate what will happen
next. In particular, Recurrent Neural Networks will be leveraged to predict
future events and prevent impending accidents. Finally, an integrated
demonstration system will be built and tested on real construction sites.