* 1734247
* NRI: FND: COLLAB: Drones and the Design of Public Outdoor Spaces
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Hala Nassar, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2021
* USD 299,859.00

With recent regulatory changes allowing for the commercial use of unmanned
aerial vehicles, aka drones, many new opportunities are emerging for public
engagement, especially in areas like filming live music events, coverage of
sporting events, and creating powerful imagery of landmarks or monuments.
However, these technology advancements have also led to a proliferation of
hobbyist drones. As a result, there are increasing reports of illegal drones
flying in these same spaces, which present a risk to people on the ground or to
those commercial drones legitimately flying in the spaces. Outdoor public space
managers could benefit from design guidelines and technology recommendations for
systems that could detect and potentially mitigate unwanted drone incursions
into their spaces while protecting both people on the ground and legitimate
drones. There is a need to explore passive approaches to drone detection and
mitigation for public areas that attract small to medium sized crowds,
particularly those approaches that are affordable and
safe.&lt;br/&gt;Â &lt;br/&gt;Through assembling a multidisciplinary team of
engineers and landscape architects, Duke University and Clemson University
researchers take a systems-theoretic approach to analyzing and addressing this
problem. Such a problem is multidimensional with multiple stakeholders,
including venue managers, the general public, and legitimate drone operators
contracted by the venues for services. Involving critical stakeholders at all
points in the process, a model of those variables that interrelate in the design
of passive drone detection and mitigation systems will be developed, including
operating environments, physical and cost constraints, and security and
aesthetic considerations. Design prototypes will be built and tested. A set of
formal guidelines and a design trade space that reflects costs and capabilities
for a range of passive technologies will also be developed that can be used by
designers and mangers of outdoor public spaces, who will be increasingly
struggling with this problem.