* 1734122
* Scholars Award: An Empirical Study of the Making and Re-Making of Knowledge About Risk
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Stephen Hilgartner, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 197,536.00

This award is to support an empirical investigation of knowledge-making
practices in an organization that has recently launched an ambitious research
program intended to make building construction more resilient to severe weather
by identifying sources of risk, develop mitigation strategies, and trigger
widespread change. That organization is the Insurance Institute for Home and
Business Safety, a nonprofit funded by property and casualty insurance
companies, which opened a unique research center in rural South Carolina in
2010. The purpose of the center is to produce and communicate knowledge about
how to mitigate damage from extreme weather events, such as hurricanes,
wildfires, hailstorms, and wind-driven rain. The centerpiece of the center is an
enormous wind tunnel large enough to test full-scale buildings. The study of
this center that is being supported by this award has as its overarching goal to
understand how knowledge about risk is made and remade as a way of getting at
broader conceptions of risk. The primary outcome of this project is its
contribution of a case study for a book manuscript; the book will mainly be of
interest to social science audiences, particularly the multi-disciplinary
community of scholars interested in risk. The PI will also produce at least one
article for policy makers and risk managers, a perspective piece for a science
policy forum, at least one article for a general interest audience. The results
of this project will have implications for public policy, the insurance
industry, and damage mitigation; this is particularly so given the prospects of
climate change.

This project aims to advance theory and empirical knowledge about the work of
experts who self-consciously set out to transform the conceptual frameworks and
management practices through which society copes with a specific set of hazards.
Understanding how knowledge about risk is made and remade is important for both
intellectual and practical reasons. The empirical research will enable the PI to
further develop theory about how dynamic change in knowledge about causation and
control of risk shapes technological artifacts, systems, and infrastructures.
The research will also shed light on the challenges of producing persuasive
results and on the reception, uptake, and repackaging of mitigation knowledge.