* 1734260
* The effect of nameability on categorization
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Gregory Zelinsky, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Michael Hout
* 08/31/2020
* USD 546,577.00

Humans have remarkable abilities to find deep similarities in what are
superficially different experiences and to use those similarities to help
categorize their experiences. This process of categorization allows people to
learn from examples and to generalize that knowledge to new situations.
Categorization is also a fundamental aspect of human reasoning. This work
investigates whether a key contributor to human categorization success is the
ability to name the features and dimensions that compose the categories. Testing
the causal link between naming and categorizing helps us understand why children
with poorer language skills often go on to have poor academic outcomes, even in
domains that appear to be nonverbal in nature like geometry. This work enhances
scientific infrastructure by developing a freely available online tool for
measuring the nameability of any visual or auditory set of items for adults and
children, which will help researchers and educators more effectively describe
learning strategies and allow for better understanding the sources of children's
reasoning errors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To explain what makes some categories
harder to learn than others, researchers have typically posited a fixed set of
features that are available to the learner. But where do the features come from?
This work tests the hypothesis that an important source of features is the words
people learn when learning a language. On this view, the words of a language do
not simply map onto pre-existing conceptual distinctions, but are one of the
contributing factors that create the distinctions. This hypothesis is tested
using a series of category-learning and category-induction experiments with
adults and a unique population of linguistically deprived children. The
experiments systematically test the extent to which ease of naming predicts
categorization success and tests the causal involvement of language by using
verbal interference protocols. The behavioral work is guided by computational
modeling using convolutional neural networks to help disentangle whether a
category is easy to learn because it is nameable or whether it is nameable
because it is easy to learn. This work is among the first to use deep-learning
models to understand human categorization.