* 1734082
* D3SC and EAGER: Using Deep Learning to Find Algorithms for Optimizing Chemical Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Richard Zare, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2020
* USD 209,734.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms - B Program in
the Division of Chemistry and in response to the Data-Driven Discovery Science
in Chemistry (D3SC) Dear Colleague Letter, Professor Richard N. Zare at Stanford
University is working on optimizing chemical reactions in microdroplets with
deep reinforcement learning. Unoptimized reactions are expensive because they
waste time and reagents. A common way for chemists to explore reaction
optimization is to change one variable at a time while all other variables
remain fixed. This method, however, might not find the best conditions, that is
the global optimum. Another way is to search across all combinations of reaction
conditions by using batch chemistry. This approach gives a better chance to find
the global optimal condition, but it is time-consuming and expensive. Deep
reinforcement learning is believed to be a superior approach in which the
computer analyzes a large data set and recognizes the pattern of features that
lead to best reaction outcomes. It is like training a dog: suppose we want the
dog to pick up a ball. If the dog does what we want, we say "Good dog!"; if it
does not, we say "Bad dog!". Similarly, Professor Zare uses a machine learning
method to give the system a positive reward if the reaction reaches a better
result than previous ones, or a negative reward if it does not. A repeated
process will eventually result in a set of best reaction conditions for certain
reactions. Professor Zare and his group apply this approach to microdroplet
chemistry, where many reactions can be carried out in small droplets and be
accelerated by factors of one thousand to one million compared with the same
reaction happening in bulk solution. Combining the efficient deep reinforcement
learning method with accelerated microdroplet reactions, Professor Zare and his
group are seeking to find optimal reaction conditions in a fast way. This
combined approach can represent a significant step for enabling artificial
intelligence to be used to optimize chemical reactions, which should have
benefits in chemical production, drug screening, and materials discovery. The
students in the Zare group enjoy the unique opportunity to experience micro-
droplet chemical synthesis, fast chemical characterization, and deep learning-
based complex data analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A reaction can be thought of
as a system having multiple inputs (parameters) and providing one or more
outputs. Example inputs include: temperature; solvent composition; pH; catalyst;
droplet size; and time. Example outputs include: product yield; selectivity;
purity; and cost. The goal of reaction optimization described here is to select
the best inputs to achieve a given output, which can be formulated as a
reinforcement learning system. In order to find the optimal reaction conditions,
Professor Zare is searching for critical reaction condition to try at the next
step based on previous reaction conditions and product yields. A recurrent
neural network is used to model the policy for reaction optimization. The
reinforcement learning system is trained on mock reactions (random functions)
and then real reactions for better performance. The approach, if successful,
could help better understanding of fundamental features of reactivity and enable
important industrial applications.