* 1734272
* NRI: FND: A Framework for Human-Team-Supervised Autonomy with Application to Underwater Search and Rescue
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Xiaobo Tan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 749,997.00

Advances in computing and manufacturing have led to rapid developments in
autonomous robots. For sophisticated tasks such as search and rescue, it is
often critical to integrate human knowledge and perception skills with the
capabilities offered by robots. Taking underwater search and rescue as a
motivating context, this project focuses on developing a principled design
framework for optimizing the performance of a mixed human-robot team comprised
of multiple human operators and heterogeneous robots. By enabling efficient and
reliable human-robot interactions, this work will facilitate the use of robots
in hazard response, environmental monitoring, mobility of goods and humans,
healthcare, manufacturing, and many other applications of societal impact. The
project will provide training opportunities for graduate and undergrad students,
including those from underrepresented groups. It will also provide research
training to high school students and K-12 teachers. An open-source robotic fish
educational kit and demos of EEG-mediated human-robot interactions will be
developed to pique the interest of K-12 students in science and engineering. The
project will further produce an underwater robotics testbed available for use by
the broader robotics and control community.

This research will develop a generalizable framework for rigorous and systematic
design of autonomy supervised by a team of interacting human operators, which
will enable the leveraging of human operators' adaptivity in complex scenarios
while mitigating performance deterioration due to loss of situational awareness.
The framework will consist of two tightly coupled modules. The first module will
involve optimal task allocation and scheduling for event-triggered human team
supervision, which will be formulated as a semi-Markov decision process (SMDP)
for a complex queueing network capturing task processing by a team of human
operators with different skill sets. Human cognitive dynamics will be
incorporated via practical models, and efficient algorithms for solving the SMDP
are examined while uncertainties introduced by stochasticity in cognitive
processes and variability among human operators are accommodated. The second
module of the framework will deal with informative path planning for autonomous
robots that optimally balances the explore-exploit trade-off in their search for
targets of interest, by solving a multi-armed bandit problem that incorporates
mobility constraints of the robots. The framework will be experimentally
evaluated in field trials emulating underwater search and rescue, which will
involve a group of gliding robotic fish and remotely operated vehicles (ROVs),
supervised by a team of two human operators.