* 1734051
* RUI: What happens when payments stop? Collective resource management under the rise and fall of payment for environmental services
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Tanya Hayes, Seattle University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2022
* USD 496,164.00

Payment for Environmental Services (PES), a voluntary transaction in which a
resource user receives payment for providing well-defined conservation
activities, has emerged as a prominent policy to support the management and
provision of critical environmental services (e.g. forest for watershed
protection). In recent years, governmental and non-governmental aid and
conservation agencies have increasingly supported PES as a tool for sustainable
resource management. Despite the widespread use of PES within the US and
internationally, we have limited understanding of its ability to support
sustained conservation activities. While some studies have shown payments to be
effective at attaining conservation gains over the short-term, few studies have
examined whether those conservation behaviors are sustained over longer time
periods, particularly if payments stop. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
examines the extent to which the PES model prompts conservation behavior and
communal resource management arrangements that endure, even when payments stop.
In 2009, the Ecuadorian government implemented an internationally recognized
payment for conservation program that paid communities and households to
conserve their native ecosystems. In 2016, the program unexpectedly lost funding
and payments stopped. In 2012-2015 the Principal Investigators gathered socio-
economic, institutional, ecological, and behavioral data from a set of
Ecuadorian communities in 10 provinces to test how the Ecuadorian payment
program changed household land-use behaviors and influenced the development of
communal resource management arrangements (NSF #SES-1156271). The study found
that, under the PES program, households reduced resource use and created
collective management arrangements. The proposed research uses this baseline
data and gathers socio-economic, institutional, ecological, and behavioral data
from the same communities to assess how loss of payments has impacted household
land-use decisions and communal resource management. Household and leader
questionnaires, focus groups, biophysical data, and aerial photos are analyzed
using quantitative, qualitative and spatial analysis techniques. The research
findings provide evidenced-based policy lessons for governments and donors
wishing to use PES and similar payment initiatives as a mechanism for
sustainable resource management.