* 1734137
* Commonly Experienced Sleep Restriction and Behavior in Strategic Social Interactions
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2021
* David Dickinson, Appalachian State University
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 12/31/2021
* USD 399,038.00

This project seeks to understand how commonly experienced levels of insufficient
sleep may affect decision making in important 2-person strategic interactions.
Sleep deprivation is considered a public heath epidemic by the U.S. Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, and current sleep trends indicate that
approximately 30% of the U.S. adult population receives 6-7 hours or fewer of
nightly sleep. And, while research has made significant advances at
understanding how sleep restriction affects decision making, the domain of
interactive decisions and social tasks is largely unstudied. Simple strategic
interactions are the building blocks of more complicated decision environments
that highlight prosocial (or anti-social) behavior and the benefits from social
interactions. Therefore, this research will not only advance science, but it
will also benefit society in furthering our understanding of the full costs of
current trends regarding insufficient sleep. Additional benefits from this
research include research assistants training in both economics and psychology,
thus extending the interdisciplinary benefits of the project to the level of
student engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A main objective of this project is to
examine strategic 2-person interactions in well-rested (WR) and sleep-restricted
(SR) subjects. An ecologically valid at-home sleep restriction protocol will be
administer to young adult subjects. The at-home protocol more closely mirrors
one's naturalistic sleep environment compared to a sleep lab, thus delivering
high external validity regarding the sleep manipulation. The strategic decision
tasks planned are selected to help identify key cognitive components of decision
making affected by sleep (e.g., backwards induction, optimism, use of
heuristics). Sleep levels will be randomly assigned to subjects and then
passively but objectively measured using wrist-worn actigraphy for a full week
of treatment sleep (SR=5-6 hrs/night attempted sleep; WR=8-9 hrs/night attempted
sleep). Following the treatment week, subjects will be administered a set of
strategic decision tasks involving cooperation, coordination, and zero-sum
bargaining. Because these tasks form the building blocks of more complicated
real world strategic environments, this research hopes to make significant
contributions to our understanding of how common levels of insufficient sleep
may harm the outcomes and efficiency realized from social interactions.