* 1734117
* NRI: FND: Smart Material Composites and Design of Internal Structural Geometry for Tunably Compliant Soft Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,05/31/2022
* John Swensen, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 05/31/2022
* USD 288,660.00

This project will demonstrate soft robots that can radically modulate their
stiffness in a manner comparable to biological systems. This ability will enable
robots that can safely collaborate with human co-workers in the service and
manufacturing industries. The creation of intrinsically flexible robots using
materials such as soft rubbers and foams is a stark contrast to the traditional
paradigm of large, heavy, rapidly moving robotics in isolated environments, and
has played an important role towards moving robots from the factory floor to the
home, clinic, and office. However the intrinsic compliance that makes soft
materials safe also makes them unable to exert large forces or to maintain their
shape when acted upon by outside forces. In many biological systems, animals are
able to change the magnitude and directionality of their soft tissue stiffness
through muscle contractions and modification of internal fluid pressures. This
project will show researchers how to use controllable compliance in robotic
components to obtain the benefits of soft materials -- adaptability, fault
tolerance, and safety -- while also providing greater force and manipulation
capabilities. The results will find application in a wide range of applications,
including home health care, medical interventions, factory automation, and
disaster response. The simplicity and safety of experimental exploration with
soft robotics also provides an ideal platform for high schools students and
undergraduate students to get involved in the emerging field of soft
robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central hypothesis of this research is that
the development of tunable compliance - with respect to location, magnitude, and
directionality - will provide greater dexterity and control and allow soft
robotic designs to exert larger and more precise forces on their environment.
This work will research the effects of compositing smart materials with existing
soft robotic components to identify the fundamental principles of geometric
design of the smart material aggregate. The intention is to imbue soft robots
with the ability to dynamically adjust the magnitude, spatial location, and
directionality of their compliance. These three aspects of tunable compliance
will require new methods of modeling kinematics and dynamics as a function of
the control of the smart material stimuli, in conjunction with other traditional
actuation schemes such as tendons and pneumatics. Another primary result of the
project will be quantitative metrics to objectively describe the capabilities of
the resulting tunably compliant robots, in order to formally optimize the
geometry of the smart material aggregate.