* 1734852
* Collaborative Research:   Coordinated Resonance and Rayleigh Lidar Studies of the Arctic Atmosphere and Geospace Environment
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2018
* Richard Collins, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Meriwether
* 06/30/2018
* USD 200,000.00

This award would would upgrade the upper atmosphere lidar facility located at
the Poker Flat Research Range (PFRR), Alaska (65N, 147W) to achieve a wind and
temperature (W&amp;T) measurement capability for the mesosphere and lower
thermosphere (MLT) region using the resonance backscatter returns from the
sodium layer to obtain these results. This instrument would be applied to
undertake correlative studies addressing new challenges in mesosphere and lower
thermosphere (MLT) polar dynamics as well as extending ongoing work on the study
of ion-neutral coupling processes. A key element of the award would be the
transfer of the Na resonance wind-temperature lidar, currently at the Arctic
Lidar Observatory for Middle Atmosphere Research, Norway (69N, 16E), to the
Lidar Research Laboratory (LRL) at PFRR. This lidar system when established at
Poker Flat would be capable of measuring three-dimensional wind, neutral
temperature and sodium density profiles at high vertical resolution and temporal
cadence. The lidar range coverage would normally be 80-105 km, and when neutral
Na is present at higher altitudes (sporadic layer formations) can then be
extended up to ¡­140 km into the lower thermosphere. This facility will
represent an excellent means of training young optical engineering physicists
that would then be well suited for many possible career paths in academia and
industrial research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major scientific goals of the
research include the following objectives: &lt;br/&gt;1. characterization of
gravity wave (GW) propagation, refraction, ducting, and energy and momentum
transports in variable environments, e.g., MLT responses to stratospheric
warmings, &lt;br/&gt;2. quantification of GW instability dynamics driving energy
and momentum deposition, turbulence, heat, momentum, and constituent transports,
and mixing, &lt;br/&gt;3. understanding the interactions of GWs with tides and
planetary waves, their influences on these fields, and the evolution of the wave
spectrum with altitude, and &lt;br/&gt;4. contributing to an improved
understanding of ion-neutral coupling in the E region. &lt;br/&gt;Studies
employing the PFRR lidar system will benefit from current and pending
measurement capabilities at PFRR, including ground-based imaging of neutral and
plasma dynamics, the construction of a new meteor radar, and in situ
measurements made possibly by pending and future rocket measurements. The PFRR
lidar team also has extensive modeling capabilities that will continue to
benefit the interpretation and understanding of lidar and correlative instrument
measurements.