* 1734300
* Collaborative Research: NSF/EAR-BSF: Coupled Sand and Clay Motion, Bed Morphodynamics, and Porewater Exchange
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Aaron Packman, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 06/30/2022
* USD 349,666.00

Interactions between water and sediments shape water bodies, set habitat for
fish, shellfish, and other aquatic organisms, and control land stability in
river floodplains and coastal regions. While the behavior of sandy systems is
fairly well understood, little information is available on interactions between
sand and finer sediments such as clay and mud. Mixed clay-sand deposits are very
common in rivers and coastal estuaries, yet it is not currently possible to
predict important behavior of clay-sand mixtures, such as changes in sand dunes,
beaches, and channels following shoreline erosion. This project will advance
capability to measure and predict interactions between water flow, sand, and
clay in freshwater and marine systems. This capability will enable better
management of critical U.S. water resources, reduce damage from coastal erosion,
and facilitate shipping and military operations in shallow coastal waters.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to show that clay-sand-water coupling
follows a regular and fundamental set of processes: migration of clay into sand
beds, accumulation of clay deposits, and feedbacks from clay filling pore spaces
and cementing sand grains. Work will be conducted jointly by U.S. and Israeli
research teams. Experiments will use a suite of new optical, acoustic, and X-ray
imaging methods to measure water flow, clay-sand dynamics, and sediment bed
formation. These results will be used to develop new mathematical theory and
computer models enabling prediction of water flow and sediment dynamics in clay-
sand systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is cofunded by the Geomorphology
and Land-use Dynamics Program, the Hydrologic Sciences Program, and the Office
of International Science and Engineering.