* 1734431
* Standard Grant: Internet Infrastructure and Connectivity in Rural Regions of the USA
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Jenna Burrell, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 212,736.00

This project will expand understanding of digital inequality by focusing on
connectivity challenges in rural communities. In terms of the broader impacts of
this project, the findings will speak directly to ongoing struggles and concerns
over Internet access. Factors to be studied include telecom industry
regulations, policies of the FCC and other agencies, grant and loan programs,
and technological innovations emerging out of Academia and the private sector.
This project will provide a better understanding of how well governments
incentivizing incumbents and rural self-organizing are or are not working and
why. The findings will help inform citizen advocacy groups and communities that
are organizing to address their connectivity needs. Furthermore, students will
be involved in an outreach activity learning about Native American communities
in the area to develop approaches to managing and sharing cultural information
informed by the idea of data sovereignty. This research will be of interest to
communities, policy makers, technology industries and scholars.

The study will center on two sites: Mendocino county, California and Crook
county, Oregon. These sites are selected for their distinctive and contrasting
populations and histories. This study will (a) pursue a cultural analysis of the
selected sites that is attuned to rural cultural identities in order to examine
how practices of Internet use are being defined and (b) look at the material
affordances and constraints on access through a focus on infrastructure with
special attention paid to the collective efforts by communities to cooperatively
self-provision connectivity. This proposal will draw from new materialist
theories because it places culture as well as collectivities and places back
into the conversation on the digital divide. This research will broaden the
conversation around access and connectivity to include culture, place and social
institutions as well as individual user behavior.