* 1734501
* NRI: INT: COLLAB: Accelerating Large-Scale Adoption of Robotic Lower-Limb Prostheses through Personalized Prosthesis Controller Adaptation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Xiangrong Shen, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 08/31/2023
* USD 899,799.00

Experiencing a lower limb amputation is a life-changing event. A person with
lower-limb amputation relies heavily on a leg prosthesis to support
himself/herself and stay mobile. However, most leg prostheses in current use are
unpowered, which can cause great inconvenience. For example, these unpowered
prostheses cannot propel the amputee users forward in walking, and cannot push
them up while standing up or climbing stairs. With the advances in medical
robotic technologies, powered robotic leg prostheses are starting to become more
common. These powered prostheses can help amputees to walk more easily and
naturally, and also provide power to support activities previously unattainable
or extremely difficult with existing unpowered prostheses (such as standing up
and stair climbing). On the other hand, these robotic prostheses are much more
complex than the existing unpowered prostheses, so tuning such a prosthesis to
fit an individual user is very challenging and time-consuming, requiring
numerous office visits with a clinician over a long period of time. This is one
of the main reasons why powered leg prostheses have not gained extensive use
among the amputee users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the research team
will help to solve this problem by developing a new method to automate the
prosthesis tuning process. The main idea is to use a pendant-like wearable
sensor to measure upper body motion, which provides rich information about how
well the prosthesis is being controlled to help the user to walk and perform
other basic tasks of daily life. The new method will use such information and
gradually tune the controller parameters over time without the need for constant
clinical supervision. To develop this method, the researchers will study how an
experienced prosthetist tunes the prosthesis parameters and develop an algorithm
to mimic this process. Furthermore, the upper body motion will be used to infer
the amputee user's intention more precisely, so the prosthesis can reliably
understand what the user intends to do even if he/she changes the motion pattern
while learning to use the robotic prosthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By conducting
research in this project, the researchers aim to develop a complete Personalized
Prosthesis Controller Adaptation (PPCA) system, which provides personalized
controller adaption on two levels: 1) automatic motion controller tuning, and 2)
automatic intent recognizer adaptation. The researchers anticipate to make
significant contributions to the related scientific areas, including: 1) a novel
wearable sensor that incorporates an inertial measurement unit (IMU), capacitive
sensing (for sensor-torso relative motion), and advanced signal processing to
provide reliable trunk motion information; 2) fundamental understanding of
robotic prosthesis-assisted amputee locomotion, and how human expertise-based
tuning optimizes its gait quality; 3) a novel quasi-supervised adaptation of
classifier-based intent recognizer, which provides the advantages of the
traditional supervised learning while avoiding its major weakness (highly
effective in adapting to changing human conditions, and no repeated training
sessions or human-conducted data labeling required). Impacts of this project
will also be generated by its various education activities, including the
introduction of robotic technologies to the future prosthetic clinicians through
a renowned prosthetics and orthotics education program, and the creation of
hands-on robotic projects in undergraduate research, which can also serve as
important tools in the K-12 outreach to attract children at different age groups
to the science and engineering fields.