* 1734430
* NCS-FO: Collaborative Research: Relationship of Cortical Field Anatomy to Network Vulnerability and Behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Thomas Grabowski, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 849,938.00

Cognitive abilities such as memory and attention are supported by specialized
brain networks made up of specific patches of the cerebral cortex called
cortical fields. Cortical fields are thought to be anatomically distinct, with
neurons connecting between them. Until recently, cortical fields could only be
identified after death, by microscopic examination of autopsy brain tissue.
Their number, function, and location in individual brains have been unknown. Now
however, Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can detect neural activity in the
cerebral cortex with relatively high resolution, and diffusion MRI (dMRI) can
detect white-matter fibers that connect brain regions. Networks made up of
cortical fields become active when individuals accomplish a task, and also
spontaneously, when the mind is "at rest." We will use all this information to
delineate the specific cortical fields in individual brains as well as patterns
of connectivity between them. Cortical fields vary in size up to threefold from
person to person, and we intend to study whether this variability is reflected
in individual abilities or susceptibilities. The overarching goal is to test the
idea that the size of cortical fields matters to the strength and vulnerability
of brain networks. We use the MRI approaches outlined above to measure network
strength, and we temporarily disrupt networks with transcranial magnetic
stimulation (TMS) to assess network vulnerability. The work is important because
it will allow us to better understand the reasons people have variable mental
abilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on two established brain
networks: the default mode network (DMN) and the lateral frontoparietal network
(LFPN), which have components in the inferior parietal lobes. Connectivity-based
parcellation distinguishes two angular gyrus fields, PgA and PgP, which are
nodes within the LFPN and DMN networks, respectively. We will use dMRI to
parcellate the cortex using a probabilistic parcel atlas of the Human Connectome
Project data as prior information. Using functional connectivity, we will
evaluate if PgP belongs to DMN, and PgA to LFPN. We will also analyze the
strength of functional connectivity across network nodes in resting state fMRI
using the dual-regression approach and ascertain the degree to which cortical
field size variability across subjects is correlated with network-size
variability. We will evaluate whether connectivity-defined cortical parcels
maximize fMRI task contrast and show higher levels of EEG gamma and theta
activities. Finally we relate the variability of cortical parcel size to task
vulnerability by applying transcranial magnetic stimulations (TMS) to PgP and
PgA. We hypothesize that low-frequency repetitive TMS (rTMS) over PgA will
impair task performance on a working memory task and on a flanker task, and more
so for individuals with smaller surface area of PgA. Furthermore, because
endogenous reduction of DMN activity is associated with successful deployment of
attentional resources, we also hypothesize that rTMS over DMN nodes will
positively affect performance on the same tasks, and more so for individuals
with smaller surface areas of these nodes. This project is funded by Integrative
Strategies for Understanding Neural and Cognitive Systems (NSF-NCS), a
multidisciplinary program jointly supported by the Directorates for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Education and Human Resources (EHR),
Engineering (ENG), and Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences (SBE).