* 1734627
* NRI: FND: Bioinspired Design and Shared Autonomy for Underwater Robots with Soft Limbs
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Camille Palmer, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Erion Plaku
* 07/31/2021
* USD 694,583.00

Currently, delicate and challenging underwater manipulation tasks are performed
only by human divers when it is safe for them to enter the environment. Robots
can help address this issue by distancing human operators from dangerous
environments, while still leveraging their skills in planning complex
manipulation tasks. Rigid robotic manipulators, however, are typically not
suitable for delicate manipulation tasks. To address this limitation, this
project explores the design and control of soft robotic arms inspired by the
octopus. Soft robots can perform delicate tasks of scientific interest in
underwater environments, such as retrieving biological samples or delicate
artifacts, without harming them. Such soft robots can also be safer when
operating alongside humans. The results of the research will be integrated into
hands-on courses as part of the Oregon State University PhD in Robotics and into
K-12 outreach via the OSU Robotics Club and Oregon FIRST Robotics
competitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
establish a framework for underwater manipulation, combining shared autonomy
between human operators and robots with mechanically-directed soft actuation and
sensing. The proposed work will examine new actuator morphologies, alternative
fabrications techniques, and the use of stretchable integrated liquid metal
sensors. To control the soft grippers, this project develops a planning and
control interface that utilizes machine learning techniques to leverage human
operators' skills at quickly identifying stable grasps. The physical attributes
of the soft grippers will be designed in tandem with algorithms, which will
provide improved understanding of underwater interaction and shared autonomy.
Dexterity and compliance of the soft manipulators will be evaluated for large
contact-area, multi-point gripping, which is particularly advantageous for
grasping delicate objects underwater. Testing will be done in a benchtop
underwater test bed, using kinematic motion capture and interaction forces to
evaluate performance.&lt;br/&gt;