* 1734220
* CompCog: Bridging the gap between behavioral and neural correlates of attention using a computational model of neural mechanisms
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Bradley Wyble, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2023
* USD 390,711.00

A challenge for our visual system is being able to focus on information
important for our current task, while also being responsive to unexpected
events. For example, when driving, if one is looking carefully for a street
sign, one should also be able to stop to avoid a car pulling out from a side
street. To address this challenge, our brain uses an attentional system that
monitors the environment for important information and decides what should be
focused at each moment in time. The proposed research will investigate this
attentional system, using experiments that examine behaviors and brain activity,
as well as with a computer model that integrates other findings from many
different labs. This model will help researchers to better understand how
brainwaves are related to both the activity of brain cells and behavior when
visual attention is engaged. The model will be made publicly available in a
format that anyone can run on their own computer, so that other researchers can
use it to help advance our understanding in many important areas, such as how
cars and other automated systems will be able to navigate and interact safely
with the world. Finally, this work supports educational efforts aimed at
engaging undergraduate students with a highly technical approach to scientific
investigation and funds outreach efforts in high schools to give students the
opportunity to develop a greater interest in neuroscience and
robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work builds on decades of research into the
nature of visual attention, which has generated a large volume of data about how
the brain processes information. Based on this work, the researchers have
created a computational model of attention that attempts to simulate how the
brain chooses which pieces of information to attend. To validate this model,
they will conduct a series of eight new experiments that test specific
predictions of the model. These tests will provide information about how the
different layers of neurons in the model should communicate to most closely
approximate the human brain's attentional system. The final model will be
compiled into a version that can be downloaded by other researchers or
educators. This model will provide a polished graphical user interface, allowing
novice users to explore how the simulated attention system works, and how
brainwaves are generated. A further objective will be to develop a new kind of
experiment that tests the delay between vision and attention. The data from this
paradigm will give scientists crucial details about how the human visual system
temporarily holds information while determining what to do with it.