* 1734164
* Collaborative Research: Role of Cloud Albedo and Land-Atmosphere Interactions on Continental Tropical Climates
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Michael Pritchard, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2021
* USD 261,093.00

The land surface interacts strongly with the atmosphere above it, as the
atmosphere supplies water to the surface in the form of rain and energy,
including sunlight and downwelling infrared radiation. The land in turn affects
the atmosphere by providing water vapor through evaporation and transpiration,
giving off sensible heat and upwelling infrared radiation, and blocking the wind
with trees and other obstacles, among other effects. Land-atmosphere
interactions are thus an important topic in climate science, and a key goal
research in this area is to understand the feedback mechanisms through which
land-surface processes influence the atmosphere in ways that produce further
effects on the land and vice versa. Much of the work in this area is focused on
precipitation and soil moisture, particularly the extent to which evaporation
serves as a source for later precipitation which further controls the amount and
distribution of soil moisture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here the PIs go beyond soil
moisture-precipitation feedback to consider mechanisms that link land surface
characteristics to cloudiness and the subsequent shading effect of cloud cover
on the surface. One of these is a feedback in which sunlight falling on moist
soil produces evaporation, which leads to the formation of clouds or fog, which
shades the soil and limits further evaporation. Previous work by the PIs
suggests that this negative feedback mechanism plays an important role in
limiting evaporation in the Amazon during the rainy season. An additional
question pursued in this research is the extent to which small-scale differences
in surface cover, such as exist between adjacent forested and deforested patches
of the Amazon, produce differences in cloudiness as near-surface air converges
into and rises above drier and hence warmer patches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key
concern in studying such effects is that climate models have limited ability to
represent them. Climate models rely on parameterizations to represent clouds and
precipitation, and parameterizations have difficulty capturing the diurnal cycle
of cloudiness. This is a severe limitation for studying the effect of cloud
shading on evaporation, as the effect depends on whether clouds develop when the
sun is high in the sky or near or below the horizon. Clouds simulated in climate
models are also unlikely to respond to small-scales patchiness in surface cover,
as models only represent aggregate cloud cover and surface conditions over grid
boxes which extend at least tens of kilometers in each
direction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs use two separate modeling strategies to
circumvent these difficulties, the first of which is a limited domain cloud
resolving model (the Weather Research and Forecasting model, or WRF) constrained
to relax back to a specified background temperature profile. This configuration
is based on the weak temperature gradient (WTG) approximation, which assumes
that temperatures well above the surface are horizontally uniform due to the
weakness of the Coriolis force over tropical regions such as the Amazon. The
WRF-WTG framework allows for very high resolution simulations (grid spacing of
one or two kilometers) over limited domains on which the processes of interest
can be represented with some realism. The second approach uses a technique known
as superparameterization, in which a somewhat simplified cloud resolving model
is placed in each grid column of a climate model, creating a hybrid model which
represents both the cloud scale and the large scale (see
AGS-0425247).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using these two modeling strategies the PIs
perform a number of model experiments to determine the effects of the proposed
mechanisms, including experiments in which the land surface turbulent heat flux
is prescribed and simulations in which the diurnal cycle of land surface fluxes
is reduced by imposing a very large soil heat capacity. The model experiments
are complemented with analysis of relevant observations from a number of
observing stations in the Amazon, some in deforested regions and some
representing the transition from wetter to drier
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has societal value as well as
scientific interest, as it seeks to improve understanding of climate variability
and change in the Amazon, a region of high biodiversity which plays a
substantial role in the global water and carbon cycles. In addition, a variety
of education and outreach activities are organized around the work, including
work with high school students in Harlem, work with a STEM center housed at Cal
State Los Angeles, and an undergraduate recruitment effort through the Research
in Science and Engineering (RiSE) program at Rutgers. The project also provides
support and training for a graduate student and a postdoc.