* 1734055
* 2017 Professional Development Workshop in Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Geoff Brennecka, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 04/30/2018
* USD 49,994.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPITON: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the 2017
Professional Development Workshop in Ceramics is to enhance the career
development of the next generation of future leaders in ceramic materials
research and education. The workshop focuses on seven early-career faculty who
have recently been awarded NSF CAREER grants from the Ceramics Program in the
Division of Materials Research, but the workshop activities have been structured
to be of value to all participants as there is a desire to increase the scale
and scope of this workshop over prior versions. The workshop is also open to
other early-career faculty as well as interested post-doctoral associates,
faculty-minded senior graduate students, and more senior faculty interested in
mentoring the next generation. The activity is an intensive two-day workshop
that brings together the two 2015 and five 2016 CAREER awardees with targeted
panels of US-based and international experts from their chosen technical
specialties in a forum that promotes professional discussions, mentoring and
networking activities. The direct panel feedback will impact the research and
training of the early career faculty; the broader exchange of best practices for
training and teaching as well as the forging of new collaborative research
opportunities and mentoring relationships will benefit all participants. These
outcomes should provide a strong base of support that helps the CAREER awardees
succeed in becoming outstanding researchers and educators in their chosen fields
and will help to strengthen the broader ceramic materials research community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2017
Professional Development Workshop in Ceramics focuses on seven technical topics
to be presented by the seven participating CAREER awardees: 1) Multiscale
visualization of electrochemical reactions via advanced in situ characterization
techniques 2) Nano-architechtured and defect-driven electrode materials for
rechargeable batteries, 3) Defect and interface effects on moving ferroelectric
domain walls, 4) Core-shell nanowire structures of Li7La3Zr2O12 electrolytes, 5)
Bifunctional materials that can serve as either battery anode or cathode, 6)
Low-CO2 cements via fundamental reaction studies across multiple length and time
scales, and 7) Off-valence substitution for valence control of dopant ions in
laser ceramics. The respective early career faculty and the technical experts in
their sub-specialties of ceramic materials research are leading the scientific
discussions for the purpose of critically evaluating research plans, career
development, and education efforts.