* 1734751
* Type II: University of Pittsburgh I-Corps Site:  Advancing Innovation, Entreprenuership and Opportunity Commercialization
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Sanjeev Shroff, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This University of Pittsburgh (Pitt) project builds on an existing I-Corps Site
under the University's Innovation Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation
Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities established at universities whose
purpose is to nurture and support multiple, local teams to transition their
technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice,
resources, networking opportunities, training and modest funding to enable
groups to transition their work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps
Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally
and contribute to the National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers,
entrepreneurs and investors. This is a Type II project, requesting a "renewal"
of funding for an existing I-Corps Site. There are two types of I-Corps Site
proposals. Type I proposals are submitted by institutions that have not had
prior funding as an I-Corps Site. Type II proposals are submitted by
institutions that have had prior funding as an I-Corps Site.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives of the Type II Pitt I-Corps Site
include: -Increase the number of entrepreneurial minded individuals on campus
through education/training with an emphasis on disciplines and individuals
underrepresented in current commercialization offerings -Enhance the Pitt
Ventures program through addition of a starter course focused on supplementing
viable innovations from campus with key steps required to move them to market
-Improve Pitt's connection to the regional entrepreneurial ecosystem for
enhanced integration with the local early-stage environment and similar networks
beyond Pittsburgh.