* 1734449
* NRI: INT: Individualized Co-Robotics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Christopher Atkeson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project explores new ways to meet the needs of individual patients and
users with customized active artificial limbs, motorized ankle and knee
supports, and other forms of assistive robots. The effectiveness of such devices
depends on accommodating person-to-person differences, such as in body types,
walking gaits, and impairments. A preliminary study investigated the degree to
which an individually adapted sequence of control patterns for a powered ankle
exoskeleton -- modified as the subject used the device -- could reduce the
metabolic cost of walking. This outcome showed that optimizing the assistive
control pattern separately for each subject greatly increased the average
benefits compared to the non-optimized device, and outperformed any previously
documented approach. This project builds upon those preliminary results to find
better and more robust customization methods for a wide range of assistive
technology in diverse circumstances. This approach to "human-in-the-loop"
optimization of human-collaborative robots could have a wide impact on improved
assistive and therapeutic devices and environments that reduce the risk of falls
in older adults; help mitigate developmental disorders in children; and assist
workers, soldiers, and first responders with physical tasks. Ultimately these
customization methods could improve performance of everyday items like shoes and
exercise equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific goal of the project is
to find optimization approaches to robustly improve co-robotic interaction with
users, facilitating physical collaboration. Scaling up to support a variety of
devices, joints, behaviors, tasks, environments, and users is also a key goal.
The project will explore how long a set of optimized parameters stay valid, how
to optimize device behavior during actual use without reducing task performance
or device acceptance, and how to assist a variety of behaviors where the user
determines when and how a behavior is engaged. In terms of scope, the project
will initially focus on how the parameterization of robot behavior, the choice
of optimization algorithm, and enhancement of human learning by interaction with
a co-robot can all play an important role in achieving this goal. In terms of
methods, the project will use both laboratory-based exoskeleton emulators as
well as portable exoskeleton devices that can go outdoors to develop and test
ideas and approaches, as well as psychophysical studies that will improve
understanding of how muscle is controlled. Co-optimization involves both the co-
robot and the user optimizing their interface policies simultaneously, and thus
presenting time-varying targets for each other's optimization. The project will
improve theoretical understanding of co-optimization in the context of physical
co-robotics. The project will also add new molecular phenomenon to current
muscle models, to provide a physiological basis and understanding of human-robot
physical interaction. The intellectual significance of this work includes better
understanding of how humans work, how to most effectively assist humans, and how
to best customize assistance for an individual. A long term goal is to build a
library of customized interaction policies for an individual performing a
variety of tasks, and tune the library online as the user does desired tasks.