* 1734899
* The APLU Project: Status Reports on Broadening Participation in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Howard Gobstein, Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 03/31/2021
* USD 487,252.00

Increasing the number of underrepresented groups earning engineering degrees is
critical to the United States' economic competitiveness and national security.
Because of its importance, greater attention has been placed on the country's
need for a strong engineering workforce and how to meet the growing demand for
engineers, especially among underrepresented groups. On behalf of the
Association for Public and Land-grant Universities (APLU), the investigators
outlined a comprehensive research project with four specific objectives: (1)
assessing the number of degrees awarded over time in engineering by all colleges
and universities and by race and ethnicity, gender, and engineering discipline
utilizing the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data Systems Completion Survey,
conducted by the National Center for Education Statistics; (2) comparing
projections in engineering degrees and projections in the engineering academic
and nonacademic workforce from datasets, such as the Bureau of Labor Statistics
Employment Projections, to more accurately assess where engineering workforce
shortages persist across specific engineering disciplines; (3) convening and
engaging esteemed scholars, industry leaders, and university administrators and
thought leaders to review collective data to better understand key shortage
areas in engineering disciplines to establish a baseline that broadening
participation leaders can use to better frame their projects; and (4) organizing
current data sources and metrics into a publicly accessible resource available
to engineering educators, social and behavioral scientists, and education
researchers and policymakers to easily compare and analyze engineering degree
awards' employment data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By highlighting recent trends at
the national and institutional level and determining mismatches in supply and
demand, this research project will assist engineering education leaders,
stakeholders, and policymakers in developing targeted efforts to broaden
participation in specific engineering disciplines among projected shortages will
exist. By convening university leaders from institutions seeking to broaden
participation in engineering, it is likely that partnerships and collaborations
will be established across various institutions, experts, and engineering
societies to address the dearth of underrepresented groups throughout the
engineering enterprise. As another major outcome from this research project, the
investigators proposed to develop a robust online tool, combining several
national datasets, to build institutional metrics as way to assist various
stakeholders and researchers with making peer and aspirational institutional
comparisons. Other project deliverables include the production of two major
reports, such as The Status Report on Engineering Education Volume I: A 5-year
Trend Analysis of Engineering degrees awarded at the national and institutional
level to determine which colleges and universities are successful at graduating
Traditionally Underrepresented Groups in Specific Engineering Disciplines and
The Status Report on Engineering Education Volume II: A Detailed Analysis of
Projections for Engineering Degrees and the Engineering Academic and Nonacademic
Workforce. Both reports will provide useful information, not commonly produced
by U.S. governmental agencies and non-governmental entities. Further, the two
reports will be widely disseminated among APLU's member and non-member
institutions of higher learning.