* 1734884
* Collaborative Research:  Tectonic and Magmatic Processes during Early-Stage Rifting:  an Integrated Study of Northern Lake Malawi, Africa
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Cynthia Ebinger, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2019
* USD 71,753.00

Although the concept that thick continental lithosphere extends and ultimately
ruptures has been accepted for over 50 years, the conditions required for this
to occur and the factors that are most important in controlling the style of
rifting, the formation and maintenance of tectonic segmentation and the
initiation of magmatism remain contentious. This is especially true of the
earliest stages of extension, in part because most studies focus on successfully
rifted margins and mature rifts, where extensive stretching, syn- and post-rift
magmatism, and post-breakup sedimentation overwrite and bury the record of
incipient extension. Understanding how, why and when features that are
characteristic of mid-ocean ridges and rifts first form and evolve during early
rifting is essential for a broader understanding of plate divergence.

The primary scientific goal of this project is to examine the emergence and
early evolution of two fundamental features of all divergent plate boundaries:
magmatism and segmentation. Magmatism accommodates a significant percentage of
plate separation at most mid-ocean ridges and late-stage rifts. Likewise,
transform faults demarcate discrete spreading segments in mid-ocean ridges,
which are broadly characterized by more robust magmatism at their centers than
at their edges. Well-developed magmatic and tectonic segmentation is also
observed in late-stage rifts and new ocean basins However,little is known about
the controls on the initiation and development of magmatism and segmentation in
young rifts. Specifically, th PIs seek to address the following questions:

? When, where and why does magmatism initiate in rifts, and what is its role in
accommodating extension? ? What controls the development of tectonic
segmentation in early-stage rifts? How is it manifested in 4D patterns of
magmatism and deformation.

The project consists of an integrated geophysical, geochemical and geological
study of the northern Lake Malawi region in the East African Rift System (EARS)
to address these questions. This is one of the few places in the world that has
all of the ingredients necessary for a comprehensive study of early rifting.
Active and passive seismic data and MT data will reveal the 3D structure of the
crust and lithosphere at a variety of length scales, from the architecture of
border faults and accommodation zones to the distribution of deformation and
magma (if present) in the mantle lithosphere. Surface deformation, seismicity,
and rift stratigraphy, as well as geochronology, thermobarometry and
geochemistry of volcanic rocks, will yield constraints on the origin of
magmatism and the evolution of deformation and magmatism at a range of time
scales, including possibly variable contributions from sub-lithospheric versus
lithospheric sources. Comparisons of active and cumulative deformation patterns
will enable the evaluation of the importance of episodicity, seismicity and
magmatism in accommodating extension and how they relate to segmentation. This
powerful combination of temporal and spatial constraints will produce unique
insights into the initiation of segmentation and magmatism during continental
rifting.