* 1734482
* NRI: FND: COLLAB: Coordinating Human-Robot Teams in Uncertain Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Laurel Riek, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2021
* USD 375,000.00

The decreasing cost and increasing sophistication of robot hardware is creating
new opportunities for teams of robots to be deployed in combination with skilled
humans to support and augment labor-intensive and/or dangerous manual work. The
vision is for robots to free up time of skilled workers so they can focus on the
tasks that they are skilled at (complex problem solving, dextrous manipulation,
customer service, etc.) and robots can help with the distracting and frustrating
parts of working, such as delivering materials or fetching supplies. This vision
is being realized across many sectors of the US economy and abroad, such as in
warehouse management, assembly manufacturing, and disaster response. However,
progress in this area is being stymied by current methods that are rigid and
inflexible, and rely on unrealistic models of human-robot interaction. This
project seeks to overcome these problems by proposing new models and methods for
teams robots to coordinate with teams humans to complete complex problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, this project will create and solve
realistic models for coordinating teams of humans and robots in uncertain
environments. The PIs will investigate innovative approaches to this research
area, and will make the following contributions: 1) Enable a transformative re-
conceptualization of multi-human multi-robot teamwork the accurately reflects
the strengths and limitations of the team, as situated within a temporally
dynamic, stochastic environment, 2) develop realistic and general models of
human-robot teamwork that consider uncertainty and partial observability, and 3)
Contribute innovative and scalable techniques for planning and learning in these
models. This research will build off of methods that have been successful in
single-robot problems under uncertainty and partially observability: partially
observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs). POMDPs model robots and
environments, but not humans. However, explicitly including people in these
models will be critical in almost all real-world applications. By extending
POMDPs to multiple robots interacting with teams of humans, complex and
realistic problems with mixed human and robot teams can be represented. The
solution methods developed in this project will allow the robots to reason about
the uncertainty about the domain and their human teammates, while optimizing
their behavior. The methods are broadly applicable to human-robot collaboration
domains, but they will be evaluated in an emergency department, an environment
with a large amount of uncertainty and many delivery and supply tasks during
high-volume times. A team of robots can assist in these tasks. Experiments will
take place in simulation and in the UC San Diego Simulation and Training Center
with various numbers of humans and robots. The results of this project have the
potential to transform the way human-robot coordination is performed.