* 1734017
* Tailoring the Properties of Heterostructures of Monolayers: Epitaxial Growth and Doping
* MPS,DMR
* 08/16/2016,06/30/2020
* Lian Li, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2020
* USD 399,660.00

Nontechnical Description: &lt;br/&gt;Heterostructures of semiconductor
materials, which provide enhanced electrical and optical characteristics well
beyond that of each individual constituent material, have been the key enabling
element in modern telecommunication, energy-efficient displays, and energy
harvesting technologies. This project explores a new approach to synthesize
heterostructures made of sheets of two-dimensional materials, in which atoms
within a sheet form strong bonds but interactions between the layers are very
weak. Atomic-resolution imaging and calculations are carried out to understand
how this characteristic anisotropic bonding facilitates the growth and
assembling of the single atomic layers similar to LEGO blocks, thus allowing the
design and synthesis of new materials with tailored properties and
functionalities beyond the limits of materials that currently exist in nature.
This project provides graduate and undergraduate students interdisciplinary
training in areas of materials synthesis and characterization at the atomic
scale, as well as electronic structure calculations. The open source
distribution of electronic structure codes continues to provide the scientific
community the benefits of our team's code development efforts. An ongoing
Research Experience for Teachers outreach program brings cutting-edge research
on two-dimensional materials to high-school students to inspire their interest
in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:
&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to gain an atomic scale understanding of 1) the
inherent grain boundary formation during the van der Waals (vdW) epitaxial
growth of two-dimensional transition-metal dichalcogenides, and 2) the doping
and bandgap engineering of their heterostructures. Leveraging the capability of
integrating molecular beam epitaxy, scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and
atomic force microscopy (AFM), the intrinsic materials properties such as band
offsets across lateral junctions and work functions are determined by in-situ
tunneling spectroscopy and force-bias spectroscopy, respectively. Layer
thickness, doping, and band gaps are further accessed by ex-situ Raman
spectroscopy and photoluminescence. The information obtained by these spatially
averaged spectroscopic measurements is correlated with atomic scale structural
information such as the alignment of vertical junctions, interface intermixing,
local strain, and disorder obtained by in-situ atomic resolution STM/AFM
imaging, as well as ex-situ transmission electron microscopy. Density functional
theory calculations are tightly coupled to the experimental systems of interest,
addressing issues related to structural properties (e.g., energetics of the
modified vdW growth and the impact of defects and impurities) and electronic
properties (interface states, band offsets, charging effects at grain
boundaries, and work functions). This integrated approach enables the controlled
growth, bandgap engineering, and characterization of heterostructures of
monolayers at the atomic scale, all necessary steps towards tailoring their
electronic and optical properties.