* 1734775
* Broadening Participation in Coastal and Estuarine Sciences: A Workshop at the Coastal and Estuarine Research Federation Conference
* GEO,RISE
* 05/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Susan Park, Coastal and Estuarine Research Federation
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 12/31/2018
* USD 46,880.00

Part 1: The Coastal and Estuarine Research Federation (CERF) will convene a
workshop and related activities focused on broadening participation in our
scientific society, and in coastal and estuarine sciences. Despite widespread
recognition of the value of increasing participation of underrepresented
minorities (URM) in the sciences, URMs are still significantly underrepresented
in marine science. CERF is a multidisciplinary organization committed to
advancing scientific understanding of estuaries and coasts and to promoting an
inclusive culture for URMs in coastal and estuarine science. The project will
provide a targeted mechanism for URM students to participate in CERF?s
conference and a URM-focused workshop, and engage a large cross-section of CERF
members in discussions on expanding inclusiveness. Results of the workshop and
related activities will form the basis of CERF's comprehensive Broadening
Participation Implementation Plan for achieving the diversity goals and
objectives in the society's 2017-2022 Strategic Plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
2: This project will support diversity and inclusion efforts at CERF?s 2017
Biennial Conference, November 5-8, 2017, in Providence, RI. CERF will provide
support for URM students and mentors to participate in the conference, including
URM student professional development through cohort building, mentoring, and
participation in a URM-focused workshop, scientific sessions, and other
conference activities. The project will also build the capacity of CERF to
achieve diversity and inclusion objectives through a transformative workshop
focused on diversity issues and integrating conversations on inclusiveness
throughout the CERF conference through varied activities.