* 1734044
* EAGER: Investigating and Pinpointing the College Success Factors for First-Generation, Underrepresented College Students in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Juan Lucena, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,552.00

Students who are the first-generation in their family to attend college are
increasingly the spotlight of educational research and reform seeking to broaden
the participation of underrepresented students in higher education in general
and engineering in particular. While growing research begins to illuminate the
challenges these college students face, this research project attempts to break
new grounds by making two key interventions. First, the investigators will apply
an intersectional lens to understanding how the multiple dimensions that make a
person's identity intersect (e.g., socioeconomic class, gender, race, ethnicity,
disability, parental status, immigrant status, and rural vs. urban K-12
schooling, etc.) and how this intersection may positively influence the success
of first-generation engineering students at various higher education
institutional-types. Second, the investigators will take a capabilities approach
to study what kinds of opportunities and strategies best support particular
kinds of first-generation students, rather than focusing exclusively on their
deficiencies and/or treating them as an undifferentiated group. Having this
nuanced understanding will provide the foundation for more effective, targeted,
and potentially transformative educational reforms to broaden the participation
of first-generation students from multiple backgrounds in engineering. By more
clearly identifying the factors leading to the success of such students, this
research project has the potential to inspire educational transformations in
admission decision-making, teaching, advising, and mentoring practices that are
all likely to broadening the participation of first-generation students in
engineering, especially among women and underrepresented groups in engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will use findings from a pilot
ethnographic research on low-income, first-generation students and insights from
the growing theoretical and scientific literature on first-generation students
to develop a survey that will be given to students and alumni from across the
U.S.. This will allow for an intersectional analysis of first-generation
students' engineering experiences and the specific variables that contribute to
their perseverance and successful entries into the job market and/or graduate
school. This project addresses two major limitations of the existing theoretical
and scientific research on first-generation students. First, the project will
provide between- and within-group comparisons of first-generation students to
obtain more nuanced understanding of how multiple factors influence their
success in completing engineering degrees and transitioning to the engineering
workforce. As the first large-scale intersectional analysis of first-generation
student experiences in engineering, the project will add analytic clarity to a
field that unevenly considers generational status along with socioeconomic
class, race/ethnicity, and gender. It will also advance the literature base by
expanding the traditional demographic categories to include those that were
salient for students in the preliminary ethnographic research, such as parental
or immigrant status. Second, the research will identify if and how opportunities
for students to apply their "funds of knowledge" (e.g., developed through their
family and work experiences) inside of the engineering curriculum shapes their
undergraduate success and graduation transitions. The project's findings will be
disseminated to participating institutions, engineering educators at-large, and
future generations of first-generation students through faculty and advisors.