* 1734883
* The Impact of Real World Stressors on Problem-Solving
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Tzyy-Ping Jung, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 09/30/2023
* USD 769,024.00

This project examines how variability in daily stress and fatigue--previously
dismissed as uncontrollable 'noise' in cognitive processing--relates to
variability in learning and problem-solving. This project is motivated in part
by evidence that performance on tests of executive function and memory can
fluctuate as a function of recently experienced, real-world, daily stressors.
Because problem-solving recruits these and other cognitive abilities, it is
hypothesized that day-to-day stressors can also impact our approaches to and
success with complex, open-ended challenges regularly faced in educational and
professional contexts. Further, on the basis of preliminary research, it is
anticipated that a subset of individuals will exhibit greater resilience to
stressors than others. In other words, for some, day-to-day stressors may create
contexts that facilitate tackling problems to greater or lesser degrees, whereas
for others, recent stressors may impact outcomes minimally. This work wields
important implications for STEM education given the increasing priority placed
on problem-solving skills. It will offer new foundations for modeling individual
differences in resilience and vulnerability to everyday stressors during complex
tasks. Moreover, understanding stressor-related intra-individual variability can
lead to strategies for improving performance of high-stakes, resource demanding
operations (e.g., piloting an airplane). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building from
methods of Ecological Momentary Assessment (EMA), both subjective and
physiological measures of stress and fatigue will be sampled from healthy adults
on a daily basis as they engage in their regular routines of daily life. These
data will be uploaded by participants to a secure server via smart phone and
will be monitored by research staff. When daily sampling logs suggest the recent
experience of high, medium, or low levels of stressors, participants will be
scheduled for a testing session to be conducted in their own home or at the
research facilities of the Swartz Center for Computational Neuroscience. They
will engage in STEM-related problem-solving tasks modeled after real world
activities. Simultaneously, electroencephalographic (EEG) data, eye movement,
and electrocardiography will be recorded and synchronized. Monitoring periods
are expected to last between one and three months and encompass nine testing
sessions. This project will result in a rich corpus of data that can be probed
from many different angles, offering an unprecedented view of intra-individual
variability in task performance as a function of day-to-day changes in
physiological and cognitive state. It is expected to reveal behavioral and brain
dynamics supporting insight and discovery. Further, expanding from episode-based
models of the metacognitive components of problem-solving, it is expected to
tease apart ways in which various theorized components--such as representing the
problem space, exploring, planning a solution, and implementation--may be
differently affected by daily stressors. This project is funded by Integrative
Strategies for Understanding Neural and Cognitive Systems (NSF-NCS), a
multidisciplinary program jointly supported by the Directorates for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Education and Human Resources (EHR),
Engineering (ENG), and Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences (SBE).