* 1734579
* Science Policy Research Report: Facilitating the Use of Evidence in Science Policy Making
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Kimberley Isett, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 06/30/2018
* USD 44,823.00

Results from the SciSIP program provide fundamental science policy insights
useful to Congress and science funding agencies yet often connections between
academic researchers and policy makers are under developed. Useful evidence is
published in academic articles and is not available in an accessible form. This
project aims to increase the diffusion of new insights in science and innovation
policy by providing evidence based recommendations about the most effective ways
to enhance the use of academic research in the policy making process.   This
policy report develops insights into the communication of results to policy
makers and aims to facilitate the use of science policy evidence in government
decision making.  This report focuses particularly on the role of research
integrators who aim to bridge academic researchers and policy makers.  The
report reviews lessons learned in the earlier evidence based medicine movement
to provide recommendations on processes that will minimize known obstacles in
application of evidence in professional practice. Four case studies of academic
research that had an impact on science policy making are analyzed to ascertain
diffusion design elements that increase policy impact. The lessons learned will
be integrated into recommendations aimed at facilitating use of evidence in
science policy making.