* 1734818
* NRT-IGE: Reproducibility and Rigor in Quantitative Biology: A Hands-on Approach
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Victoria Prince, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 08/31/2021
* USD 498,685.00

Current research in biology is producing increasingly large and complex sets of
data. These data could represent, for example: DNA sequences, images of the
brain, or number of species in an ecosystem. In each case, unlocking the
information within these big data sets requires sophisticated mathematical and
computational approaches. The standard curriculum for graduate students in
biological sciences was designed well before this data deluge. As a consequence,
today's graduate students are not being adequately trained for their future
careers. At the same time, there are growing concerns that scientists are
sometimes unable to reproduce published findings. This inability often results
from poor data analysis strategies. The future success of the US biological
research mission hinges on training students to use data analysis approaches
that are both rigorous and reproducible. This National Science Foundation
Research Traineeship (NRT) award in the Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE)
Track to the University of Chicago seeks to meet this need by developing a new
and effective approach to the training of early stage graduate students in the
quantitative analysis of biological data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
goal of this program is to teach students to critically evaluate quantitative
analysis methods in the scientific literature, and to acquire good programming
habits that support reproducibility and rigor in their own research. An
interdisciplinary team of quantitative biologists will direct and lead the
program, exposing students to the faculty that can advise them in future work.
The training program begins with an intensive residential week-long boot camp
that brings together students across diverse sub-fields of biology to promote
teamwork and prepare them for interdisciplinary research. The boot camp includes
introductory tutorials in computer programming, statistics, and modeling in
modern biology, as well as more advanced tutorials in statistical approaches to
large data sets and practical lessons in organizing and sharing code and data.
The boot camp is capped off with a series of workshops in which students apply
what they have learned to real biological data spanning a wide range of fields.
A subsequent on-campus course builds on and reviews these concepts, and
integrates training in rigor and reproducibility with concepts of responsible
research. We hypothesize that this program will produce trainees who are well-
prepared for the future scientific workforce. We will evaluate the impact of
this intervention through quizzes, surveys, and targeted interviews. All
teaching materials and data sets used in the workshops will be shared online so
that any university can implement a similar training module on their own campus.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to
encourage the development and implementation of bold, new, potentially
transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The Innovations in
Graduate Education Track is dedicated solely to piloting, testing, and
evaluating novel, innovative, and potentially transformative approaches to
graduate education.