* 1734735
* NCS-FO: Neurobehavioral integration of visual and semantic number knowledge and its role for individual variation in the math ability of children and adults
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,11/30/2023
* Julie Fiez, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 11/30/2023
* USD 982,661.00

This project, conducted by a team of researchers at the University of
Pittsburgh, will address the need to improve math abilities in American children
and adults. According to the 2015 National Assessment of Educational Progress,
only 40% of 4th graders, and 33% of 8th graders score at, or above, proficiency
level in math, and only about 30% of US adults can complete basic mathematical
processes in real-world scenarios such as looking at a thermometer and figuring
out the temperature. Such poor math achievement outcomes impose significant
burdens, such as in securing employment, on individuals who enter adulthood
without achieving basic proficiency, and challenges the capacity of the US to
remain competitive in a global economy that is strongly driven by the
intellectual capital of its citizens. This project will investigate a
foundational skill that underlies math achievement: the ability to recognize
visual number symbols by connecting them with the quantities they represent.
Using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and behavioral measures, the
project team will characterize the neural constituents of number knowledge and
will test for pathways within this number network that contribute to this
"symbolic integration" and math ability. Finally, by studying adults and 8-year-
old children, they will test whether the neural substrates of symbolic
integration change with age, and if so, whether these changes correspond to
shifts in the behavioral profile of symbolic integration and individual
difference in math ability. Overall, by focusing on the widely used, but poorly
understood, construct of symbolic integration, the proposed work will have broad
impact on theories of math ability that make assumptions about these underlying
processes and will inform future studies examining math learning trajectories
and remediation strategies for struggling math learners. This project is funded
by Integrative Strategies for Understanding Neural and Cognitive Systems (NSF-
NCS), a multidisciplinary program jointly supported by the Directorates for
Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Education and Human
Resources (EHR), Engineering (ENG), and Social, Behavioral, and Economic
Sciences (SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching objective of the
project is to investigate whether symbolic integration is foundational to math
ability in adults and children. The project leverages the larger and more
established literature on word recognition to develop and test a symbolic
integration hypothesis of number processing. This model posits that formal math
ability rests in part upon the integration of visual symbols (i.e., Arabic
numerals) with the magnitudes they represent, via both direct (visual-semantic)
and indirect (visual-verbal, visual-manual) pathways. An innovative combination
of neurobehavioral measures will be used to test the model, through an
individual differences study involving 100 adults and 125 8-year-old children.
The project team will develop a novel neuroimaging protocol and will use
cutting-edge multivariate methods to efficiently and broadly identify and
characterize the neural constituents of a number processing network. A likely
set of regions includes those involved in visual (fusiform gyrus), verbal
(angular gyrus), manual (precental gyrus), and semantic (inferior parietal
cortex) coding of number. In addition, resting state data will be acquired from
each participant, and used to extract a metric of connectivity between
identified visual, verbal, manual, and semantic constituents of number
knowledge. A pair of behavioral tasks will measure the associative strength
between visual and semantic codes for number (i.e., symbolic integration) in
each participant. Using general linear models (GLM), the investigators will then
test the prediction that both direct (visual-semantic) and mediated (visual-
verbal-semantic; visual-manual-semantic) pathways significantly contribute to
symbolic integration skill. Finally, standardized measures of math ability will
be obtained from each participant. A GLM will be used to test for a predicted
positive relation between individual differences in symbolic integration and
math ability. Overall, the work will have a broad impact on theories of math
ability and will inform future studies of math learning and intervention.