* 1734532
* NRI: FND: Using Template Models to Identify Exoskeleton User Intent
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Patrick Wensing, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 753,811.00

Exoskeletons have great potential to restore mobility and improve quality of
life for individuals with locomotor impairments due to neurotrauma such as
spinal cord injury (SCI) and stroke. For several years, clinical exoskeleton use
has accelerated gait retraining by enabling patients to take more steps per
session, practice more repeatable gait patterns, and have their progress more
closely monitored. Today, the technology has matured to the point that multiple
systems with FDA approval are commercially available. Still, broader exoskeleton
adoption, both in the clinic and for personal use, is needed for the technology
to achieve its full potential to impact daily life. The key barrier to such
adoption is the lack of a fluent and transparent interface to determine how the
user intends to move in conjunction with the exoskeleton. This project seeks to
enable exoskeleton use in the diverse scenarios of daily life by developing a
robust approach to determine a user's intent. Since the fundamental mechanics of
walking are truly universal, the approach is to leverage relatively simple
template models of walking that encode these mechanics within algorithms that
more reliably identify user intent. Activities of interest include starting from
rest, changing walking speed, direction, and cadence, stair ascent/descent, and
stopping. The models will be applied to both healthy subjects and individuals
with spinal cord injury to identify commonality and critical differences. Beyond
the benefits to exoskeleton end-users, the project will facilitate outreach to
both K-12 teachers and middle school students to promote education in the STEM
disciplines by highlighting how engineering can directly improve quality of
life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to improve human machine interface
technologies for lower-body exoskeletons by using simple template models of
locomotion to more effectively capture user intent. In most existing approaches,
mapping sensor data to the user's state/activity is treated as a black-box
pattern recognition problem. In contrast, reduced order models or templates are
low-dimensional dynamical systems that capture the fundamental mechanics of
walking, upon which more complex behaviors play out. The project will
investigate physics-based template models to augment inference of exoskeleton
user intent for small changes to nominal walking gait (speed, direction, and
cadence). Leveraging bio-inspired template control algorithms, extended Kalman
filtering and non-parameteric Bayesian approaches will be investigated to solve
a stochastic intent observer problem. Next, the work will be extended to detect
transitions in user intent for starting, stopping, and gait progression to/from
stairs. Throughout, parallel analysis will study customization of the
methodology, including the use of entirely different template models, for
exoskeleton users with locomotor impairments. Data-driven Floquet analysis will
be applied for translation of data from healthy users to augment intent
recognition in users with spinal cord injury. Experiments with the new intent
recognition will be incorporated into the control system of an FDA-approved
exoskeleton that will be used to assess recognition delay and generalization
performance of the methods relative to existing techniques. These experiments
will be conducted first with healthy subjects and subsequently with individuals
with incomplete spinal cord injury. Ultimately, the project has the potential to
improve the impact of exoskeletons in areas spanning rehabilitation, search-and-
rescue, military, and industrial applications by more effectively capturing user
intent.