* 1734109
* NRI: FND: Safe and Efficient Robot Collaboration System (SERoCS) for Next Generation Intelligent Industrial Co-Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Masayoshi Tomizuka, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2022
* USD 750,000.00

In current automated factories, humans and robots typically work separately,
partly for safety reasons and partly because full robotic automation has been a
goal. In recent years, however, it has been recognized that there are tremendous
opportunities when robots are brought out of their cages and allowed to
collaborate with human workers in a shared workspace. Such collaboration takes
advantage of both the intelligence, adaptability and flexibility of humans and
the endurance, strength and reliability of robots. In any collaboration between
humans and robots, i.e. co-robots, it is important to consider and ensure both
the safety of the humans and the best performance of the robots. This project
aims to establish a set of design principles for a safe and efficient robot
collaboration system (SERoCS). Outside of factories, SERoCS may be applied in
other settings, such as with mobility assistance of humans by robots and
automated driving situations where human-driven vehicles and autonomous vehicles
share the same road.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SERoCS consists of three parts: (1)
robust cognition algorithms for environment monitoring, (2) optimal task
planning algorithms for safe human-robot collaboration, and (3) safe motion
planning and control algorithms for safe human-robot interactions (HRI).
Research on cognition environment monitoring algorithms involves the
construction of a cognition model library and the implementation of an algorithm
for online prediction and adaptation of human behavior. In addition, task
planning algorithms for safe human-robot collaboration require the construction
of a motion skill library learned from human demonstrations and its association
with an algorithm for online task planning and objective generation using
learned skills. The two-layer structure that will be employed for safe motion
planning and control algorithms comprises a long-term, efficiency-oriented
planning layer and a short-term, safety-oriented control layer for safe HRIs.
The SERoCS will signicantly expand the skill sets of the co-robots and prevent
and minimize occurrences of human-robot collision and robot-robot collision
during operation.