* 1734618
* Standard Grant: Reconstructing Nuclear Environments and the Downwinders Case
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Jacob Hamblin, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2021
* USD 297,339.00

This award supports a hybrid project that involves both infrastructure
development for enhancing STS research and basic research in the history of
science. The project focuses on the science of reconstructing past environmental
contamination and human exposures to radiation in the Hanford Environmental Dose
Reconstruction Project, and a related court case often referred to as the
Downwinders Case. The project and the case are of particular interest for
historical and social scientific study because they involve efforts by
scientists to imagine and calculate past exposure in the absence of data taken
specifically for that purpose. The research team will develop an important
research collection, the recently-acquired Berger/Haber Hanford Nuclear
Reservation Downwinders Case Collection, working in collaboration with the
Special Collections and Archives Research Center of Oregon State University.
Team members will digitize a sizeable portion of this collection and supplement
it with oral history interviews. They will also produce the first detailed
historical studies of the dose reconstruction project, linking it to issues in
the History of science, Environmental History, and the broader field of Science
and Technology Studies. Graduate student research assistants will work with the
Downwinders Case Collection at Oregon State University on the digitization
project and conduct oral history interviews with guidance from the PI. Three
workshops are to be convened that will include historians, scientists, and other
stakeholders in the history of radiation exposure.

Although the exposures themselves date from the 1940s, the Hanford Environmental
Dose Reconstruction Project stretched from the late 1980s to the late 1990s. Its
various publications were not only critical to legal proceedings, they also
continue as the basis for most points of reference about thyroid exposure from
Hanford. The studies were controversial, with criticism coming from other
scientists working under the auspices of the National Research Council, and from
stakeholders such as residents, victim advocacy groups, and Native American
tribal councils. Such disparate views invite scholarly work analyzing how the
historical doses were reconstructed and negotiated. The scientists had access to
ecological, meteorological, geological, and public health data, as well as
testimony from the people with thyroid cancer. The scientists had disciplinary
expertise in a range of fields. What kinds of data did the scientists view as
reliable? What questions did they ask? What kinds of data were excluded, and
what arguments went unheard? Whose perspectives were included, and whose were
excluded? These questions are foundational to both historians and social studies
of science scholars. They will provide new insights into the social dynamics of
scientists, the construction of scientific ideas, and the reconstruction of
scientific facts as deployed in important legal disputes.