* 1734854
* NCS-FO: Data-driven modeling of visual cortex
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Robert Shapley, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 599,968.00

One of the great challenges of modern neuroscience is a comprehensive theory of
the function of the cerebral cortex. The overall aim of the present project is
to answer this challenge with a new model of the visual cortex. The modeling
process will lead to the discovery of common, canonical neural mechanisms behind
a multitude of visual phenomena, giving special emphasis to canonical
computations that are performed not just in the visual cortex but also in other
regions of the cerebral cortex. The project aims to enhance understanding of
cortical function by looking beyond structure to study the dynamics of cortical
activity. An important part of the project's broader impact will be to provide
interdisciplinary training for young researchers in response to society's need
for an educated workforce with multi-disciplinary skills bridging mathematics
and neurobiology. Additionally, the principal investigators will reach out to
broad scientific audiences as well as high school students. Specifically, the
results of this project will be disseminated by giving invited scientific
lectures to national and international scientific meetings. The investigators
also participate in university-sponsored outreach events for New York City-area
high school students, such as the annual C-Splash lectures at the NYU Courant
Institute of Mathematical Sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project adopts an
integrative strategy to apply ideas from dynamical systems theory to theoretical
neuroscience. The project will construct a next-generation model of the visual
cortex that is realistic and comprehensive in the way it reproduces the dynamics
of cortex and its visual functions. The model will be constrained by hundreds of
sets of visual neuroscience data and by all that is known about cortical
neuroanatomy. Such a model is a tool to advance neuroscience and a step toward
building robotic intelligent systems that emulate human perception. The visual
cortex will be modeled as a large network of spiking, conductance-based neurons.
It will be analyzed as a complex dynamical system. Specific projects are: 1)
network models of local circuitries; 2) extended models of the visual cortex
covering a substantial portion of the visual field, and 3) dynamical
interactions on neuronal scale to perceptual organization of two- and three-
dimensional objects. The modeling and analysis will have wide impact beyond
visual cortex in studies of the functional, dynamical consequences of canonical
computations that are performed throughout the cerebral cortex.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by Integrative Strategies for
Understanding Neural and Cognitive Systems (NSF-NCS), a multidisciplinary
program jointly supported by the Directorates for Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE), Education and Human Resources (EHR), Engineering
(ENG), and Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences (SBE). This award is co-
funded by the Division of Mathematical Sciences in the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS).