* 1734795
* NCS-FO:   Collaborative Research:  Seizure control through state-specific manipulation of cell assemblies
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Sarah Muldoon, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 237,000.00

How activity of individual brain neurons results in the emergence, spread, and
eventual termination of seizures is a basic and unsolved issue. Extensive
research has examined brain activity during seizures using invasive and non-
invasive tools, but there is a gap in our understanding of the cellular-level
basis of large-scale phenomena such as seizures. Here, Dr. Sarah F. Muldoon
(University at Buffalo, SUNY) and Dr. Ethan M. Goldberg (The Children's Hospital
of Philadelphia and The University of Pennsylvania) use methods for recording
neural activity from multiple single neurons in mice, as well as methods for
recording large-scale neuroelectric activity (EEG), to identify groups of
neurons whose activity is associated with time-evolving features of seizures.
This project combines newly developed theoretical and computational neuroscience
approaches with state-of-the art experimental techniques for imaging and
manipulating brain activity. It evaluates a novel hypothesis that transitions to
seizure onset and between seizure sub-states represent changes in the activity
of small, identifiable clusters of neurons, and that such clusters can be
identified and manipulated to modulate seizures. This multidisciplinary
collaborative approach is expected to produce novel insights into the mechanisms
of seizure generation and propagation, inform novel treatments for epilepsy, and
provide a framework generalizable to larger efforts to link data related to
changes in brain state across scales.

Recent work suggests a fine-grained and evolving heterogeneity in individual
neuronal dynamics during seizures. However, relatively little is known about the
relationship between single neuron activity and large-scale seizure dynamics.
Here, we combine multilayer network theory with two-photon calcium imaging in an
experimental in vivo epilepsy model to identify functional cell assemblies
(small groups of neurons with similar, functionally-relevant activity patterns)
associated with transition to and between seizure states. We characterize the
ability of defined subsets GABAergic inhibitory interneurons to impact cell
assembly dynamics, using optogenetics to manipulate interneurons to interrupt
transition to seizure. The overall goal of this proposal is to develop a means
for rapid detection of spatially- and functionally-defined neuronal assemblies
associated with these sub-state transitions so as to predict and manipulate such
transitions. The results will provide the first large-scale imaging data on the
cellular architecture of epileptic seizures in vivo as well as a set of novel
tools for the analysis of such data. This work will lead to the development of
neural control strategies designed to specifically target subpopulations of
neurons that have been functionally identified as key elements in driving
epileptic dynamics.

This project is funded by Integrative Strategies for Understanding Neural and
Cognitive Systems (NSF-NCS), a multidisciplinary program jointly supported by
the Directorates for Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE),
Education and Human Resources (EHR), Engineering (ENG), and Social, Behavioral,
and Economic Sciences (SBE).