* 1734166
* Interactions between speech perception and production during second language learning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Melissa Baese-Berk, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2023
* USD 413,379.00

The ability to communicate in more than one language confers an advantage in
business, science, diplomacy, and many other aspects of modern life. To
successfully master a new language, an individual must be able to both
understand and produce the language. Educators commonly assume that perception
and production skills develop in tandem and encourage students to try saying
words in the new language on their first day in the classroom. However, recent
research suggests that the relationship between speech perception and production
is more complex and dynamic, especially when learning to speak and hear sounds
that don't occur in languages the learner already knows. Under some
circumstances, learners can perceive these novel sounds but may not be able to
produce them, or they can produce the sounds without hearing their identity
reliably. Compelling new evidence suggests that trying to say novel speech
sounds out loud during learning can lead the learner to perceive those sounds
less well than learners who do not say the sounds out loud. To determine how
languages are best learned it is necessary to understand the disruptive effect
of production on perception. The findings of the proposed research have the
potential to inform practice in language teaching. Outreach activities will
disseminate results to a broad audience, including a science education project
in partnership with The Science Factory, a children's science museum.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal lays out a series of behavioral studies that
systematically investigate both linguistic and non-linguistic factors (such as
timing, cognitive load, and quality of productions) that influence perceptual
learning and quality of productions of unfamiliar speech sounds. The aim is to
understand their unique and joint contributions to perceptual learning. This
theoretical account, along with the empirical results, is expected to enhance
understanding of the nature of language representations and how they interact
with cognitive, linguistic, and situational features. The findings will also
contribute to knowledge of the relationship between perception and action more
broadly.