* 1734999
* NRT:  Sustainable Oceans:  From Policy to Science to Decisions
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Alan Hastings, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,999,884.00

Oceans span over 70% of the Earth and play critical roles in almost all facets
of human well-being, including regulating climate, biodiversity, and feeding the
world's growing population. A grand challenge for society is to improve the
scientific understanding of natural and human impacts on marine ecosystems to
ensure that the oceans continue to provide for generations to come. To overcome
this challenge, a segment of our nation's workforce must address an unmet and
growing demand for hypothesis-driven research to inform the decisions of federal
and state resource management agencies. This National Science Foundation
Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the University of California, Davis will
train the next generation of marine scientists under a new paradigm that puts
the policy focus on the front-end of the research and training enterprise as a
means of building more effective links between the science and decisions on
sustainable use of living marine resources. The project anticipates training 60
PhD students, including 30 funded trainees, from ecology, conservation biology,
economics, geology, physiology, biogeochemistry, and oceanography.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is growing appreciation that the disconnect between
the scientific and policy communities is due to the scientific research
questions not aligning with the information that policymakers need to make
informed decisions, and to the researchers rarely having the wide-angle lens
necessary to understand how their disciplinary research integrates with other
science to address policy questions. The basis for the training program's
paradigm is a novel causal chain model that extends from a policy goal to the
different types of scientific information needed to measure the impacts of
management decisions. The practice of working through a causal chain, coupled
with fieldtrips to stakeholders, basecamps (week-long workshops with decision-
makers and stakeholders organized around marine management issues), internships,
short-term visiting scientists, research symposium, data-model integration
training, and immersion in marine science and policy will provide trainees with
a deeper understanding of how their own STEM research, founded in the primary
perspective of a single discipline, fits into a policy process. Trainees will be
recruited from a diversity of populations, with special attention to students
from natural resource-dependent communities (e.g., tribal nations in Northern
California, rural and remote coastal towns). Recruitment, mentoring, and
professional development skills are woven throughout all of the elements of the
training program, including research partnerships with tribal nations and direct
engagement with resource-dependent communities via the fieldtrips and basecamps.
Elements of the training program are also open to California State University
(CSU) masters students through our novel Scholars Program in partnership with
CSU's Council on Ocean Affairs and Technology (COAST) program. The NRT program
will help shape the future curriculum of a new Marine Science PhD program at UC
Davis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students
in high priority interdisciplinary research areas, through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.