* 1734179
* RUI:   Electron Beam Production for Optical-Scale Accelerators using Pyroelectric Crystal Arrays
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Rodney Yoder, Goucher College
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2023
* USD 145,494.00

This experimental research project aims to demonstrate a mechanism for producing
miniature electron particle accelerators using unusual materials: pyroelectric
crystals, which create strong electric fields during heating and cooling.
Particle accelerators have been an essential part of scientific research into
the fundamental properties of matter, but are also critical tools in modern
medicine, defense applications, and industry. Typical accelerators are large and
costly, but new types of accelerators which have the potential to provide
electron beams using a tiny (millimeter-sized) device that can be built cheaply
on a silicon wafer are now being developed. However, these microaccelerators
also require new kinds of miniature electron beam sources: the injected beam
should be about 1 micrometer (a millionth of a meter) wide, but have a speed
near that of light. This research project aims to demonstrate a mechanism for
producing such a beam using pyroelectric crystals. This project will be carried
out at a small liberal-arts college, giving undergraduate students the
opportunity to participate directly in cutting-edge research and contributing to
the training of the next generation of scientists. The project will also enable
development of new teaching tools for undergraduate lab
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objectives of this project are to
demonstrate a novel injector scheme, capable of producing near-relativistic
micron-scale electron beams that are suitable for use with dielectric-based
microaccelerators and also potentially valuable as a small-footprint beam and
radiation source. Fields provided by an array of pyroelectric crystals enable
field emission from an array of nanoemitters and then accelerate the emitted
beam to near-relativistic velocities. The use of pyroelectrics allows high
accelerating fields and output energies without the need for large external
voltages. This concept is supported by experimental measurements to date on
lithium niobate crystals. The approach involves a narrow vacuum channel through
the center of a three-crystal array, which is predicted to produce highly
uniform accelerating fields of tens of MV/m, and in which a submillimeter patch
of carbon nanotubes will be inserted. Projected output current is in the
nanoampere range, with energy greater than 250 keV. Complete measurement of
output beam parameters will be performed, enabling improved understanding of the
physics and engineering principles of the pyroelectric accelerator, and leading
to an optimized design for an application-ready injector module. This project
will also yield more complete information about pyroelectric materials,
including optimal heating modalities, internal and surface fields, and the time
structure of their response.