* 1734251
* Analyses of Large-scale Climate Variability: Understanding Periodicity in the Extratropical Storm Tracks
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* David Thompson, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2021
* USD 697,861.00

Weather systems appearing on daily maps are driven by the temperature contrast
between the tropics and the poles, which is expressed dynamically as the
baroclinicity of the atmosphere, or the variation of pressure on surfaces of
constant density. Pressure differences on density surfaces produce a pressure
gradient force, which provides the kinetic energy that powers weather systems
and the winds associated with them. Recently the PI demonstrated that the
interplay between baroclinicity and kinetic energy (in this case referred to as
eddy kinetic energy or EKE), results in variations in the vigor of weather
activity with a period between 20 and 25 days (see AGS-1343080). The 20-25 day
oscillation was documented in the longitudinally averaged EKE of the Southern
Hemisphere and has an annular structure with peak amplitude near the center of
the storm track. The mode is thus referred to as the Southern Baroclinic Annular
Mode (SBAM), and the PI has identified a comparable although weaker counterpart,
the NBAM, in the Northern Hemisphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work funded here
seeks to develop a physical understanding of the modes, using a combination of
observational data analysis and model simulations to understand why the modes
exist and what determines their periodicity, spatial structure, relationship to
individual weather systems, and other characteristics. The work also considers
the implications of the modes for practical weather forecasting, in part by
examining their predictability in the forecasts archived as part of the Seasonal
to Subseasonal Prediction Project (performed under the auspices of the World
Meteorological Organization).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is of societal
as well as scientific interest due to the possible implications of predictable
oscillations in weather activity for long-range forecasting. The PI and his
group also perform outreach to the local school district through presentations
to students and teachers on the science of weather and climate. In addition, the
project supports two graduate students, thereby providing for the future
workforce in this research area.