* 1734967
* Broadening Participation in Engineering: A Qualitative Study on Latina/o Persistence In and Beyond the Degree
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Alberto Esquinca, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 09/30/2022
* USD 456,076.00

A diverse and well-prepared engineering workforce, one that includes Hispanic
women and men, can potentially advance the engineering field. Hispanic-serving
institutions (HSIs) enroll almost half of Hispanic students attending college.
If engineering educators and others are to successfully broaden participation of
Hispanics in engineering, it is imperative to understand the role HSIs play and
the potential for broadening participation of Hispanics in engineering and
computer science. Equally important is the contribution to the understanding of
the challenges, barriers, and/or hurdles Hispanics face in seeking engineering
and computer science degrees at HSIs. To this end, a team at The University of
Texas at El Paso (UTEP) will conduct a qualitative research investigation to
understand the persistence of Hispanic mechanical engineering and computer
science undergraduate students who are in their senior capstone course; and
identify those salient factors contributing to these students' successful
trajectories as they seek professional positions in the workplace, and/or make
decisions to continue in graduate school during their last year of undergraduate
studies. The study will take place at UTEP, an HSI that has been identified as a
university with one of the highest upward social mobility rates in the U.S. The
project will be using a qualitative research methodology to answer the following
overarching research questions: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. How do undergraduate
Latina/o students who are enrolled in a senior capstone engineering course
understand their identities in the context of completing their studies and their
transition to the workforce and/or graduate studies? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2.
What institutional conditions in an HSI university facilitate or inhibit
Latina/o transition into the engineering workforce and/or graduate
studies?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the persistence of Hispanic
undergraduate engineering and computer science students is particularly
imperative, given that Hispanics are the nation's largest minority group and
among its fastest growing populations. As such, this research project can
contribute to the national conversation on the personal, social, and
institutional conditions that facilitate or prevent the increased representation
of Hispanics in engineering and computer science.