* 1734049
* The Paradox of Migration and Attitudes Towards Immigrants:  Assessing Mexican Beliefs about Migration the Immigrants
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Omar Garcia-Ponce, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Lee Walker
* 07/31/2023
* USD 256,681.00

&lt;br/&gt;The issue of undocumented immigration has been a central issue in
American politics for many years. Undocumented immigration has in some sense
"connected" Mexico and the United States. Along with this comes concerns about
issues such as domestic security, economic considerations, and questions about
contributions Mexican migrants make to U.S. society. Immigration of undocumented
persons to the U.S. generates significant political controversy because
immigrants are commonly portrayed as threats to US security, culture, and
economic standing. In terms of understanding how citizens perceive the role of
immigrants, focusing solely on the United States limits insight in a number of
ways. First, the U.S. is a receiving country. That is migrants move to the U.S.,
but relatively few American citizens migrate to other countries. Unlike U.S.
citizens, Mexicans are in the unique position of being both a sending and
receiving nation with respect to immigration. The proposed study seeks to
understand how Mexican citizens assess and understand the immigration issue.
Obviously, many Mexicans have migrated to the U.S. Throughout Mexico, however,
there are large numbers of migrants from Central American countries. In this
study, the investigators are interested in understanding the differences in how
Mexicans view unauthorized migrants. In particular, they seek to assess how
respondents view "ingroup" migrants (Mexicans moving to the US) and "outgroup"
migrants (Central Americans living in Mexico). To do this, they will administer
a series of public opinion surveys of Mexicans asking them about immigration and
their attitudes toward Mexican and Central American
migrants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Immigration, particularly with respect
to undocumented immigrants, is an issue that ties the United States to Mexico.
Most of the attention paid to the issue by the media and political elites
centers on the movement of people from Mexican to the U.S. This ignores the fact
that Mexico has experienced massive inflows of immigrants as well. In this
context, Mexican nationals occupy a unique niche with respect to immigration in
the Americas. On the one hand, Mexico is the leading sending nation of
undocumented migrants to the United States. Yet Mexico is also a leading
receiver of immigrants from Central America. Interestingly, evidence suggests
the views of Mexicans in this context are highly conflicted. Mexicans tend to
view Mexican immigrants to the United States in a positive and empathetic way.
When asked about immigrants from Central America, however, they tend to exhibit
positions similar to those many Americans take with respect to undocumented
Mexican immigrants. Further, Mexican metabeliefs about Americans' attitudes
toward Mexican immigrants stand in stark contrast and in conflict to their
attitudes and treatment of Central American immigrants. In this sense, Mexican
citizens are situated in the unique position of giving researchers leverage and
insight within the a single population to investigate questions related to
outgroup dehumanization, ingroup metadehumanization, and the extent to which the
negative effects of dehumanization and derogation can be counteracted. The
investigators gain analytical leverage to assess how these critical concepts
manifest, because their research design leverages information on the concepts
within a population where immigrants comprise both an ingroup (Mexican migrants)
and an outgroup (Central American migrants). The study will utilize a sampling
plan that produces a representative sample of Mexican citizens, thus avoiding
the need to rely on student or convenience samples to assess attitudes related
to migrant dehumanization. This study will evaluate three important questions.
First, it will address the extent to which Mexicans engage in dehumanization of
Central American immigrants. Second, it will measure the degree to which Mexican
beliefs about American dehumanization of Mexican immigrants influences their
judgement about ingroup immigrants. Third, it will assess whether negative
appraisals by Mexicans of derogated outgroups (Central American migrants) can be
mitigated by the presentation of humanizing information, namely, information
connecting the plight of outgroup migrants (Central American) with ingroup
migrants (Mexican).