* 1734036
* An Examination of the Long Term Relationship between Urban Planning and Social Control
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Timothy Pugh, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2020
* USD 254,770.00

Dr. Timothy Pugh and a team of scholars from the United States and Guatemala
will investigate the emergence of cities among the ancient Maya between 800 and
400 BC. The majority of people worldwide currently live in cities, yet little is
known about what cities do or how they initially formed. Balancing complex
social interactions, transportation, and urban planning needs is critical to the
success of cities in the present as well as the past. However, such balancing
becomes even more complex during the emergence of social inequality and
occupational specialization. Archaeology allows the study of social phenomena
over long periods of time and without historical documents. Thus, this research
will contribute to understanding the long-term relationships between central
administration and cities: What roles did cities play in helping societies adapt
to emerging social complexity? How does the development of central leadership
relate to urban planning? What are the long-term dynamics of tensions between
public and private spaces? How do such dynamics relate to the emergence of
social inequality? The project explores the invention of what is currently the
earliest known urban grid in the Americas at the lowland Maya site of Nixtun-
Chich in Peten, northern Guatemala. How did such complex city planning emerge in
an area without a tradition of such planning? Nixtun-Chich is also the only Maya
city known to have an urban grid. Why were urban grids not as successful among
the Maya as they were among the ancient Chinese, Indus Valley, and Greek
civilizations? In sum, the project will examine how cities can act as a sort of
administrative tool to organize increasingly large and socioeconomically diverse
populations. This research will train both United States and Guatemalan students
and will support student efforts to complete research practicums and theses at
various levels. Project results will be published in English and Spanish in
books and journals, and presented at conferences in Guatemala, the United
States, and elsewhere. Information will be uploaded to an ongoing website
(http://www.itzaarchaeology.com/), which summarizes project findings.

In the Maya lowlands of Mesoamerica, the typical city includes low-density urban
settlement. However, between 800 and 500 BC, Nixtun-Chich developed a unique
urban grid formed by a series of perpendicular corridors and was densely
settled. This research project will test the hypothesis that the settlement of
Nixtun-Chich was rationalized through a gridded layout to organize and manage an
increasingly large and complex population. The project will also investigate
whether private space began to impinge upon public space by the end of the
Middle Preclassic period (400/300 BC) at the city, perhaps leading to social
dissipation and ultimately dispersion. These propositions will be tested through
a multiyear archaeological program of extensive excavations in the urban grid.
This research will make a number of broader impacts. The knowledge of the
diversity, successes, and failures of ancient cities can contribute to modern
discussions of urbanization and policymaking. The proposed work will add some
historical depth to understanding the importance of a positive balance of social
interactivity, transportation costs, and settlement patterns, which is critical
for sensible policymaking. Accordingly, the work has the potential to illuminate
the social functions of public goods and the potential drawbacks of
privatization.