* 1734745
* Support for the 2017 Biomechanics, Bioengineering, and Biotransport Conference (SB3C)
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2018
* Jeffrey Holmes, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 03/31/2018
* USD 25,000.00

This award will support the 2017 Summer Biomechanics, Biotransport and
Bioengineering Conference (SB3C2017) being held in Tucson, Arizona; June 21-24,
2017. The SB3C meetings, and their predecessor SBC meetings, are generally
considered the premiere annual meetings for biomechanics. The primary purpose of
the meeting is to promote state-of-the-art research, collaboration, and
international scientific discourse in the broad field of bioengineering with
focus on biomechanics, biotechnology, biotransport, biomaterials, tissue
engineering, rehabilitation and design. The organizing committee for SB3C2016 is
drawn from individuals in academia and the industry with significant experience
in running the previous summer meetings. The meeting and its precursor meetings
have traditionally provided a high-quality, multidisciplinary biomedical
engineering event since the early 90's and contributed to training many
generations of academics and researchers. Notably, the summer meetings series
has, since its inception, prioritized the integration of students into the
meeting to support their professional development and future connection to the
biomechanics, biotransport and bioengineering research community. For many
years, students have made up more than 50% of attendees and presenters. The
theme of this year's meeting is "Growth, Development, Remodeling, and Repair".
In addition to the direct impact this conference will have on the mainstream
bioengineering community, it serves an important cross-fertilization role, since
attendees are drawn from a very broad range of disciplines beyond the
biomechanics community.

The aims of the project are to sponsor travel fellowships for females and under-
represented minorities; and, to sponsor the prestigious Student Paper
Competition by covering the meeting registration costs of the top 40 BS and MS
competition submissions. Finalists and winners in the student paper competition
can add this information to their resumes, and the competition provides an
opportunity for students to develop as researchers and is a significant career
boost, enhancing retention of the most talented students and providing role
models for all student attendees. Through the technical proceedings and
conference web site, information presented at the meeting will be available to
multiple societies and to the public at large. Further, the conference has
historically had, and is expected to continue to have more than 50 percent of
the attendees being students and postdoctoral fellows and more than 25 percent
female attendees. For the second time, the organization committee has been
extended to include a Diversity Chair. Through the travel fellowships and
associated workshops, the PI plans to establish this meeting as the "go to"
conference for female and under-represented minority attendees.