* 1734023
* Diversifying the Next Generation Geoscience Mentor Community Through Training Aboard the JOIDES/Resolution
* GEO,RISE
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Steven Hovan, Indiana University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 02/28/2019
* USD 45,500.00

This workshop aims to increase the diversity of the geoscience mentor pool
through training that also serves to position young scientists of diverse
backgrounds to serve as sea-going scientists or co-Chief Scientists
participating in Integrated Ocean Drilling Program (IODP) research. It also aims
to bolster the pipeline and build effective local networks through the pairing
of high school teachers with these early career scientists. The workshop thus
offers synergy by increasing the diversity of (1) scientists who are positioned
to contribute both to IODP science and geoscience more broadly, and (2) mentors
who research shows stand a better chance of positively influencing the
educational and/or career pathways of undergraduate students of color
(Kendricks, et al., 2013; Summers and Hrabowski, 2006). Direct scientific
benefit will come from increasing diversity among the pool of young scientists
that are broadly engaged in IODP science, allowing measurable impact on the
trajectory of undergraduates in STEM fields through programs such as STEM
Student Experiences Aboard Ships (STEMSEAS; Chang et al., 2014). This is a high
priority for the NSF, UNOLS and other federally-funded
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop focuses on an opportunity to
entrain a diverse cohort of young scientists into the geoscience- and Integrated
Ocean Drilling Program (IODP)- pipeline, and at the same time, to position these
same individuals to have measurable impact on the trajectory of undergraduate
students from diverse communities nationwide through effective mentoring and
engagement in critical issues of societal relevance.&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
goals of the proposed workshop are to:&lt;br/&gt;1 - Encourage early career
scientists and secondary-level educators from communities that remain poorly
represented in STEM fields, and particularly geosciences, to
participate.&lt;br/&gt;2 - Showcase and educate about Joides Resolution
(JR)/IODP capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;3 - Increase the diversity of the talent pool
that will apply to sail on IODP and related expeditions in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;4 - Build a diverse mentoring pool for undergraduate
STEM/geoscience students.&lt;br/&gt;5 - Create local partnerships to bolster the
STEM/geoscience pipeline.