* 1734910
* NCS-FO: Connecting Spikes to Cognitive Algorithms
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Il Park, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 12/31/2022
* USD 715,232.00

Experimental neuroscientists can record the signals communicated among the
neurons that are collectively involved in producing meaningful behaviors, but
making sense of these patterns of activity in terms of specific mental functions
is challenging. This research project aims to discover the unseen mental
processes that underlie such meaningful behavior from those recordings. The
technology developed in this endeavor will uncover new ways of understanding
mental processes hidden deep in the noisy signals collected from multiple
neurons and will be used to derive new theoretical models (cognitive algorithms)
to explain how populations of neurons work together. Such models will contribute
to the development of diagnostic tools and neural prosthetics for cognitive
dysfunctions in perception, working memory, and decision making, and can also
inspire advances in machine learning and artificial intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The technical goal of this project is to develop a data-driven
framework amenable to visualization and interpretation of neural activity
underlying cognition. The core of the project is the identification and recovery
of an interpretable low-dimensional nonlinear continuous dynamical system that
underlies observed neural time series, and its validation through experimental
perturbations. This will answer two key scientific questions: (1) How are task
and cognitive variables represented in low-dimensional neural trajectories; and
(2) What are the laws that govern the time evolution of the neural states.
Answering these questions will help us understand how subjects implement and
switch between different cognitive strategies, and more importantly, will
provide a means for testing previously proposed theoretical models of the neural
computations underlying cognition. This project will develop a number of
statistical methods that can (i) extract private and shared noise from single-
trial electrophysiological observations, (ii) combine recordings from multiple
sessions to infer a common cognitive neural dynamics model, and (iii) design
control stimulation to perturb the current neural state. Specifically, these
tools will be applied to recordings from cortical areas involved in visuomotor
decision-making to discover (1) how the co-variability in a population of
sensory neurons encodes decision variables, (2) how the cognitive strategy
changes when sensory evidence statistics change, and (3) the underlying dynamics
that sustain spatial working memory. The success of this project could transform
how the field analyzes population activity with low-dimensional structure in the
context of cognitive tasks and beyond.