* 1734365
* NRI: INT: COLLAB: Co-Robotic Systems for GeoSciences Field Research
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Thomas Shipley, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2022
* USD 423,878.00

Sand and dust storms are a growing worldwide menace, soil instability and
erosion threatens agriculture, and fine sediment compromises ecosystem health of
rivers and oceans, all impacting large human populations on nearly every
continent. The cumulative effects of these disturbed environments also threaten
human well-being through damage of habitation and disruption of transportation.
An interdisciplinary collaboration of geoscience, cognitive science, and
robotics researchers aims to accelerate and deepen the collection of data about
the fluid and materials properties associated with such unstable soils by
endowing legged robots with the instrumentation and scientific agenda of agile,
novice field assistants. These new robots are capable of general field mobility
and are being programmed to think like assistant field geologists in order to
develop research strategies in rugged natural environments where measurements
are lacking. Overcoming the specific locomotion challenges presented by these
environments and developing algorithms and software sufficient to interpret and
act on human research needs will greatly advance the field of robotics. The
resulting new information about wind, water and materials processes will have
bearing on the management of infrastructure and agriculture, and also the
response of landscapes to environmental changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project focus is to use the geosciences field research setting to test a chain
of hypotheses reaching from the formal representation of scientific knowledge to
the properties of provably correct algorithms for human-machine pursuit of
scientific data. The geoscientific goal is to produce the first comprehensive,
time varying maps of soil strength with co-located soil moisture composition and
size over the course of rainfall events in a natural landscape. The cognitive
science goal is to develop a formalized representation of the cognitive
processes underlying field data collection and interpretation that is
simultaneously suitable to underlie robotic field assistance algorithms while at
the same time advancing the study of human perceptual interpolation and
reasoning. The robotics goal is to achieve a provably correct architecture for
generating from formalized human task specification a chain of safe, stable
online automated legged gait transitions on complex broken terrain that subserve
the geoscientist data collection objectives. Two different families of legged
robots with a variety of perceptual and geoscientific instrumentation suites
will be deployed over natural hillsides under investigation by human
geoscientists. Field performance of the resulting human-robot teams will be
evaluated according to criteria assessing the degree of robotic mobility and
autonomy, the quality and reliability of the resulting geoscientific
measurements, and the impact of the collection process on the sampled
environment. Advances in legged robot mechanics and intelligent control have
brought the field to a threshold where the next major challenges for autonomous
mobility can only be formulated and engaged with respect to suites of abstract
but formal tasks relative to unstructured environments against which the
appropriateness and success of autonomously generated, goal-directed motor
behaviors can be precisely measured. Robots endowed with even the rudiments of
understanding what measurements are needed where and when by scientists, in
order to test their hypotheses, would deepen our insight into the structure of
human cognition. They would also open the way toward collecting massive amounts
of data at presently unachievably fine spatiotemporal scales, potentially
transforming the theoretical and empirical foundations of geoscience.