* 1734829
* Science Policy Research Report: The Use of Research Portfolios in Science Policy
* SBE,SMA
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2018
* Nicholas Vonortas, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 05/31/2018
* USD 49,694.00

Funding organizations have been very successful at selecting individual projects
under the guidance of peer review. However, the growth in size and scope of
R&amp;D across new thematic, sectoral and geographic areas has made it
increasingly difficult to develop strategic thinking about the directions and de
facto priorities of R&amp;D funding. Research portfolio approaches take an
R&amp;D landscape perspective of project management to facilitate strategic
thinking. Looking at the ensemble of funded projects, one may wonder if some
type of relevant research is underfunded, or whether there is room for improving
efficiency of the investments taking into consideration the high uncertainties
of research. This project complements current management focus on R&amp;D
program quality with systemic considerations on project risk, synergies and
responsiveness to societal needs. It provides tools to R&amp;D program
managers/decision makers to consider aggregate R&amp;D portfolios. The policy
report will interpret analytical methods for better handling project risk and
synergies at the program level. It will also explain methods to analyze the
alignment between R&amp;D program missions and the expected societal outcomes of
program portfolio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This science policy report is based on
the notion that an R&amp;D portfolio is more than the sum of the projects
contained in the portfolio. The reason is that the risks of failure and project
learning are not additive but multiplicative in complex ways: by considering the
interactions among projects and economies of scale and scope, risks can be
reduced and overall learning enhanced. Three specific approximations are shown
for portfolio management. First, methods for single-objective portfolios are
developed for cases such as energy consumption in an industry or within the
logic of public R&amp;D. These methods better handle technical and market
uncertainty, as well as account for all stop-go decisions in the lifetime of a
research project. They are based on the literature using decision trees and real
options methods. Second, the project develops methods for R&amp;D programs that
have multiple goals such as citizen wellbeing, the environment, and security. In
such cases, the project analyses multicriteria methods or Data Envelopment
Analysis. Third, the project introduces data and visualization techniques
developed in the past few years that facilitate the identification of knowledge
gaps and help in making more transparent the current focus of R&amp;D
investment.