* 1734145
* RESEARCH-PGR: System approaches to study soybean root biology at high resolution
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Akos Vertes, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2022
* USD 3,690,423.00

Soybean is a major crop with the ability to fix atmospheric nitrogen through
symbiosis with soil bacteria. Legumes like soybean annually fix 60 million
metric tons of nitrogen, which have a fertilizer replacement value of $7- 10
billion. A long-term goal of N2 fixation research is to transfer the symbiotic
ability of legumes to non-legume crops like corn or tomato. However, there are
gaps in our understanding of the complex events that occur after the bacteria
penetrate the root. These gaps are hindering efforts to engineer nitrogen
fixation into non-legumes. Hence, the main objective of this project is to
elucidate the initial events that take place during the formation of structures
that mediate the movement of bacteria through the root. This project will use
high-resolution methods to characterize macromolecular events at a single-cell
level. The experimental data will be analyzed with sophisticated modeling tools
to improve our understanding of the first events of the legume-bacterial
interactions that lead to symbiosis. The knowledge gained will support efforts
to transfer the rhizobial symbiosis to non-leguminous plants. In addition to the
research mission, the project will create new programs to provide transformative
elementary education, as well as training programs for the professional
development of middle school and high school teachers. Finally, this project
will develop an innovative Sophomore Bioinformatics/Plant Science program to
provide integrated training in plant research and
bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data integration and system modeling of
complex biological processes require detailed, functional genomic data,
preferably obtained in a cell-specific way in order to avoid the effects of
signal dilution due to the presence of non-responding cells. The long-term goal
of this project is to further basic understanding of the agronomically important
soybean N2 fixing symbiosis. A unique focus of this project is the ability to
sample and analyze the transcriptome, proteome and metabolome at a single-cell
resolution. These methods, as well as sophisticated data analysis and modeling
tools, will be applied to the intermediate stages of soybean nodulation;
specifically, the infection thread progression and bacterial release into nodule
cells. These are key events in nodule formation/function that remain largely
undefined. The data generated will be used to construct predictive,
computational models of the plant response to rhizobial infection thread
initiation and growth. The knowledge gained from this research, together with
precision breeding techniques, will be instrumental to improving soybean quality
and meeting the growing demand for food and fuel expected in the forthcoming
years. Moreover, filling in the gaps in our understanding of the rhizobial-
legume infection process will be critical to ongoing efforts to transfer this
symbiosis to non-leguminous plants (e.g., maize). The project also includes
strong outreach programs focusing on the introduction of plant science to
elementary, high school and undergraduate students.