* 1734632
* Collaborative Research: Police Department as Organizational Machine: Effects of Body Worn Cameras on the Work Dynamics and Performance of U.S. Police Departments
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Keith Guzik, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 08/31/2022
* USD 339,472.00

The adoption of body worn cameras in US police departments represents a
challenge to established ways of policing. This applies to law enforcement
agencies as much as officers. For agencies, body worn cameras represent a novel
piece of equipment that must be supported through appropriate technological
systems and usage policies. Cameras also produce an abundance of video data that
policing organizations must manage as well. Considering these demands, this
project will identify the impacts of body worn camera technologies on individual
work dynamics and organizational operations in US police departments.
Specifically, this project will develop a larger IT governance framework to
maximize the value of body worn camera technologies for effective policing
operations. This project will expand knowledge on the management of public
sector organizations that are increasingly enmeshed with wearable Internet of
Things technologies like body worn cameras, and research results will inform the
development of educational materials in technology management, law and
criminology, and information systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A primary goal of
this project is to create an evidence-based organization theory and IT
governance framework for public sector organizations that are being increasingly
embedded with digital technologies in general and Internet of Things
technologies in particular. Specific to the impacts of body worn cameras (BWC)
on policing organizations, this project addresses three questions: (1) What
individual work dynamics and organizational changes are induced by BWC systems;
(2) what technosocial governance mechanisms help maximize the value of BWCs in
accomplishing police departments' mission; and (3) what empirical evidence
explains the effects of BWCs on the operational and mission performance of
police departments. This research activity answers these questions through a
three-stage research design. First, the investigators will complete qualitative
case studies of police agencies by analyzing data collected from interviews,
field observations, and document analyses. Second, drawing upon the results of
the case studies and in collaboration with participating agencies, the
investigators will develop an IT governance framework to maximize the value of
body worn camera technologies in accomplishing police departments' missions.
Lastly, drawing from data that will be collected through survey and public
sources, the investigators will analyze the effect of body worn cameras on the
operational and mission performance of police departments across the US.