* 1734190
* NRI: INT: COLLAB: Integrated Modeling and Learning for Robust Grasping and Dexterous Manipulation with Adaptive Hands
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Aaron Dollar, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 02/28/2022
* USD 632,500.00

Robots need to effectively interact with a large variety of
objects&lt;br/&gt;that appear in warehouses and factories as well as homes and
offices.&lt;br/&gt;This requires robust grasping and dexterous manipulation of
everyday&lt;br/&gt;objects through low cost robots and low complexity
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally, robots use rigid hands and analytical models
for such&lt;br/&gt;tasks, which often fail in the presence of even small errors.
New&lt;br/&gt;compliant hands promise improved performance, while
minimizing&lt;br/&gt;complexity, and increased robustness. Nevertheless, they
are&lt;br/&gt;inherently difficult to sense and model. This project combines
ideas&lt;br/&gt;from different robotics sub-fields to address this limitation.
It&lt;br/&gt;utilizes progress in machine learning and builds on a strong
tradition&lt;br/&gt;in robot modeling. The objective is to provide adaptive,
compliant&lt;br/&gt;robots that are better in grasping objects in the presence
of multiple&lt;br/&gt;unknown contact points and sliding or rolling objects in-
hand. The&lt;br/&gt;broader impact will be strengthened by the open release of
new or&lt;br/&gt;modified robot hand designs, improved control algorithms and
software,&lt;br/&gt;as well as corresponding data sets. Furthermore,
academic&lt;br/&gt;dissemination will be accompanied by educational outreach
to&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Towards the above objective, the first step will
be the definition of&lt;br/&gt;new hybrid models appropriate for adaptive,
compliant hands. This&lt;br/&gt;will happen by improving analytical solutions
and extending them to&lt;br/&gt;allow adaptation based on data via novel, time-
efficient learning&lt;br/&gt;methods. The objective is to capture model
uncertainty inherent in&lt;br/&gt;real-world interactions; a process that
suffers from data scarcity.&lt;br/&gt;In order to reduce the amount of data
required for learning, different&lt;br/&gt;models will be tailored to specific
tasks through an automated&lt;br/&gt;discovery of these tasks and of underlying
motion primitives for each&lt;br/&gt;one of them. This task identification
process will operate iteratively&lt;br/&gt;with learning and utilize improved
models to discover new tasks. It&lt;br/&gt;can also provide feedback for
improved hand design. Once these&lt;br/&gt;learning-based and task-focused
models are available, they will be&lt;br/&gt;used to learn and synthesize
controllers for grasping and in-hand&lt;br/&gt;manipulation. To learn
controllers, this work will consider a&lt;br/&gt;model-based, reinforcement
learning approach, which will be evaluated&lt;br/&gt;against alternatives. For
controller synthesis, existing tools for&lt;br/&gt;this purpose will be
integrated with task planning primitives and&lt;br/&gt;extended through learning
processes to identify the preconditions&lt;br/&gt;under which different
controllers can be chained together. The project&lt;br/&gt;involves extensive
evaluation on a variety of novel adaptive hands and&lt;br/&gt;robotic arms
designed in the PIs' labs. Modern vision-based solutions&lt;br/&gt;will be used
to track grasped objects and provide feedback for&lt;br/&gt;learning and closed-
loop control. The evaluation will measure whether&lt;br/&gt;the developed hybrid
models can significantly improve robustness of&lt;br/&gt;grasping and the
effectiveness of dexterous manipulation.