* 1734335
* 21st GLOBE Annual Meeting
* GEO,RISE
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Anthony Murphy, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 02/28/2018
* USD 149,464.00

The Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) program
is a cooperative international science and science education program jointly
supported by NASA and NSF, with additional in-kind support from NOAA, Department
of State, and USAID. Using inquiry-based, place-based, and problem-based
pedagogies, GLOBE directly supports national efforts to engage a new generation
of diverse students in the science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM)
disciplines and encourage them to consider careers in STEM. GLOBE annual
meetings bring together GLOBE Country Coordinators and U.S. Partnership
Coordinators, members of the scientific community that support GLOBE, and
representatives of the sponsoring agencies. Annual meetings provide a venue for
both sharing of best practices for GLOBE implementation that have been developed
through the creative efforts of the community, as well as additional training in
the use of GLOBE program resources and technology. This will be the 21st annual
meeting for GLOBE, offering an opportunity for the community to both reflect on
and celebrate their many accomplishments and focus on effective implementation
of emerging opportunities for the program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
provides partial support for the 2017 GLOBE Annual Meeting, which is being held
July 30- August 3 at Southern Connecticut State University in New Haven, CT.
Over 150 adult members and 50 student members of the worldwide GLOBE community
are expected to attend. The University Consortium for Atmospheric Research
(UCAR) and the GLOBE Implementation Office (GIO) are leading the planning effort
for this meeting, with contributions from other members of the GLOBE community.
Specific objectives for this meeting include:&lt;br/&gt;1) considering a set of
protocols for research related to coastal resilience in urban areas; 2) sharing
best practices for implementing GLOBE in communities such as through science
fairs and highlighting public participation in science opportunities; 3)
introducing participants to current GLOBE technology that helps students to
conduct research and present research for peer review; 4) allowing students to
present their research at the 4th Student Research Exhibition; 5) engaging
students in a scientific research field trip using GLOBE protocols; and 6)
sharing best practices for STEM Equity and Inclusion by using GLOBE as the
educational context. A 2-day student research experience based on GLOBE
protocols will be organized as part of the week long meeting.