* 1734155
* Standard Grant: Geometric Approaches to Representing the Observable
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Nicholas Teh, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2019
* USD 193,141.00

This award supports a project in the history and philosophy of physics. The PI
will generate a new historical narrative that corrects the standard but flawed
historical account of Pascual Jordan's approach to observables (measurable
physical quantities) in quantum theory, and thereby illuminate the significance
and legacy of his approach. The PI will show not only that Jordan's approach has
the same expressive capacity as quantum theory, it also provides novel
conceptual insights for constructing geometric models for quantum phenomena in a
way that connects more readily with common sense ideas about observables. The
PI, who has an impressive track record of dedicated and successful outreach, has
concrete plans for outreach to audiences at the graduate, undergraduate, and
high-school levels, as well as the general public, with explicit emphasis on
promoting diversity. The PI will also organize a workshop with plans to recruit
both junior scholars and members of underrepresented groups, who are to engage
in various training efforts.

The PI will show that the historical development of Jordan's approach led to a
new algebraic theory that has the same expressive capacities as standard quantum
theory. That account will then be used to provide a new perspective on the role
of observables in the philosophy of representation. He will use Jordan's account
as a case study for understanding the significance of representation theorems,
and for establishing a deep new connection between Jordan observables and the
expression of quantum theory in geometric language. He will also explore the
philosophy of geometry as it applies to quantum theory, and clarify the
metaphysical and pragmatic significance of reformulating a physical theory in
geometric language. Implications will be developed to offer insight into recent
philosophical debates on theoretical equivalence, and to explore possible ways
to connect with other non-standard approaches to quantum observables. This
project lays the groundwork for a novel analysis of observable quantities in
science that will provide a potentially transformative impact on history and
philosophy of science, as well as an opportunity for both fields to engage
meaningfully with contemporary physics.