* 1734613
* Conference: Archival Innovations for Preserving the History of Space Exploration
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Jonathan Coopersmith, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2018
* USD 26,637.00

This award supports a three-day conference that will occur in the Washington DC
area in spring 2018. Its goal is to address unprecedented challenges and
opportunities in creating and preserving the history of space exploration. It
will bring members of the historical and archival communities together with
representatives of the space industry, records management, digital humanities,
and libraries to examine the critical issues in creating, collecting,
preserving, and accessing space archives worldwide. Conference organizers will
disseminate these strategies and practices, encourage space stakeholders
(especially international organizations) to incorporate these recommendations,
and encourage underrepresented minorities and communities to create and archive
their contributions to space history. Strategies for developing better archives
that are broadly accessible will increase public interest in space science and
technology. In addition, they will benefit the larger historical profession by
promoting accessible tools and techniques together with best practices for their
use.

The conference is both timely and important. Creating and preserving the history
of space exploration face unprecedented challenges and opportunities. As early
generations of researchers, engineers, administrators and users retire, the
number of countries, organizations, and companies involved in space is sharply
expanding. In addition, new forms of electronic communication and data including
oral histories and social media are changing the nature of historical records.
If historians, archivists and the space community do not act soon to encourage
the creation and preservation of space archives, the future record will be
incomplete, inaccessible, and possibly incomprehensible. If successful, this
conference will develop data management strategies and toolboxes of exemplary
best practices that greatly assist in preserving humanity's heritage. Outreach
efforts will provide guidelines, promote support networks, and engage with both
domestic and international space actors.