* 1734456
* NRI: FND: Human-Robot Collaboration with Distributed and Embodied Intelligence
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Aaron Steinfeld, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 731,540.00

This award supports research on the issue of intelligence re-embodiment in
robots. The fundamental question to be addressed is whether robots should be
designed so that different synthetic intelligences can take over. A smart phone
can be repurposed to serve different users by swapping chips. Should robots with
much higher functionality be designed so that they operate in a suitably similar
way? The goal of this project is to answer this question along with a number of
related questions including the following. Should robots be designed so
different intelligences can take over? Where does the locus of intelligence sit?
How does the user understand where it is and who or what is in control? How does
re-embodiment impact issues of privacy? To answer these questions, this research
effort will adopt a mixed-methods approach including surveys, fieldwork,
simulations, and on-site testing of a robot operating system module. The
findings of this work are expected to have direct value to robot developers and
other researchers. Other impacts include interdisciplinary training of PhD
students, and creating research opportunities for undergraduates. Team members
plan to use the results of this research to enrich courses on human-robot
interactions, and in outreach activities to engage non-academic
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project uses a variety of methods
to study the issue of intelligence re-embodiment in robots. Team members will
conduct online surveys to systematically assess factors related to re-
embodiment. They will engage in fieldwork to investigate current practices of
people working and living in environments with several intelligent systems.
These findings will in turn be used to inform a user enactment study that will
create simulations of real-world contexts and test participants' reactions to
different robot behaviors. Team members will also extract and evaluate a set of
generalized interaction principles using a second online study. In addition,
they will develop a robot operating system (ROS) module to enable re-embodiment
of robots by a cloud-based intelligence; the module will be used to assess
reactions of business owners and other stakeholders interacting with these
systems. The results of these research components will advance knowledge on how
people understand re-embodiment. They will serve to map out a set of design
recommendations, design features, and the corresponding interaction patterns
that do not yet exist around robot behavior in different contexts. They will
also lead to the production of software components that support re-embodiment by
remote intelligences. More generally, they will help achieve a vision of fully
collaborative, ubiquitous, interconnected co-robot systems.