* 1734236
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: Exploring Ideas of Cooperation in the Biological Sciences During the Interwar Period
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Abraham Gibson, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 206,157.00

This award supports the research of a post-doctoral fellow on a history of
biology project that focuses on a variety of different ideas of cooperation that
developed during the interwar period (1919-1939). His primary goal is to
understand what motivated the work that emphasized cooperation, as well as the
nature of that work. He will do so using a set of driving questions and a
research plan that utilizes three approaches, which are indicated below. Among
the questions that he will pursue are the following. What was cooperation-
oriented thinking? To what extent and in what ways was there a shared focus on
cooperation and related ideas? What terms in addition to "cooperation" capture
this thinking? What motivated researchers to study the biological nature and
significance of cooperation during this particular historical period? How did
the ideas develop over time, and are there unique features that characterize
this period? The results of this project are to be disseminated through both
traditional and digital publications, at conferences, and in classrooms. They
will be aimed at scientists, scholars, and the general reading public. The
postdoc will use his extensive training and experience in digital history to
design a blog that showcases pertinent documents, photographs, stories, and
novelties that arise out of this project. This website will introduce users to
previously overlooked aspects of American biology and international relations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A working hypothesis of the project is that although
biologists during the interwar period used different labels for cooperative
behavior including holism, unity, emergence, and organicism, they shared a
common underlying goal; namely, to provide a biological explanation for
cooperation, of how parts come together as coordinated wholes. The postdoc plans
to focus on a specific facet of this goal by examining how this generation of
biologists across different fields advanced theories about the evolution and
nature of sociality and cooperation (as opposed to competition). His primary
goal is to understand how and why these biologists devoted enormous effort and
energy to better understanding the origin of social impulses. He will do so by
engaging in a close study of the scientific, social, cultural, and political
details of the period to obtain a deeper understanding of the ideas of
cooperation. He will use archival research, computational methods, and
interactions with current researchers in biosocial systems to bring to light
what biologists are saying about cooperation today to compare ideas of
cooperation across two different time frames; the comparison can both inform the
historical study and inform current conceptions.