* 1734558
* NRI: INT: Learning-Enabled Robot Support of Daily Activities for Successful Activity Completion
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Diane Cook, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2021
* USD 999,999.00

The population is aging - the estimated number of individuals over the age of 85
will triple by 2050. Even in our current population an estimated 9% of adults
age 65+ and 50% of adults age 85+ need assistance with everyday activities, and
the annual cost for the United States is roughly $2 trillion. Given the economic
and quality of life costs, there is a critical need to better use smart
technologies so that individuals can live independently in their own homes,
helping both individuals and society as a whole. This proposed work will create
a novel multi-agent robot system, called Robotic Activity Support (RAS), that
provides in-home activity support for older adults and others that need
assistance to independently perform common activities of daily living. The
system will rely on cooperation between a smart home and a mobile robot to learn
activity routines for an individual. RAS will use this information to provide
activity interventions that help smart home residents initiate and successfully
complete important daily activities and improve functional independence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rather than explore co-robot systems with multiple
identical platforms, the system will represent a collaboration between a mobile
robot, a smart home agent with multiple heterogeneous sensors and multiple
humans with distinct roles. For this collaboration, the project team will employ
a custom robot that will partner with the team's CASAS smart home architecture.
RAS will incorporate caregiver-in-the-loop active learning to improve its
models. the team will use an iterative user-centered development process to
enhance the mobile robotic platform design. The RAS system will use active
learning from both the resident and caregiver to learn common activities and how
it can support such activities. For example, the robot may prompt a resident to
eat breakfast if she does not initiate the task at the normal time, remind the
resident where the cereal is, and notify a nearby caregiver if help is needed
that is beyond the robot's capabilities. The team will evaluate RAS on historic
smart home data (from their more than 100 deployments), in their on-campus smart
home, and in a home with a healthy older adult caregiver, as well as an older
adult exhibiting cognitive limitations.