* 1734853
* NCS-FO: Connectome mapping algorithms with application to community services for big data neuroscience
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Lei Wang, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 12/31/2021
* USD 650,000.00

Neuroscience is advancing by dissolving disciplinary boundaries and promoting
transdisciplinary research between psychologists, cognitive neuroscientists,
computer scientists, and engineers, to name a few. The success of this
scientific endeavor would be enhanced by establishing software mechanisms to
improve reproducibility of scientific results. This project develops a software
platform that facilitates publication of publicly-accessible data and
implementation of data-analysis algorithms. Both functions will be achievable
within high-performance computing environments. The platform will enable
publication of reproducible code, and access to national supercomputers. It will
also make available reference datasets for validating results and data quality.
It is expected that the open online platform will promote voluntary data
submissions in exchange for access to the system. In addition, this platform
will provide a reusable database of "data derivatives," which are data at
different stages of preprocessing, including cortical segmentations, meshes,
functional maps, brain connectivity matrices, or white-matter tracts. This open-
derivatives database will allow computer scientists, mathematical scientists and
engineers to use these data to develop and improve methods in their domains.
Most generally, providing easy-to-use published data and methods will promote
understanding the brain and allow diverse communities of scientists to use
reproducible methods, and reuse the "long tail" of neuroimaging
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on providing seamless public
access to data, computing, and reproducible algorithms, while promoting code
sharing and upcycling the long tail of neuroscience data. It has three main
objectives. First, to develop a platform to capture brain data, publish
algorithms as reproducible applications, and perform data-intensive computing on
high-performance compute clusters, as well as public clouds. Second, to develop
novel algorithms for mapping brain-connectome individuality and variability. The
algorithms will enhance discovery by leveraging the online platform for data
intensive processing of large datasets. Third, to collate a large data set of
brain data and data derivatives (processed data), such as connectome matrices,
multi-parameters tractography models, cortical segmentation and functional maps.
These derivatives will benefit scientists to develop algorithms for functional
mapping, anatomical computing, and model optimization. This project is funded by
Integrative Strategies for Understanding Neural and Cognitive Systems (NSF-NCS),
a multidisciplinary program jointly supported by the Directorates for Computer
and Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Education and Human Resources
(EHR), Engineering (ENG), and Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences (SBE).
It has also received funding from the CISE Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure.