* 1734400
* NRI: INT: Co-Multi-Robotic Exploration of the Benthic Seafloor - New Methods for Distributed Scene Understanding and Exploration in the Presence of Communication Constraints
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2022
* James Kinsey, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,337,101.00

This project addresses the control and communications among underwater robotic
vehicles to explore and map in ocean environments, where the communications are
inherently low bandwidth, may be degraded and even disrupted due to natural
ocean phenomena. The research focuses on coordinating robots and cooperating
teams of such robots under such conditions with limited human intervention. It
is expected the principles learned from this project will be generalizable to
deployment of teams of cooperating robots operating in harsh environments with
similar communication challenges such as what might be expected in the aftermath
of natural disasters.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses technical
challenges with robots learning to describe their environment using high-level
descriptors, using state of the art unsupervised machine learning techniques,
and exchanging compact messages with each other to keep the description model
consistent across all the cooperating robots. This high-level scene description
is used by the robots to efficiently communicate the state of the exploration to
each other, and to the human operator as possible. Furthermore, the human
operators can efficiently control the robot team by specifying their interests
in terms of these learned scene descriptors. The automatically generated
exploration trajectories aim to maximize the information content, human
interest, and spatial coverage, while taking into account the difficult
constraints imposed by communication range in such harsh environments.