* 1734100
* NRI:  INT:   Design and Development of a Social Robot for Gathering Ecological Momentary Stress Data from Teens
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Elin Bjorling, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,107,001.00

This award supports project EMAR (Ecological Momentary Assessment Robot), a
timely interdisciplinary project that will research, develop, and deploy a user-
friendly social robot that gathers teen mental health data in a public high
school setting. Existing research only provides evidence for the benefits of
human-robot-interaction among young children and adults; investigating the
interactions between teens and robots has been largely overlooked. Such an
investigation is needed since adolescents are very likely to have long-lasting
relationships with robots in the future at work, in the classroom, and at home.
It also needed especially since adolescents constitute a vulnerable population
that is negatively affected by stress and mental health issues, and since there
are well-established difficulties in gathering accurate, useful, mental health
data from teens in their natural environment with digital surveys and experience
sampling using static data collection tools including computers, tablets, and
smart phones. The success of this project will contribute to the development of
ubiquitous social robots that serve as tools for on-site, real time data
collection. Such tools would improve research methodology and facilitate
evidence-based decisions in real time. In addition, this interdisciplinary,
community-based project will serve to achieve societally relevant outcomes by
broadening participation and engaging both undergraduate and high school
students, including those who are traditionally underrepresented in STEM. The
results of this project will be disseminated widely using pertinent means for
reaching researchers, practitioners, community partners, and
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two key objectives: To design and
develop an engaging social robot to capture real-time stress and mood data from
teens, and to successfully deploy and evaluate the social robot in an urban,
high school setting. As school populations increase, and mental health services
decrease, gathering valid, real-time data via engaging technology may be an
essential tool for assessing student health. Using a human-centered design
approach, the project employs participatory methods to engage local teens
directly in the design and testing of the robot. The project will utilize
interdisciplinary investigations of teen-robot interactions, teen-centric
iterative design, and the social impact of deployment; in doing so, it will
acquire valuable and much needed information to understand the relationship
between teens and robots as well as the potential impact of a social robot as a
data gathering device. It will also facilitate assessing the feasibility of
using a robot to gather real-time data for aggregation into visual data that
would serve to inform decision-making and evaluation of interventions; such an
ability would be especially useful in school environments where teens need more
support. The results of this study will contribute and serve to advance the
field of robotics as well as the fields of adolescent health and research
methodology. They will also contribute to understanding the specific
relationship between teens and robots, which is an imperative for this
generation's future success.