* 1734820
* Type I: Iowa State University I-Corps Site: Driving Innovation through Entrepreneurial Talent
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Aragula Rao, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 498,750.00

This project, from Iowa State University (ISU), creates an I-Corps Site at this
institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-
funded entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and
support multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps
Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the
National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the ISU Site is to embed a
strong and pervasive culture of entrepreneurship and innovation across the
entire campus community. With a rigorous and experiential program of study, led
by experts, this Site interfaces with other innovation Sites in the Midwest and,
within five years, is expected to propel the university towards reaching its
full potential in terms of creating new ventures. This goal is being
accomplished via a new entrepreneurial ecosystem that effectively integrates
several key components including a continuum of entrepreneurship options,
mentors, funding networks and assistance, Angel investors, a "Startup Factory"
program and space in a new Startup Factory Building.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expectations are that the ISU Site is energizing solutions
to grand challenges - such as food production to serve a growing global
population - that require innovative thinking and creativity in agriculture,
engineering and other disciplines. ISU, a land grant institution steeped in
traditions of agriculture, contributes a record of entrepreneurial contributions
reflecting its strengths in engineering, bio-renewables, materials science and
agriculture. In the long term, the I-Corps site will generate a new body of
academics, holistically trained as scientists-technologists-entrepreneurs,
equipped with knowledge and skills to galvanize transformative new solutions to
vexing agricultural and other global problems that will ensure the robustness
and sustainability of the food and energy supply chain. Association with other
agricultural and engineering schools in the Midwest enhances the knowledge base
and creates a virtual network of innovators and entrepreneurs driving the
economy of the entire Midwest region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through partnership
with the Iowa Economic Development Authority (IEDA), the Iowa Innovation Council
and the Iowa Innovation Corporation (I-ICorp), novice entrepreneurs from the ISU
innovation ecosystem connect with the broader network of venture capitalists and
business leaders in the state; through practical experiential learning modules,
cohorts collaborate with a diversity of successful real-world entrepreneurial
businesses (bioscience, information technology, bioenergy etc.) in the Research
Park as well as the more mature companies (Pioneer-DuPont, Monsanto and John
Deere) that drive the economic engine of the state; and, the Site training
program incorporates respect for and inclusiveness of all forms of diversity in
the innovation economy.