* 1734887
* NCS-FO: A Computational Theory to Model the Neurobiological Basis of a Visuo-Cognitive Neuroprosthetic
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Stephen Macknik, SUNY Health Science Center at Brooklyn
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 949,928.00

Evoking high quality visual perception in a blind person, via direct
microstimulation of the brain, poses great difficulties. One major obstacle has
been that electrical stimulation of the brain typically affects neuronal
populations that are mutually suppressive, which subverts proper neuronal
signaling. The visual system has two antagonistic information channels that
encode either the perception of lightness, in ON cells, or darkness, in OFF
cells. Inappropriate coactivation of these two channels results in nullification
of contrast, and deprived visual perception. It follows that high-quality
prosthetic stimulation systems must avoid unwanted coactivation of mutually
suppressive neurons, just as the natural visual system does. This is a challenge
because the antagonistic neurons typically lie within microns of each other in
the brain. The project aims at transformative advances in viral transfection and
imaging methodology, computational theory, and cortical prosthetic
neuroengineering design for the purpose of restoring vision by genetically
modifying neurons in the brain and then stimulating them with light, a method
called optogenetics. The expected results and methodology will form the
scientific basis to build a breakthrough neuroprosthetic, with transformative
potential to further brain research in sensory, motor, and cognitive parts of
the cortex and to advance human medicine. To promote the development and
availability of derived products to the public, the team will disseminate the
discoveries to general audiences through public lectures and publications in
popular science magazines. The investigators will supervise trainees from
underrepresented groups, including postdoctoral fellows, graduate students,
undergraduates, and high school students. The investigators are faculty mentors
for The Children's Aid Society (CAS) Workforce Development Department Summer
Youth Employment Program (SYEP), which provides summer research opportunities to
disadvantaged and minority youth in NYC to inspire them to pursue STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent research has shown that, for any given retinal
position, the ON and OFF cell inputs to the brain's visual cortex are purely
excitatory, concentrate in a specific layer, and are laid out in a pattern that
can be targeted with light from outside the brain. First, the team will modify
these neurons genetically, to turn them into a novel type of photoreceptor,
embedded within the brain. The team will then target light stimulation to the
identified ON and OFF cells, determining the precise balance of activation to
either channel to generate high-quality prosthetic vision based on a video
camera's signal. This technology can then be used to bypass the eye to stimulate
the brain from the camera. The project aims to develop the computational model
to drive an optogenetic brain stimulation system that will optimally activate
neural responses in the primary visual cortex. By comparing the neuronal
responses of sighted nonhuman primates viewing natural visual stimuli to
prosthetic responses in the same neurons, the work will optimize stimulation
patterns that evoke naturalistic visual perception. The balanced targeting of
appropriate ON and OFF inputs at each position in visual space is expected to
achieve maximal contrast perception at the highest attainable acuity, with full
stereoscopic binocular vision. The team's computational model of spatiotemporal
visual inputs into the cortex will also account for the effects of eye movements
on early visual responses, a novel approach to visual prosthetics tested here
for the first time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by Integrative
Strategies for Understanding Neural and Cognitive Systems (NSF-NCS), a
multidisciplinary program jointly supported by the Directorates for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Education and Human Resources (EHR),
Engineering (ENG), and Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences (SBE).