* 1734147
* Diversity, Network Structure, and the Effectiveness of Collective Design and Innovation
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Shelley Dionne, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Tara Behrend
* 07/31/2021
* USD 441,000.00

This project will investigate how the diverse knowledge, expertise and behaviors
of people and their social networks can make large-scale collaborative design
processes more effective and innovative. This has become a very important issue
in modern society where developing successful solutions for complex problems
requires collaboration among many individuals with diverse knowledge, expertise
and behaviors, and where the interactions of those individuals are often complex
and dynamic. The project will use multiple research methods to address this
issue, combining computer simulations for idea and hypothesis generation and
online experiments with human participants for idea and hypothesis testing. The
project will expand knowledge about the linkage between individuals'
interactions in various organizational configurations and their performance in
innovation, which will be applicable to product, service, concept, policy,
and/or aesthetic design tasks in a wide variety of
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the complexity of products and services has
skyrocketed over the last several decades, collective design and innovation
processes have become a necessity for the development of successful solutions
for real-world problems. Such large-scale design processes typically involve
individuals with diverse knowledge, expertise and behaviors, and the
organizational structures under which the collective design takes place are
often complex and dynamic with temporally changing non-trivial network
properties. This project aims to investigate, both theoretically and
experimentally, how the diversity of knowledge, expertise, and behaviors of
individual members and the topological properties of organizational network
structures will affect the effectiveness of design and innovation processes at
collective levels. This will be accomplished through (a) theoretical agent-based
network modeling and simulation, and (b) model evaluation through online
laboratory experiments involving student participants with diverse majors.
Modeling and simulation will investigate potential interactions between task-
related diversity and large-scale organizational network structures. The
predictions produced by the simulations will be evaluated through online
laboratory experiments, in which participants will collaborate on several open-
ended collective design tasks through a computer-mediated collaboration
platform. In these experiments, the participants? task-related diversity will be
measured and its distribution in the organizational network will be manipulated.
The topologies of the network will also be monitored and manipulated
dynamically. The successful outcome of the project will be a new "guiding
principle" for configuring and manipulating task-related diversity and
organizational network structures to promote effective collective design and
innovation. This will bear multidisciplinary impacts on organizational science,
management science, systems science, systems engineering, operations research,
and network science.