* 1734947
* Collaborative Research: The effect of carbonate chemistry on the sea ice community in the High Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Jody Deming, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 08/31/2021
* USD 352,204.00

Sea ice influences many physical, atmospheric, chemical and biological processes
occurring in the Arctic. Sea ice is also a challenging habitat to assess: it
moves in response to wind, and hence nearly always moves independently of
surface waters. The properties of the ice, which influence a suite of chemical
and biological interactions between the atmosphere, the ice, and the surface
ocean, change over both space and time. While enhanced photosynthesis is
expected in the increasingly ice-free Arctic Ocean, there has been little
research to determine the impact of increased atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2)
and other environmental changes on the microbes that grow within and beneath the
sea ice. This research will contribute to our understanding of elemental cycles
in the central Arctic basin and of the vulnerability of the sea ice biological
community to a rapidly changing environment, particularly as it is impacted by
increasing carbon dioxide concentrations and ocean acidification. The project is
part of a joint US-Swedish collaboration and will support an early-career female
faculty member. It will also support the training of a graduate student and a
postdoctoral scientist who will gain experience with underway and discrete
biogeochemical sampling as well as incubation experiments. The investigators
will conduct public outreach about changes in the Arctic Ocean at the VIMS
Marine Science Day and Polar Science Weekend at the Pacific Science Center in
Seattle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this research is to
assess how changes in seawater chemistry as a result of increases in atmospheric
carbon dioxide (CO2) will alter algal-bacterial interactions in sea ice. Recent
losses of Arctic sea ice have resulted in an increased uptake of atmospheric
CO2, accelerating the rate of acidification in a region that is rapidly
changing. While enhanced marine productivity is expected in an increasingly ice-
free Arctic, the impact of the changing environment on ice-dependent biological
communities is challenging to predict. As part of a joint US-Swedish
collaboration, this work will provide a quantitative assessment of the
sensitivity of ice-dependent algae and bacteria to changes in pH and use a
combination of underway and discrete sampling to deliver new observations on the
spatial and temporal variability of the CO2 system in the High Arctic in late
summer when sea ice is at a minimum. In addition, the research team will perform
a suite of ship-board experiments that manipulate seawater pH to assess the
impacts on sea ice biota and their exopolymer polysaccharide products. Although
previous work has focused on the impact of elevated CO2 on phytoplankton, there
has been little targeted research on ice-dependent biota. Given the paucity of
CO2 system observations in the central Arctic basin, especially late in the
productive season when the impact of autumn production and the seasonal salinity
minimum can be included in the cumulative estimate of production, the
observations proposed here will be of particular significance.