* 1734311
* Conference:  Bridging the divide between the C. elegans and parasitic nematode research communities: June 21-25th, 2017; Los Angeles, CA
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* William Sullivan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Purnima Bhanot
* 05/31/2018
* USD 14,000.00

Parasitic roundworms, also known as parasitic nematodes, infect over one billion
people worldwide and are major agricultural pests, causing the loss of billions
of dollars in crops and reduced production from livestock. Despite this massive
impact on public health and food security, a limited number of drugs and
chemicals are available to combat these parasites, and resistance to particular
drugs is emerging. Novel approaches are therefore needed to control parasitic
roundworms. Caenorhabditis elegans is a non-parasitic nematode that is studied
by a large, robust research community which possesses a powerful collection of
tools to study its biology. However there is historically limited interaction
between the C. elegans community and the parasitology community. This workshop
will bring together C. elegans biologists and parasitologists during the
International C. elegans Meeting (to be held in Los Angeles, CA June 21-25th,
2017) in order to bridge these communities and to drive new approaches and
collaborations to control parasitic roundworms. Funds will be used to support
travel expenses for experts on parasitic roundworms, including female and
underrepresented minority speakers, and to allow underrepresented minority
students to attend and participate in this workshop as well as the rest of the
C. elegans meeting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this
conference is to educate and promote interactions and collaborations between the
parasitic roundworm community and C. elegans researchers. In particular, the
goal is to increase awareness among C. elegans scientists of the issues and
problems that parasitic roundworm researchers face, and pave the way for
applying to parasitic roundworm studies the powerful approaches and technologies
that have advanced C. elegans research. The upcoming International C. elegans
Meeting provides the best opportunity to reach the majority of C. elegans
researchers. A session will be organized at that meeting in which six experts on
plant, animal and human parasitic nematodes speak on the life history and unique
biology of parasitic species and on the outstanding issues in their field. In
addition to educating the C. elegans community, time will be provided for
researchers in the two communities to interact. The goal is to stimulate C.
elegans researchers to think about problems facing the study and control of
parasitic nematodes and to apply their expertise toward solving these problems.
To this end, a second, more informal event will be hosted after the session to
provide opportunities for one-on-one conversations with the invited speakers.
This workshop is unique, because it is embedded within the C. elegans biannual
meeting, ensuring exposure to a large number of C. elegans investigators.