* 1734237
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Antecedents of Complexity in Healthcare Routines
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Ken Frank, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 340,452.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to understand how
social and technological factors contribute to the complexity of organizational
routines in healthcare. We know that complexity is influenced by the way work is
organized, but current theory and methods do not provide useful ways to examine
this relationship. This research will develop and test new methods for analyzing
the complexity of healthcare routines using electronic medical records (EMR) and
interviews from a range of clinical specialties at the University of Rochester
Medical Center, including Dermatology, Dermatologic Surgery, Orthopedics,
Pediatric Oncology, and Radiation Oncology. This research will deepen our
understanding of the factors that drive the complexity of healthcare
organizations, a context where there is an urgent need for better ways of
organizing. This project will provide a way to analyze the complexity of
healthcare routines, and better understand complexity as a factor in the cost
and quality of healthcare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complexity is a basic concept in
the science of organization, and routines are the fundamental way that
organizations accomplish work. However, the state of the art in organizational
science currently provides no valid, reliable way to measure or compare their
complexity. This research will demonstrate a novel, graph-theoretic methodology
that incorporates social and material dimensions into the portrayal of routines.
This methodology can be used to assess and compare the influence of various
antecedents on the complexity of clinical routines. This project will also
result in new research infrastructure, in the form of algorithms and software
that can be applied in future research on any kind of process or routine. This
new research infrastructure is particularly timely and valuable because of the
increasing availability of digital trace data, such as the electronic medical
record data used here.