* 1734767
* Science Policy Research Report: The Use of Innovation Prizes in Government
* SBE,SMA
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Luciano Kay, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 04/30/2018
* USD 27,589.00

Prizes and grand challenges - competitions that offer a reward to the first
person or team that achieves a certain feat or invents a new technology - can
play an important role and, through innovation, help the nation tackle and solve
complex problems to achieve important goals such as becoming more competitive,
advancing the national health, and securing the national defense. Given the
growing interest in these competitions and their notable effect, there is a need
to systematically compile scientific knowledge on how to design, manage, and
evaluate these funding mechanisms. This project analyzes existing empirical
evidence, produces a research report with a synthesis of research findings on
prizes, and provides actionable recommendations to help government agencies make
a more efficient use of prizes and achieve their missions. Prizes represent
unconventional instances of innovation and creativity and represent a way to
incentivize innovation, educate and train students in S&T, and increase
awareness of broader policy issues. This project helps better understand the
value and potential of government prizes but its recommendations also have
application to solve other pressing societal or economic problems that are not
necessarily technology-related.

This project evaluates scientific evidence and other non-academic literature of
the past 15 years, and then reviews and synthesizes existing knowledge to
clarify what is and what is not known about prizes with regards to their use in
science and technology policy. It seeks to answer questions such as how certain
design parameters affect their outcome, the actual incentive effect induced per
award dollar, and the kind of contributions prizes make to the sponsor's
mission. Its synthesis taps into research's findings and focuses on four main
themes: design, implementation, use of results and evaluation of prizes. It
analyzes and compares the methodological quality of the reviewed publications
and investigates the reasons for differences across studies.