* 1734815
* NRT-UtB: Graduate Training Program in Sensory Science: Optimizing the Information Available for Mind and Brain
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Andrew Oxenham, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,997,329.00

The human senses provide the information to the brain about the world around us.
Deficits in visual, auditory or other sensory inputs have a major impact on
quality of life, including education, employment and social engagement, which in
turn places a major burden on the US economy. The scale of this problem is
large: According to reports by the World Health Organization (WHO) and the
National Institutes of Health, there are approximately 5 million Americans with
vision impairment and around 36 million Americans with some form of hearing
loss. There is broad recognition of the need for interdisciplinary collaboration
for translational research on disabilities. Research into the development of
more effective assistive technologies and environmental modifications requires
interdisciplinary expertise that unites a fundamental understanding of the basic
sensory science (vision, audition, motor control, speech and language) with deep
technical expertise in engineering, computer science, and other related fields.
This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the
University of Minnesota will enable the formation of an integrated and
interdisciplinary training program in sensory science through the joint
strengths of the university's Center for Cognitive Sciences and Center for
Applied and Translational Sensory Science. The program's goal is to prepare
future scientists to combine engineering approaches with scientific knowledge
and methods so that they are in a position to develop the next generation of
sensory aids that will improve the quality of life for Americans with sensory
loss. The program will serve students from computer science, engineering,
kinesiology, psychology, and speech-language-hearing disciplines through
courses, research opportunities, internships in the medical-devices industry,
and public outreach activities. A total of 49 different PhD students will be
enrolled in the program over the course of the 5 years, 18 of whom will receive
NRT fellowships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project creates a new
interdisciplinary graduate training program that encompasses the following key
aims: 1. Establish an academic program in the form of a graduate minor through
which students will receive the focused, multi-disciplinary educational
background they will need to address critical challenges in the development of
assistive technologies for sensory loss. 2. Advance interdisciplinary research
in translational sensory science through the development of structural
mechanisms that support the formation of interdisciplinary research teams. 3.
Provide extra-curricular training and networking opportunities to the trainees
through supplementary mechanisms, including weekly journal clubs, summer and
winter workshops, spring and fall research symposia, and an annual fall retreat.
Students will also participate in public engagement such as preparation of
podcasts on research topics of interest to the stakeholders. 4. Provide
practical career development opportunities through personalized contacts with
local and national companies. Many trainees will eventually seek employment in
industry, and those who continue in academia should seek to engage in
collaborative work with industry partners. In an effort to provide students with
real-world experience that can inform their research and post-graduation career
choices, the program will offer the trainees 8-10 week summer internship
opportunities in industry-based applied research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of
STEM graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary research areas,
through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based,
and aligned with changing workforce and research needs.