* 1734380
* NRI: INT: COLLAB: Development, Deployment and Evaluation of Personalized Learning Companion Robots for Early Literacy and Language Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Abeer Alwan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 08/31/2023
* USD 623,646.00

This National Robotics Initiative project will develop, deploy and evaluate
personalized companion robots to assist kindergarten-age children in learning
language and vocabulary skills. The aim is to accelerate the impacts of social
robots for early education in schools and at home. The four-year project will
advance knowledge in three key areas: (1) automatic speech recognition models
for young children; (2) multi-modal student assessment algorithms for early
language and literacy skills; and (3) personalization of activities, content,
and dialogic question generation to boost learning outcomes. The project will
generate new insights for how to develop expressive, socially responsive robots
that provide more effective, engaging, and empathetic educational experiences
for young children. To evaluate the impacts of long-term interactions on
educational outcomes, the project team will conduct a 4-month study with
Kindergarten classrooms, as well as a 3-month at-home study. The project will
engage teachers and parents to develop key guidelines for best practices for use
of social robots in classroom and home settings, and participating undergraduate
and graduate students will be trained in the multidisciplinary aspects of social
robotics, speech recognition and understanding, human participation studies,
interactive machine learning for automatic assessment and personalization tools,
and early education research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research and
development project will be implemented in two phases: An initial phase
consisting of short pilot deployments to train and continually iterate
development of project technologies and systems, followed by longer term
deployment of the robot to examine autonomous interactions with social robots in
school and home educational settings. During the development stage of individual
components (automatic reading and language assessment tools, automatic question-
generation algorithm, automatic speech recognition and spoken language
understanding system models, and activities with the autonomous social robot
learning companion) the project team will collect and analyze data with
practical and performance measures, and refine and iterate each component of the
system being developed. After development of the individual components, the
autonomous social robot storytelling companion will be developed through
repeated iterations with children. In the final year of the project, two 4-month
studies will be conducted in six Kindergarten classrooms with 15 to 20 students
each. This project is expected to result in five key contributions: (1)
Development of Automatic Speech Recognition and Spoken Language Understanding
systems for young children's speech, (2) Multi-modal automatic assessment
algorithms for Kindergarten age children's spoken language and early reading
skills; (3) Automatic personalization algorithms for story content customization
and dialogic question generation in the context of young children's verbal
storytelling; (4) Development of a fully autonomous, collaborative, peer-like
social robot system with effective educational activities; and (5) Long-term
studies with deployed social robots in schools and homes spanning several months
and demonstrating sustained engagement and positive learning outcomes.