* 1734777
* Physical Impacts on late Season Productivity in Changing Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Nicholas Beaird, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 245,458.00

The Arctic region is experiencing environmental changes that have important
implications for the local Arctic ecosystem and the communities that depend on
it for their subsistence. For example, a longer season of reduced ice cover
suggests the possibility of more marine plant growth. Yet, the rate at which
plants grow may be limited by the exhaustion of available nutrients during the
longer growing season. Understanding is limited by an incomplete knowledge of
how physical processes help replenish nutrients in the euphotic zone late in the
season. Important processes span a range of scales, from small scale turbulent
mixing to regional scale wind-driven upwelling. This project will pair novel
physical and biological measurements to understand the biological response to
changes in the physics. The work takes advantage of a scheduled cruise to reduce
costs. The project will contribute to STEM workforce enhancement by supporting
the development of an early career scientist. Public outreach will be
accomplished through a science communication fellowship at the Oregon Museum of
Science and Industry.

During a cruise to the Chukchi Sea in late summer, instruments to measure fine-
scale shear, velocity, and turbulence will be integrated onto a towed vehicle
capable of high-resolution sampling over broad areas. The towed vehicle, which
is funded through an existing project, allows for continuous in-situ water
sampling throughout the water column and is equipped with a suite of
comprehensive biological sensors and standard physical sensors. The proposed
additions will yield a unique set of simultaneous, comprehensive high-resolution
physical and biological observations. The collective analysis of these
observations will provide critical insight into biophysical interactions in the
changing Arctic.