* 1734656
* Student Travel Support for the IEEE SECON 2017 Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2018
* Kewei Sha, University of Houston - Clear Lake
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 04/30/2018
* USD 10,000.00

The goal of this award is to broaden the audience attending a premier conference
in communications, the IEEE Communications Society Conference on Sensing,
Communication, and Networking (SECON), and as a result, raise the level of
interaction and the potential for new collaborations, new investigations, and
higher quality research. Support from the National Science Foundation is
provided through this award for graduate students attending institutions in the
United States. IEEE SECON publishes top-tier research on sensor networks and the
Internet of Things, and is one of the top four conferences in this space.

Conference attendance is a crucial part of the life of a researcher. By creating
new opportunities for students (especially those from under-represented groups)
to attend a high-quality conference, this project will benefit the research
community in several ways. The students themselves benefit from the opportunity
to meet and interact with many other researchers in a favorable setting, and
from attending research presentations that may be related to their research
areas. The research community benefits from the improvement of the students in
the pipeline, and from the introduction of new researcher perspectives.
Additionally, everybody benefits from increased diversity of participants
attending the conference.