* 1734567
* Modeling the Emergence of Outliers in Entrepreneurship
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2018
* G Christopher Crawford, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Chao
* 12/31/2018
* USD 204,558.00

This project will build a theoretical framework to address how an entrepreneur's
initial resource endowments, expectations for novelty, engagement with the
market, and the general market environments interact to facilitate the emergence
of extremely successful and influential new ventures. Ventures like this are
outliers because they are rare and have disproportionate impact at multiple
levels. Moreover, these outlier ventures are very different in both their inputs
and outcomes than what most would characterize as typical. The project's
framework will enhance knowledge of how organizational systems grow, improve
performance, and achieve outlier outcomes over time in changing competitive
environments. Because this framework is built on data from multiple complex
social systems, it is generalizable for and capable of improving the outcomes of
individuals, teams, firms, industries, and nations.

The overarching research focus of this project is to identify the primary
drivers of outlier outcomes in entrepreneurship. Building a theory about the
emergence of outliers is difficult under the assumption of normal, bell-shaped
distributions of inputs and outcomes. Under the normal distribution assumption,
outliers are usually cleansed from the analysis-either deleted or mathematically
transformed-to reduce their influence. This project moves beyond the normal
distribution assumption and uses theoretical assumptions and methods from
complexity science. This theoretical approach has two advantages. First, a
complexity perspective assumes that in relatively unconstrained environments,
outcomes will likely be distributed according to a power law. This distribution
is vital because traditional theory building and testing methods assume that the
probability of an extreme event is effectively zero. A power law assumption can
more adequately reflect the empirical distributions found in studies of emerging
ventures. Second, a complexity perspective suggests that a system's outcomes are
primarily the result of an interconnected combinations of inputs, including 1)
an agent's initial endowment of resources, 2) the agent's rules for engagement
with other agents based on expectations for future outcomes, and 3) the quantity
and quality of environmental resources. Within this perspective, the emergence
of a system from non-existence to existence occurs as a nonlinear, threshold-
based process. This project uses non-parametric maximum-likelihood bootstrap
estimates of power law fit on representative samples of nascent entrepreneurial
ventures to derive a meta-construct framework of inputs that apply to all
organizational forms: endowments, expectations, engagement, and environments.
Then, to test this generalizable 4E framework, these inputs are used to build an
agent-based simulation model, the outcomes for which will be validated with
empirical data from the fastest growing privately held firms.