* 1734333
* Fundamental Coupling Processes in the Mesosphere, Lower Thermosphere (MLT) Using Enhanced Na Wind-temperature Lidar Measurements at the Atmospheric Lidar Observatory
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Tao Yuan, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* John Meriwether
* 07/31/2019
* USD 176,065.00

TThis award is to operate a sodium and Rayleigh lidar systems in the middle
latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere (at Logan, Utah). This combined lidar
system would be used to undertake correlative studies, addressing new challenges
in mesosphere and lower thermosphere (MLT) dynamics as well as extending ongoing
work on the study of the interactions of the ionospheric plasma with the neutral
atmosphere through collisional interactions. The systems would be capable of
measuring three-dimensional wind, neutral temperature and sodium density
profiles at high vertical resolution and temporal cadence with a temperature
profile for the range from 30 to 115 km and a wind profile for the range from 80
to 105 km. When neutral Na is present at higher altitudes (possibly as a result
of sporadic layer formations) the wind and temperature observations can then be
extended up to Â­140 km into the lower thermosphere. This unprecedented vertical
measurement range will, for the first time, allow waves to be studied all the
way from the region where they are initiated up to the region where they die
out. The facility will also represent an excellent means of training young
optical engineering physicists that would then be well suited for many possible
career paths in academia and industrial research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
major scientific goals of the research include the following objectives:
&lt;br/&gt;1. characterization of gravity wave (GW) propagation, refraction,
ducting, and energy and momentum transports in variable environments, e.g., MLT
responses to stratospheric warmings, &lt;br/&gt;2. quantification of GW
instability dynamics driving energy and momentum deposition, turbulence, heat,
momentum, and constituent transports, and mixing, &lt;br/&gt;3. understanding
the interactions of GWs with tides and planetary waves, their influences on
these fields, and the evolution of the wave spectrum with altitude, and
&lt;br/&gt;4. contributing to an improved understanding of ion-neutral coupling
in the E region. &lt;br/&gt;Studies employing the USU resonance and Rayleigh
lidar systems will benefit from current and pending measurement capabilities at
the Bear Lake Observatory located nearby the Logan lidar site.