* 1734419
* NRI: FND: Collaborative Multi-Robot Systems with Provable Availability, Safety, and Optimality Guarantees
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Jingjin Yu, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2021
* USD 548,060.00

In recent years, collaborative multi-robot systems have had great initial
success in industrial applications. Notable examples include the deployment of
automated straddle carriers at container shipping ports (e.g., Brisbane,
Rotterdam, Los Angeles) and the use of mobile robots at order fulfillment
centers of online retailers (e.g., Amazon). Operational efficiency plays a
pivotal role in the viability of these multi-robot systems, the underlying
structure of which is yet to be fully understood. A thorough investigation of
large-scale collaborative multi-robot systems will lead to solutions for the
effective routing of many robots in dynamic and dense settings with provable
availability, safety, and optimality guarantees, which will help lower the
barrier of entry for industrial multi-robot applications and contribute to
productivity increases of the US labor force.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algorithmic
issues rising from the domain possess unique features that distinguish them from
well-studied problems. On one hand, classical pickup and delivery problems (PDP)
do not model the non-trivial geometry of physical robots and the possible
collisions among multiple robots sharing a limited workspace. On the other,
multi-robot path and motion planning research has yet to systematically address
the coordination of hundreds to thousands of robots for the continuous execution
of dynamic and stochastic tasks. The proposed study intends to fill this gap
between research and application through the modeling and subsequent algorithmic
resolution of the problem, which we call the dynamic multi-robot dispatching
problem (DMD). Depending on the specific application domain, DMD may be
subdivided into unlabeled (e.g., container unloading from ships) and labeled
(e.g., order fulfillment) variants, providing rich grounds for structural
exploration. Despite the fact that optimal multi-robot coordination is a
computationally intractable problem, preliminary efforts indicate that
approximately optimal solutions could be computed in polynomial time, through
the careful integration of the state-of-the-art multi-robot motion planners and
the global coordination of robot flows. Following this route, the proposed
research will develop algorithmic solutions for DMD with provable availability
and optimality guarantees under stringent safety assurances for human co-
workers. Working with collaborators, the research will also seek to maximize its
applicability to industrial setups.