* 1734500
* American Women Engineers from the Baby Boom Generation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Laura Ettinger, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 237,420.00

This project will investigate the careers and lives of a varied group of
American women engineers who graduated from college in the 1970s. It will
explain why women engineers have made the choices they have and how their
choices have been constrained structurally and culturally. It will contribute to
our understanding of how individual women might negotiate the constraints and
how institutions might work to eliminate them. The results of this research will
be published in engineering and science, technology, and society journals and
eventually a book. They will also contribute to achieving the goal of
encouraging girls and women to become engineers and to persist in engineering
careers. The investigator will use her research to create three-minute videos
featuring pioneering women engineers to be disseminated through the American
Society of Engineering Education, Society of Women Engineers (SWE), and National
Academy of Engineering Engineer Girl websites. She will create several
instructional modules for SWE chapters to use with Girl Scouts and for free
adoption by middle school STEM (science, technology, engineering, and math)
educators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By providing historical context, this project
advances our understanding of why women are less likely than men to become
engineers and the social and institutional biases that keep girls and women away
from engineering. The 1970s was a crucial decade for women in engineering and
yet, the stories of their careers and lives, including the important lessons
they have learned about career persistence, have never been adequately studied.
The project will use a survey, along with in-depth oral history interviews and
follow-up questionnaires, with pioneering women engineers to answer three
questions: 1) How did pioneering women engineers perceive themselves as
navigating the gender stereotypes imposed upon them by society? That is, what
individual and social mechanisms did pioneering women engineers use to negotiate
work in a male-dominated field? 2) What advice do the pioneering women engineers
have for girls and women today? 3) What can the pioneering women engineers' life
experiences, and their perspectives on their life experiences, tell us about the
structures that still need to be put in place or reinforced to encourage women
to go into and persist in engineering careers? Those answers will produce new
knowledge and understanding 1) to help individual girls and women learn
strategies from the pioneering women engineers about how to navigate their
careers and lives, and 2) to help educational institutions, particularly STEM
and engineering educators at all levels, as well as government, industry, and
engineering professional societies, to eliminate barriers for girls and women to
enter and persist in following engineering careers.