* 1734596
* Standard Grant: The Role of Craft Skill in Scientific Practice
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2024
* Pamela Smith, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 313,653.00

This award provides support for the Making and Knowing Project, a research
initiative of the Center for Science and Society at Columbia University. The
research brings together students, practitioners, scholars of the humanities and
social sciences, natural scientists, and specialists from computer science and
the digital humanities in formal university courses and a series of "expert
crowdsourcing" workshops and working groups. The award will support further
development of the project's collaborative and pedagogy-driven research
methodology. It will also facilitate the completion of an open access digital
critical edition and English translation of an important French artisanal and
technical manuscript. The manuscript was never published or extensively studied
prior to this project. It contains a huge variety of recipes and instructions in
areas as varied as medicine, metalworking, surveying, ballistics, pigment and
varnish making, cannon casting, and detailed observations of animal behavior. It
provides an important perspective into the earliest phases of the Scientific
Revolution, when nature was investigated primarily by skilled artisans by means
of continuous and methodical experimentation in the making of objects during a
period when making was knowing. The open-access critical edition will make the
manuscript accessible to diverse audiences, and allow them to experience the
processual knowledge of historical techniques through texts, images, and videos.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF support for this project will enable the research team
to continue laboratory research to increase the accuracy and enhance analysis of
research results, and to transform the extensive research data of the previous
three years, which is now stored in a variety of formats, into the critical
edition for digital publication in 2019. The project is researching the
manuscript's assemblage of written and practiced activity by employing
interdisciplinary methodologies, including hands-on reconstructions of the
recipes (using historically relevant materials, tools, and processes) and new
data visualization and analysis from the digital humanities. The Project is thus
innovating models of cross-disciplinary collaboration and pedagogy-driven
research that will be incorporated into a Research and Pedagogy Template for
scholars who wish to implement the Project's methodologies in their own research
and teaching. The Template will be freely available as a part of the critical
edition and the Project's website. The critical edition will also be freely
accessible to diverse audiences. It will add a rare and important text to an
extremely limited corpus of technical treatises and thereby provide rich
evidence for new scholarship in STS, the history of science and technology, and
other disciplines.