* 1734741
* The PROMISE Engineering Institute
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2017,10/31/2020
* Renetta Tull, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 10/31/2020
* USD 399,999.00

The PROMISE Engineering Institute is a diversity and inclusion effort for the
State of Maryland that brings together the state's largest engineering entities
to collaborate for the purpose of actively increasing engineering faculty
diversity within Maryland. The effort's uniqueness lies with its plan to
facilitate faculty diversity by actively leveraging partnerships to provide
underrepresented early-career and future engineering professors with intentional
professional national and international networks. These networks are designed to
increase participants exposure within the engineering community, retain them in
the academy, and propel research collaborations particularly related to the
National Academy of Engineering's Grand Challenges, and strengthen engineering
identity and cultural competencies within engineering's national landscape. The
project involves advanced graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, visiting
professors, and assistant professors from each of Maryland's engineering schools
and colleges: The College of Engineering &amp; IT at the University of Maryland
Baltimore County (UMBC), The Clark School of Engineering at the University of
Maryland College Park (UMCP), The Whiting School of Engineering at Johns Hopkins
University, and the Clarence M. Mitchell School of Engineering at Morgan State
University. The PROMISE Engineering Institute will be established with support
from the University System of Maryland (12 institutions) and the Maryland
Independent College and University Association (15 member institutions).
Further, participating scholars will have the opportunity to develop national
and international networks to facilitate their interest and engagement in
collaborative research and attention to global problems through the PROMISE
Engineering Institute's committed partnerships with the Southern Regional
Educational Board's Doctoral Scholars Program and Institute for Teaching and
Mentoring (SREB), the William Averette Anderson Fund (Bill Anderson Fund , BAF),
the Latin and Caribbean Consortium of Engineering Institutions (LACCEI), the
Global Engineering Deans Council (GEDC), the World Engineering Education Forum
(WEEF), the International Federation of Engineering Education Societies (IFEES),
and the international Center for the Integration of Teaching, Research, and
Learning (CIRTL). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PROMISE Engineering Institute effort
is designed to unify the faculty diversity commitment of the engineering schools
within the state, by adding support and commitment from the University System of
Maryland (USM) and the Maryland Independent College and University Association
(MICUA). The statewide collaborative will address faculty diversity on a broad
scale, with shared responsibility across the state's engineering programs. The
project will engage in four activities: 1) Portal: There will be a statewide
online portal that will showcase engineering advanced graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows who are available for faculty positions. 2) Training:
Participants will receive professional development and training for
collaboration through participation in national and international efforts that
will assist with providing them with a global network, key for the engineering
disciplines. Further, the training portion will provide scholars with
comprehensive research and pedagogical skills. 3) Placement: Campuses in the
State of Maryland will collaborate to develop new opportunities to attract
diverse scholars such as post-doc to tenure-track conversion models, and
collaborative industry-based visiting professorships. These are targeted faculty
placement initiatives, supplemented by "toward tenure" activities. 4) Support:
The project will facilitate transitional support for new postdocs and assistant
professors by bringing together current engineering faculty mentors within
departments where scholars are placed, to discuss and develop strong support
mechanisms that will facilitate retention. The project will also build
communities of practice among the participating scholars that will assist with
preparing for roles as engineering faculty. This portion of the project is
designed to facilitate collaborative networks of engineering faculty from all
races and ranks that connect within and across engineering departments in
Maryland The project will be evaluated by Westat, which has developed a logic
model that shows the objective as facilitating faculty appointments among
scholars who are underrepresented minority (URM) group members in engineering.