* 1734126
* Geobiology 2017: The Inaugural International Conference of the Geobiology Society
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Timothy Lyons, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 09/30/2019
* USD 59,400.00

Much as chemists and physicists brought their tools and expertise to bear on
studies of the Earth to create geochemistry and geophysics in the middle of the
20th century, geochemists and microbiologists today have merged their toolkits
toward an unprecedented exploration of the co-evolution of Earth's life and
physical environments in a maturing field of science known as geobiology. To
support the progress of geobiology as an integrated discipline, this project
funds participation by U.S.-based scientists in the inaugural conference of the
Geobiology Society, scheduled for June 11-14, 2017, in Banff, Canada, a world-
famous geobiological destination in its own right. Recognizing that a single,
international, community-building conference was critically needed to bring
together this first generation of self-identifying geobiologists, the Geobiology
Society designed this conference to promote the exchange of ideas, tools, and
expertise with emphasis on contributions from early-career scientists (newly
hired assistant professors, postdoctoral fellows, and graduate students).
Reducing participation costs for U.S.-based scientists, who will make up ~70% of
the estimated 350 total participants, is a key part of the Geobiology Society's
plan to ensure accessibility to this initial meeting, which will in turn seed
its long-term sustainability. The society's pledge to sustaining these
inclusive, community-building efforts for all stages of scientific experience is
in itself a broader impact. In addition, each student attendee will prepare a
digital poster presentation to be bundled into an online conference proceedings
volume that will be made publically available on the Geobiology Society
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leading scientists from both geochemistry and
geophysics have recognized the need to bring together scientists with different
backgrounds to enhance cross-disciplinary communication. Yet a recent NSF-
sponsored workshop on Geomicrobiology and Microbial Geochemistry (October 2013)
identified barriers to exchange of relevant information (e.g., on methodologies)
among different sub-disciplines as one of the main obstacles to advancing the
field of geobiology. Although expertise in any given aspect of geobiology
requires specialized training, it is the cross-fertilization among these
seemingly disparate fields that defines geobiology, and highlights the need for
this shared conference. Because a major goal of this conference is to facilitate
bridge building across the disparate fields that define geobiology, particularly
from the geological and biological ends of the spectrum, morning programs will
be devoted to a single series of oral sessions that all participants will
attend; there will be no overlapping or conflicting sessions. The first two full
days will explore the modern tools of organic and inorganic geochemistry,
molecular biology, microbial ecology, sedimentary geology, and paleontology. The
third full day will focus on interpretations of the rock record, including key
studies of the modern world that enhance our ability to look back. The
afternoons are designed for extended student poster sessions. Additionally,
there will be informal talks offered during the poster sessions covering a range
of topics, including data visualization, new technological advances in
instrumentation, and tips for searching and securing a job.