* 1734336
* Conference: Dream Catcher or Dream Killer: The Impact of Gateway Courses on Transfer Students in the Biological Sciences; U.C-Davis; Summer/Fall, 2017
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2017,03/31/2018
* Raymond Rodriguez, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* William Hoese
* 03/31/2018
* USD 49,980.00

This two day conference will launch a network of educational stakeholders from
community colleges and the University of California (UC) to develop and
implement a shared vision for the support and preparation of biology transfer
students. The disparity in performance and career trajectories of biology
transfer students compared to freshman start students is a critical problem that
must be addressed, particularly in light of the high percentage of
underrepresented and underserved students attending California community
colleges. The proposed conference is the first of its kind in the region for
educators and advisors from these institutions to meet and discuss the
curriculum and expectations of their courses and programs, challenges students
face, and potential solutions. This is particularly important for biology given
the very large number of majors, student diversity, and the transformative and
fast pace of changes in discoveries and technology with numerous
interdisciplinary ties to other STEM fields. The results of this effort have the
potential to impact thousands of transfer students a year and represents an
initial effort to generate a scalable, collaborative, and sustainable
instructional model for California and beyond.

The conference will include 55-60 individuals with equal representation from the
UC and the community colleges. UC Davis campus is an ideal central location in
Northern California with over 32 community colleges within a 100-mile radius.
Two to four members from each institution will be identified and invited
(including faculty, advisors, transfer coordinators, administrators) to insure a
multifaceted view of the issues and buy-in from all stakeholders. The specific
objectives include the following: 1) to establish more effective lines of
communication between the UCs and community colleges in order to develop a
shared vision; 2) to gather information about misalignments between the biology
curriculum and prerequisites; 3) to initiate efforts toward better supporting
successful learning progression for transfer students; 4) to discuss how the
rapidly changing pace of research and technology is impacting curricula and
requirements; and 5) to discuss instructional interventions and new teaching
methods that could break the "sink or swim" instructional model that has plagued
transfer students for many years.

This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences
and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).