* 1734461
* NRI: INT: MANUFACTURING USA: COLLAB: In-Situ Collaborative Robotics in Confined Spaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Nabil Simaan, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2023
* USD 814,000.00

Many manufacturing operations require workers to perform operations in confined
spaces, subjecting them to possible fatigue and injury from performing tedious
tasks in non-ergonomic postures. Intelligent robotic assistants can facilitate
safe and ergonomic reach into such spaces, while allowing human workers to
remain physically present and in full control over delicate operations. The
project will investigate the use of highly reconfigurable, in-situ,
collaborative robots (ISCRs) with the enhanced perception and support-autonomy
needed to allow a worker and a robot to safely share a common space and
collaborate through physical interaction. Conventional robots cannot be used as
ISCRs because they are bulky, special-purpose and difficult to program. This
project's ISCRs are expected to reduce worker fatigue and musculoskeletal
injuries, which are responsible for more than 34 percent of lost work days in
the United States, and increase worker productivity. Their added intelligence is
also expected to make the robots easier to use, by offering a human-friendly
means of interaction. The research has potential applications in the aerospace
industry, including the manufacture and service of the fuselage and wings,
inspection and repair of hydraulic lines or fuel tanks and pipes, caulking,
welding of structural joints and deburring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work to
support effective human-robot collaboration in confined spaces makes three main
technical contributions: 1) design and control strategies for ISCRs, 2) contact
detection and location estimation and 3) simultaneous contact-force and
navigation (SCAN) planning, so that a robot can use bracing to maneuver deep
into a confined space. The ISCRs allow compliance and robustness to geometric
uncertainty, reduced inertia, contact sensing and regulated force of interaction
with the environment. This new design enables the exploration of real-time
estimation for contact state detection, a screw-theoretic approach for
constraint identification, and stiffness modeling. The research will also
develop planners to achieve SCAN within a semi-structured environment with
uncertainty and will use intentional contact to allow enable the robot to reach
deep into confined spaces.