* 1734319
* Collaborative Research:  Preformed Laser-driven Plasma Waveguides for Multi-GeV Laser-Plasma Electron Acceleration
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Rafal Zgadzaj, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

This research project aims to demonstrate the physical principles underlying a
new type of electron accelerator that would be thousands of times smaller and
less expensive than the best modern accelerators. Since the 1930s, scientists
have built ever bigger and more expensive machines, called accelerators, to
accelerate electrons to more than 99% of the speed of light, which Einstein
discovered to be the speed limit of the universe. At such enormous speeds,
electrons can probe into nature's deepest subatomic secrets, irradiate cancerous
tumors, and generate powerful x-rays that measure the structure of molecules
essential to life. One of America's biggest electron accelerators, a 2-mile-long
machine called "SLAC" (which originally stood for "Stanford Linear Accelerator
Center") accelerates electrons to 99.99999999% of the speed of light. The energy
carried by such an electron, at 30 giga-electronvolts (GeV), is less than a
mosquito uses to flap its wings once, but it's a lot of energy for one electron.
The goal of this research project is to enable tabletop electron accelerators
that are thousands of times smaller and less expensive than SLAC, but which can
nevertheless accelerate electrons to the same energy as SLAC does. The new
technology is a long, narrow pipe made of plasma, or ionized gas (the same state
of matter one finds inside fluorescent light bulbs and stars). This pipe is a
"racetrack" that is intended ultimately to confine and guide electrons, and a
powerful laser pulse that fuels their acceleration, until they reach 30 GeV. A
separate powerful laser will be used to shape the fluid-like plasma into a pipe.
Computer calculations will be used to understand how the plasma pipe forms, and
a model version of the pipe will be demonstrated in the laboratory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-year project will elucidate the science
underlying the formation of cylindrical plasma waveguides with axial electron
density in the range between 1 and 3 times 10^17 particles per cm^3 and radius
of ~50 µm. Such waveguides can ultimately guide 100 J, 150 fs drive pulses from
the Texas Petawatt (PW) Laser in a low-order mode at relativistic intensity up
to the pump depletion limit, in order to extend the performance of a single-
stage 2 GeV laser-plasma electron accelerator to the tens-of-GeV level. The
channel formation method is based upon physical principles developed during the
1990s, but is being extended to ~20x lower plasma density. Formation of short
(~1 cm) channels in tenuous He plasma will be demonstrated, using 2J, 80-300 ps
drive pulses available in the laboratory at the University of Texas at Austin.
This prototype setup will enable the duration, energy and focus of channel-
forming pulse, and the pre-ionization and doping conditions that optimize plasma
heating and channel formation at low plasma density to be discovered.
Simulations of channel formation in tenuous helium, and channeled propagation of
relativistic laser pulses, by the research group at the University of Colorado
Boulder will guide experiments. The intellectual merit lies in discovering
laser-plasma conditions that optimize formation of high quality, single-mode
plasma channels of lower density than ever previously demonstrated. The broader
impacts include developing plasma waveguide technology that may ultimately
extend single-stage energy gain of future laser-plasma accelerators to levels
typical of SLAC; advancing the careers of three doctoral students from
historically under-represented groups; and introducing an undergraduate student
to professional research.