* 1734727
* AMPS:   Advanced Mathematical Algorithms for Model Reduction and Stochastic Modeling for the Emerging Power Grid
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Barry Lee, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 246,419.00

This project will develop tools to analyze and help design robust and resilient
modern power grid systems. The emergent power grid is very different from the
traditional grid, which is based on technology dating back to the early 20'th
century. With new technologies and regulatory policies, new challenges are
arising in the design of stable power systems that can reliably deliver electric
power. To tackle these challenges, mathematical and computational tools are
needed to analyze these power grids with the new features. The goal of this
project is to develop these mathematical and computational tools. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project will examine model reduction,
uncertainty/stochasticity, and stability, which are some of the new features
that must be incorporated in the models of the modern grid. Stability will be
the connecting theme in these topics since stability is required to ensure a
resilient grid with reduced risks. The PI will examine (1) how synchrony in the
oscillations of the grid can be used to determine coherent sets of generators
and loads for accurate model reduction; (2) what are the relevant structures
that must be reserved to produce accurate reduced models; (3) how to develop
multilevel solvers for decentralized systems; (4) how stochasticity affects the
synchrony, coherency, model reduction, and stability of the grid; and (5) how
observed data can be assimilated into the stochastic models. The stochasticity
will be incorporated using stochastic differential-algebraic equations. This
stochasticity will be introduced using the Orstein-Uhlenbeck process that best
describes the stochasticity in the components of the system.