* 1734332
* The Science and Fundamental Understanding of the Radio Frequency Surface Resistance of Nitrogen Doped SRF cavities
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Anna Grassellino, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 470,000.00

The research enabled by this award will improve the understanding of one of the
physical processes that determine, and may ultimately limit, the performance of
future particle accelerators. Particle accelerators have a wide variety of uses,
from basic research machines for fundamental studies of elementary particle
physics to tools and instruments ranging from industrial welding to medical
diagnostics and treatment. One of the key limiting factors for particle
accelerators can be the performance of superconducting, radio-frequency cavities
that are used to accelerate the electrically charged particles. By discovering
the mechanisms presently contributing to energy dissipation within such
cavities, we can push the technology to theoretical limits for the next
generation of superconducting particle accelerators. This research project
involves the training of graduate students as the next generation of research
leaders with expertise in accelerator science and technology, as well as the
physics of superconducting materials for particle accelerators and related
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and graduate
education in the field of superconducting, radio-frequency (RF) accelerator
science. The research supported by this award is directed towards a fundamental
understanding of the physical processes governing the region of field
penetration into Nitrogen-doped Niobium superconductors used in state-of-the-art
RF cavities for particle accelerators. The research involves physical and
chemical characterization, on the sub-nanometer scale, of the sub-micron deep
surface layer near the vacuum-superconducting interface where the RF screening
currents flow. Surface profile characterization, from sub-nano-meter to micron
length scales, will be carried out, and combined with local electronic and
magnetic properties obtained from atom-probe reconstruction, nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy, and transport measurements in the normal metallic phase
of Niobium. The detailed atomic-scale structure of the surface and screening
region will be combined with state-of-the-art theoretical modeling and
computational theory for the RF currents under high-field conditions. The
overarching goal is to push performance of next-generation superconducting RF
cavities to theoretical limits.