* 1734264
* Hierarchical control of sequential skills: Using EEG to decode the underlying representations
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Ulrich Mayr, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2022
* USD 498,721.00

Many of the most interesting human activities result from basic building blocks
of behavior being structured into appropriate sequences. For example, speaking
involves the combination of individual syllables into words and sentences;
while, performing music involves the combination of notes into melody. The mind
must represent these activities in terms of the hierarchical structures that
combine the basic elements. Deficits in the ability to implement such
structures, due to neurological disorders or aging, can have wide-ranging
consequences for real-world functioning. Little is currently known about the
mental representations that enable these sequential skills, or about how
deficits in fluent sequential performance arise from disruptions to these
representations. This project develops new methods for tracking these mental
representations using electrophysiological signals recorded at the scalp (EEG).
These methods will allow the pinpointing of the exact sources of individual and
age-related differences and provide initial hints for the origin of deficits due
to disease or brain insults. The project provides training and educational
opportunities in sophisticated brain-imaging and data-analytic techniques for
undergraduate and graduate students and contains a science-education component
for underprivileged high-school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cognitive
scientists have long assumed that the critical, hierarchically-organized
structures that support sequenced behaviors rely on a special set of mental
representations that organize complex sequences into smaller parts (often
referred to as chunks), or that mark the position within a chunk. Yet, because
of their abstract nature, it has been very difficult to empirically track these
hidden representations. The central hypothesis tested in this project is that
rhythmic, electrophysiological signals contain robust information about how
strongly these mental representations are activated at a given point in time.
The planned experiments will examine the validity and robustness of new, EEG-
based methods of tracking mental representations. Individual experiments will
determine how exactly positions or chunks are represented and will test specific
hypotheses about how individual or adult, age-related differences in cognitive
resources (e.g., working-memory capacity) affect sequential representations.
This project will equip researchers with refined theories about how sequential
information is processed, and more generally with a novel set of analytic tools
to characterize complex, cognitive performance.