* 1735414
* Collaborative Research: Electron Acceleration and Emissions from the Solar Flare Termination Shock
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Fan Guo, New Mexico Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 08/31/2020
* USD 90,000.00

This collaborative research project plans to make significant progress toward
our understanding of one of the key problems in solar physics; i.e., the
question of how electrons are accelerated within solar flares. Solar flares are
the strongest explosions in the Solar System, and they provide sites for
particle acceleration and high-energy emission. However, the question of exactly
how this acceleration occurs remains unsolved. The project will combine two
powerful numerical models that will enable the principal investigators (PIs) to
simulate the physics over a wide range of scales from the large scale flares
that produce shock waves down to the smallest scales where the particle
acceleration occurs. This project will also support the training of the next
generation of solar scientists. The PIs will involve both undergraduate and
graduate students in the research, and funding is provided for a postdoctoral
researcher for the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In solar flares, a termination
shock can develop when a high-speed outflow from the flare encounters magnetic
loops in the solar atmosphere forming a standing shock wave that can accelerate
particles to high energies. These shock waves had been predicted but never
observed until recent X-ray and radio observations by one of the PIs (Chen).
Motivated by this recent discovery, this project plans to investigate the
dynamical evolution of termination shocks and their acceleration of electrons by
combining, for the first time, two powerful numerical simulations: (1) large-
scale magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) models of the dynamical evolution of a flare and
(2) particle-in-cell kinetic and test-particle simulations for electron
acceleration at the shock front. From the combined numerical model the PIs plan
to generate synthetic hard X-ray emission and compare this emission with
observations.