* 1735765
* Laboratory Technician Support: Enhancing High-Precision 40Ar/39Ar Dating at the OSU Argon Geochronology Laboratory
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Anthony Koppers, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 699,333.00

The OSU Argon Geochronology Laboratory has employed K/Ar and 40Ar/39Ar dating
methods at Oregon State University (OSU) since 1969. Our user-base is ever-
growing and ranges from students, post-docs and collaborators at OSU to many
clients and collaborators throughout the U.S. and internationally. Over the last
decade, we have substantially upgraded our facility and we now have in operation
two new ARGUS-VI multi-collector mass spectrometers. Applying the ARGUS-VI to
modern-day 40Ar/39Ar geochronology has provided us with a quantum leap forward
in precision, accuracy and throughput of analyses. Our analytical precision is
10x improved using 60-95% less material. In addition, with two fully-automated
ARGUS-VI instruments now online, we are projecting to carry out more than 70,000
analyses/year on ~1,300 samples from ~130 different research or educational
projects. With this proposal, we will hire an experienced geochronologist with
an MS or PhD degree and experience in 40Ar/39Ar geochronology. The successful
candidate is envisioned to expand our expertise beyond our current research
areas and would double our capacity for supporting the in-creasing number of
NSF-funded geochronology projects in our laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
research made possible through the ARGUS-VI instruments in the OSU Argon
Geochronology Laboratory include the high-precision dating of (i) Late
Pleistocene and Holocene sanidine and volcanic samples as young as a few
thousand years, (ii) magnetic reversals and excursions in terrestrial lava flow
records, (iii) low-potassium basalts from ocean crust, bonitites and tholeiites,
(iv) ultra-low-potassium clinopyroxene, and (v) terrestrial volcanic centers
younger than 5 Ma to improve our understanding their eruptive histories and
related geohazards. These five examples of our recent advances, provide an
exciting foundation for growing our research enterprise over the next decade.
The new 40Ar/39Ar geochronology technician will play a critical role in building
out those research avenues, while bringing to OSU research interests and skill
sets that significantly expand our laboratory?s research portfolio.