* 1735295
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Segregation and Its Effects on Social Disparities in Exposure to Air Pollution
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Yoo Min Park, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 08/31/2019
* USD 10,607.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will examine how racial and ethnic
segregation impacts the unequal exposure to air pollution by considering the
full range of spaces individuals experience daily (e.g., home, workplace, and
leisure activity locations). The doctoral student will develop an individual-
level segregation measure that incorporates this more comprehensive
conceptualization of segregation and combine it with a method for assessing
personal exposure to air pollution at a high spatiotemporal resolution. This new
fine-grained approach will enable investigators to more reliably examine the
association between segregation and the disparity in exposure to air pollution
because it can improve on several methodological problems in previous studies
that were solely residence-based. Moving beyond simplistic understandings based
solely on residential segregation, the research findings will yield new insights
into how the disparities in environmental exposures are shaped through complex
socio-spatial processes and how non-residential segregation contributes to those
disparities. The investigators will collaborate with relevant organizations and
agencies to disseminate the project findings. Findings will provide more nuanced
knowledge for future policy recommendations by emphasizing the need for policies
that consider human daily mobility. The findings will also help promote general
awareness and understanding of the unfair burdens of air pollution and the
urgent need to address such disparities. This new knowledge will contribute to a
more inclusive and comprehensive participation in policy-making and engagement
in a constructive dialogue about environmental justice and a wider range of
social disparity issues stemming from segregation.

This project addresses three specific research questions: 1) Do individuals
experience different levels of segregation over the course of a day, and if so,
do racial minorities experience higher levels of segregation both during the
daytime (i.e., in non-residential areas) and at night (i.e., in residential
areas) than the majority? 2) Are the average exposure levels of different racial
groups different, and if so, which group faces the highest level of exposure to
air pollution? 3) How does the observed segregation at different times of day
affect the disparity in total daily exposure to air pollution? The first
question will be addressed by developing a new segregation measure that
considers spatiotemporal proximity among individuals in combination with an
activity-travel diary dataset that includes personal characteristics and
detailed daily travel information (e.g., geocoded locations and time durations
of trips). The differences between time periods will be examined using a
repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA). To answer the second question
the doctoral student will use a geographic information system (GIS) to integrate
exposure level data with diary data, as well as hourly air pollution data
produced from air dispersion modeling. An ANOVA will then be conducted to
compare the racial differences. The third question will be answered by geo-
visualizing the spatial relationship between segregation at different times and
differential exposures to air pollution using GIS and by conducting regression
analyses on the association. This project will be based in the greater Atlanta,
Georgia, region, but will be generating information that will be applicable to
many other metropolitan locations in the United States.