* 1735587
* CRISP Type 2: dMIST: Data-driven Management for Interdependent Stormwater and Transportation Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Michael Gorman, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,499,238.00

The overarching objective of this Critical Resilient Interdependent
Infrastructure Systems and Processes (CRISP) research project is to create a
novel decision support system denoted dMIST (Data-driven Management for
Interdependent Stormwater and Transportation Systems) to improve management of
interdependent transportation and stormwater infrastructure systems. dMIST is
designed specifically to address the critical problem of recurrent flooding
caused by sea level rise and more frequent intense storms. The City of Norfolk,
Virginia, a national leader in addressing the sea level rise challenge, will
collaborate with the research team and serve as the project testbed. With sea
level rise and more frequent intense storms, streets in many cities now flood
multiple times per year. Flooding of roadways has cascading impacts to other
infrastructure systems that depend on the road network including emergency
services. Solving the problem of flooded roadways requires new tools capable of
analyzing stormwater, transportation, and other infrastructure as interdependent
systems. dMIST will be a recommendation system for assisting municipal decision
makers and stakeholders in day-to-day operations to mitigate the short-term
impacts of road flooding occurrences. It will also offer decision makers novel
ways of testing "what if" scenarios that stretch across interdependent
infrastructure systems in order to guide how large investments are used to adapt
infrastructure systems to a more resilient
future&lt;br/&gt;state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core intellectual merit of this
research is the advancement of a novel modeling and control framework called
Data Predictive Control (DPC) for assisting decision makers in understanding and
managing interdependent critical infrastructure systems (ICIs). The research is
expected to provide four key novel contributions that are critically needed for
management of ICIs using DPC. The research is targeted to result in: (1) new
methods for data-driven, control-oriented modeling for real-time operations and
control synthesis of interdependent stormwater and transportation networks that
will complement the knowledge already encoded in existing infrastructure models
and decision-making processes; (2) new hybrid-modeling approaches for long-term
planning of infrastructure systems that combine the benefits of data-driven
models with physics-based (first principles) models to allow decision-makers to
explore "what if" scenarios; (3) new recommendation systems whose interpretive
capabilities will be evolved in consultation with decision-makers and
stakeholders, with this consultation process being studied as part of the
research; and (4) new methods to reduce sensing costs that analyze the
confidence of recommendations from hybrid models, and how that confidence
changes with hypothetical new sensor investments. The research is intended to
have broad impact related to national economic and security interests due to its
focus on sea level rise. Sea level rise of an additional foot is estimated to
cost our nation $200 billion. Given that a common projection for sea level rise
is four feet by the end of the century and the nonlinear relationship between
sea level rise and infrastructure costs, the total cost will be much higher.
This project is also designed to have an immediate impact on Norfolk, the
testbed site. Norfolk, because they are considered to be the second most
vulnerable city in the nation to sea level rise impacts, provides an ideal
testbed for the research goal of producing generalizable outcomes that can be
applied to other cities in order to get ahead of this problem. To this end, a
specific aim of this work is to encourage innovation in the growing industry of
real-time infrastructure monitoring and control to address the challenges
introduced by sea level rise.