* 1735752
* EXP: Development of Human Language Technologies to Improve Disciplinary Writing and Learning through Self-Regulated Revising
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Diane Litman, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2022
* USD 557,555.00

Writing and revising are essential parts of learning, yet many college students
graduate without&lt;br/&gt;demonstrating improvement or mastery of academic
writing. This project explores the feasibility&lt;br/&gt;of improving students'
academic writing through a revision environment that integrates
natural&lt;br/&gt;language processing methods, best practices in data
visualization and user interfaces, and&lt;br/&gt;current pedagogical theories.
The environment will support and encourage students to develop&lt;br/&gt;self-
regulation skills that are necessary for writing and revising, including goal-
setting, selection&lt;br/&gt;of writing strategies, and self-monitoring of
progress. As a learning technology, the environment&lt;br/&gt;can be applied on
a large scale, thereby improving the writing of diverse student
populations,&lt;br/&gt;including English learners. Additionally, the project's
multidisciplinary training of graduate&lt;br/&gt;students is focused on
increasing diversity in cyberlearning research and development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three stages of investigation are planned. First, to
analyze data on students' revision behaviors,&lt;br/&gt;a series of experiments
are conducted to study interactions between students&lt;br/&gt;and variations of
the revision writing environment. Second, the collected data forms the
gold&lt;br/&gt;standard for developing an end-to-end system that automatically
extracts revisions between&lt;br/&gt;student drafts and identifies the goal for
each revision. Multiple extraction algorithms are&lt;br/&gt;considered,
including phrasal alignment based on semantic similarity metrics and deep
learning&lt;br/&gt;approaches. To identify the goal of a revision, a supervised
classifier is trained from the gold&lt;br/&gt;standard. A diverse set of
features and the representations of the identified goals
(e.g.,&lt;br/&gt;granularity, scope) are explored. In addition to the "extract-
then-classify" pipeline, an alternative&lt;br/&gt;joint sequence labeling model
is also developed. The labeling of sequences is used to&lt;br/&gt;recognize
revision goals and the sequences are mutated to generate possible corrections
of&lt;br/&gt;sentence alignments for revision extraction. The writing
environment is iteratively refined,&lt;br/&gt;augmenting the interface
prototyping through frequent user studies. Third, a complete&lt;br/&gt;end-to-
end system that integrates the most successful component models is deployed
in&lt;br/&gt;college-level writing classes. Student progress is tracked across
multiple assignments.