* 1735654
* Science Policy Research Report: A Synthesis of Available Information and Analysis of Knowledge Gaps to Advance Groundwater Security Under Drought
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Ruth Langridge, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 12/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

Groundwater provides 25 percent of fresh water used in the United States, which
is especially significant during drought when pumping is increased to compensate
for reduced surface supplies. Groundwater depletion is extensive in many areas
and there is a critical need to reduce drought vulnerability. This project
summarizes the scientific evidence, makes policy recommendations, and
illuminates important information gaps, regarding the important relationships
between groundwater and drought. This policy research report integrates physical
and social science research to provide an understanding of the relationship
between groundwater management and drought resilience and communicates results
and policy recommendations to local, state and federal agencies and
policymakers, academic scholars, water management utilities and water users, as
they consider future strategies to reduce drought impacts, including water
shortages, through more effective groundwater management.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effective groundwater management requires an
interdisciplinary proces. This project synthesizes and reviews data from the
physical sciences, the social sciences, and the legal and policy literature, to
identify knowledge gaps. Issues that will be addressed include the
hydrogeophysical characteristics of a basin as these affect groundwater use and
management and water supply security, and the potential impact of future
droughts under climate change on water supplies and the effect of competing
interests and climate uncertainty on decisionmaking regarding groundwater use
and management, and the benefits and impacts of particular management approaches
and their distribution. The legal and policy programs that exist to support
groundwater security and sustainability and increase drought resilience, and
potential incentives that can reduce resource degradation and promote more
equitable access are considered. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;