* 1735804
* EXP: Collaborative Research: Cultivating Apprenticeship Learning for Architecture, Engineering, and Construction Using Mixed Reality
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Wei Wu, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2022
* USD 139,365.00

For students pursuing careers in the architecture, engineering, and construction
industry, learning multi-faceted skills are critical for career success. To
enable this range of skill development, many schools and universities
participate in student-based design and build competitions, where teams of
students build actual structures to learn some of these tactile skills. While
these competitions can be beneficial for learning, they can also be cost and
resource intensive, which limits access to this type of learning experience.
This research aims to explore the use of mixed reality as a cyberlearning
technology to assess how this type of increasingly affordable technology may be
able to provide a similar type of learning experience for physical construction
activities. Such insights will advance the understanding of how people learn
about Architecture, Engineering, and Construction topics, specifically, and with
cyberlearning environments, in general. In the near term, this work will support
authentic learning and skill development by leveraging emerging technologies.
This approach will offer an educational experience that requires fewer resources
than required for a physical design/build experience. In the long term, this
study will provide a genre of cyberlearning to prepare students for careers
better and faster than traditional approaches. This is especially critical
because this hugely impactful industry has struggled in recent years with
productivity issues; this will be further challenged as it approaches a major
labor shortage. This work offers a new, and potentially more accessible,
approach for preparing the next generation of Architecture, Engineering, and
Construction professionals capable of improving the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to: develop
markerless mixed reality technology (using a Microsoft HoloLens®) aimed at
sufficiently replicating physical design and construction learning environments
to enable access to students at institutions without sufficient resources; and
assess the impact of a mixed reality facilitated cyberlearning environment on
promoting cognitive-, affective-, and skill-based learning that occurs during
traditional (in-person) design and construction activities. Carnegie's Three
Apprenticeships --of the head, heart, and hand-- serves as the theoretical
underpinning for this study. The following research questions guide this study:
1) Can mixed reality sufficiently replicate the physical environment and
simulate the experience of project design and construction in the building
industry? 2) In what ways can a mixed reality cyberlearning environment enable
access to learning experiences that are otherwise inaccessible? 3) To what
extent does the mixed reality-facilitated cyberlearning environment promote the
cognitive-, affective-, and skill-based learning that occurs during traditional
design and construction activities? Through a collaborative partnership, the two
institutions involved in this work will test this cyberlearning environment with
students at two remote locations. One location includes a physical building
structure for students to explore, and the other will only include the mixed
reality environment. This approach will enable the research team to identify the
unique value provided by mixed reality where physical presence is unavailable.
Through this structured research, it will also help qualitatively and
quantitatively evaluate the impacts on explicit and tacit knowledge generation
through mixed reality for apprenticeship learning in the Architecture,
Engineering, and Construction industry. Ultimately, the work will provide
intellectual contributions related to: advancing the development of markerless
mixed reality as a cyberlearning technology; enhancing the understanding of
learning related to the Three Apprenticeships model; and increasing the
understanding of how students learn in a mixed reality cyberlearning environment
through a structured research methodology. Findings of this research will
provide empirical evidence and guidance for future research initiatives aimed at
further leveraging the unique educational value provided by mixed reality.