* 1735781
* Type II: University of Utah Center for Medical Innovation I-Corps Site
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Tomasz Petelenz, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 356,783.00

This project, from the University of Utah, creates an I-Corps Site at this
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-
funded entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and
support multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps
Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the
National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a Type II proposal, requesting a
"renewal" of funding for an existing I-Corps Site. There are two types of
I-Corps Site proposals. Type I proposals are submitted by institutions that have
not had prior funding as an I-Corps Site. These proposals may request $100,000
per year for up to five years. Type II proposals are submitted by institutions
that have had prior funding as an I-Corps Site. These proposals may request up
to $100,000 per year for up to three years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University
of Utah I-Corps Site program encourages and assists students and faculty in
transitioning research projects to commercialization by providing education,
training, resources and networking required for understanding markets,
customers, product-market fit and to answer business and/or technology
questions. The I-Corps Site program at the University of Utah is currently in
its 3rd year and has trained nearly 90 teams and over 150 participants. The
program resulted in successful business and technology go/no-go decisions,
successful transition to commercialization, and helped advance five technologies
to the commercial start-up stage. This extension focuses on refining the
curriculum by implementing lessons learned in the first three years of the
program, developing new teams and generating more successful transitions, as
well as implementing the new financing model that will assure future program
sustainability without further government funding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Utah
I-Corps Site enhances and builds upon this institution's existing expertise in
medical device innovation, commercialization and entrepreneurship. This Site
initiated the development of a model of transitioning from research-based
technologies to viable commercial products in academic environment that allows
the university to expand their innovation programs, provide more impactful
resources to faculty and student innovation teams and improve recruitment of
underrepresented participants. This extension further generalizes and
disseminates the developed curriculum and implements agreements and procedures
to assure its future financial sustainability. Partnership networks within the
university support underrepresented student and faculty groups and offer the
support and resources needed to help such groups thrive and participate in the
process and, as the program becomes self-sustaining, will be extended, through
internships and special courses to other colleges and local high schools. Thus,
the program helps increase the diversity of the regional business environment
leading to enhanced growth and economic prosperity for all citizens in the
region.