* 1735143
* Collaborative Research: NRT-IGE: The NAVIGATE Project: A Case-Study Approach to Overcoming Barriers to Advancement for Women in STEM
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Nancy Schiller, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 08/31/2022
* USD 428,873.00

Women are underrepresented in STEM disciplines despite widespread efforts to
increase participation, creating an economic barrier as industry demand for STEM
employees grows rapidly with advancing technology. Even more apparent is the
shortage of women in leadership roles in STEM fields. Many women in STEM
disciplines continue to be dissuaded from lofty career goals when they encounter
gender bias, discrimination and inequity, reporting that they find it
challenging to navigate these adverse situations without derailing their
careers. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award in
the Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) Track to the University at Buffalo
and California Polytechnic State University will support the development of the
NAVIGATE Project, which aims to increase the number of women STEM graduates who
persist in their chosen disciplines, and achieve leadership roles. The NAVIGATE
Project is an innovative training program that relies on Case Study Teaching
Methods to increase the skills of STEM women to navigate effectively past
instances of bias, inequity or discrimination in the workforce. Persistence
within career paths will be increased, and the numbers of women in leadership
roles nationally will be enhanced. A team comprising scientists and engineers,
academic and industry leaders, case studies teaching experts, and evaluation and
educational researchers will design and implement the program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NAVIGATE program employs a proven pedagogy from
business, law, and medicine, the Case Study Teaching Method, which has been
shown to promote internalization of learning and the development of analytical,
problem-solving and decision-making skills, to empower women STEM graduate
students to recognize and combat gender bias, inequity and discrimination. The
program is informed by current theories of equity, diversity and inclusion, and
by literature on the issues women STEM professionals encounter in the workforce.
This project will test, for the first time, the effectiveness of the Case Study
Method for developing students' skills to navigate these issues. The project
team will use a mixed methods research design to collect qualitative and
quantitative data to evaluate the effectiveness of the graduate training
program. The team will create a collection of case studies that will be widely
disseminated through the National Center for Case Study Teaching in Science or
through Lead it Yourself, an NSF-funded project hosted by the University of
Washington. The project addresses a national priority to grow and diversify the
STEM workforce with methods that have not previously been tried and tested.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to
encourage the development and implementation of bold, new, potentially
transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The Innovations in
Graduate Education Track is dedicated solely to piloting, testing, and
evaluating novel, innovative, and potentially transformative approaches to
graduate education.