* 1735316
* NRT: Quantitative &amp; Evolutionary STEM Training (QUEST): An Integrative Training Program for Versatile STEM Professionals to Solve Environmental and Global Health Problems
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Lori Stevens, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,999,999.00

Major environmental and global health problems, such as emerging infectious
diseases, antibiotic and pesticide resistance, reduced crop yields, and the loss
of biodiversity, can be addressed through the integration of evolutionary
principles with the massive amounts of available climate, genomic, and public
health data. For example, pathogens, pests, and invasive species often quickly
evolve resistance to control measures, while important crops and wild
populations have limited or variable capacity to adapt to rapidly changing
global conditions. Important insights into the mechanisms of pathogen/pest
resistance and resilience will require collaborative efforts that apply
evolutionary principles to big data analyses and visualization. However, few
opportunities exist for trainees to develop the unique combination of relevant
evolutionary, quantitative, and teamwork skills. This National Science
Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the University of Vermont will
meet this demand with an interdisciplinary PhD training program called
QUantitative &amp; Evolutionary STEM Training (QUEST). The project anticipates
training 36 PhD students as core trainees, 18 of whom will receive NRT-funded
stipends, from a range of disciplines including biology, mathematics and
statistics, engineering, agricultural sciences, environmental studies, and
health sciences. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The QUEST program is unique in its
emphasis on evolutionary training, modeling for prediction, and culturally
sensitive teamwork. Major research efforts will focus on three areas: (i)
emerging infectious diseases and modeling for prediction, (ii) rapid evolution
in response to antibiotics, pesticides, and global change conditions, and (iii)
pathogen interactions that affect food security and ecosystem health. A
supportive and collaborative training environment will be cultivated by cohort
building via a shared, physical space, a set of core courses in which trainees
work in teams to solve real-world problems, and a seminar that includes invited
speakers and professional development activities. In addition, QUEST trainees
will complete an applied internship, selected from government, non-profit,
industry, and international partners. Through cultural sensitivity and inclusion
training for faculty, staff and trainees, and innovative recruitment efforts,
the traineeship aims to increase underrepresented groups in STEM. Project
outcomes will be (1) trainees that are experts in the application of deep
evolutionary and quantitative knowledge to develop solutions for resilience in
environmental and global health systems, (2) trainees that can work creatively
and collaboratively to translate their skills to practical solutions in non-
academic sectors, and (3) a scalable, transferable graduate training program
that increases diversity in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of
STEM graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary research areas,
through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based,
and aligned with changing workforce and research needs.