* 1735700
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Design of active ink for 3D printing: integrating modeling and experiments
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Igor Aronson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2020
* USD 285,000.00

This award supports a multidisciplinary team of four investigators using
modeling, analysis, computer simulations, and experiments to study using
suspensions of active particles to enhance the properties of inks for
applications in 3D printing. Active materials represented by suspensions of
synthetic self-propelled particles harvest energy from their environment and
alter the properties of the surrounding fluid. They have novel materials
properties and promising applications. Here, a new concept of ink for 3D
printing, termed "active ink", is introduced. Even a small fraction of active
self-propelled particles in a fluid results in a dramatic reduction of
viscosity, enhancing ink transport through the nozzle and increasing printing
speed. This project will facilitate the design and manufacture of new materials,
significantly shortening the path from prototype to product. This research will
also enable a highly multidisciplinary training and education of students and
postdocs who will learn theoretical techniques in applied mathematics and
computations, as well as experimental techniques employed in chemistry and
nanofabrication. Apart from the development of new 3D printing technology, the
work will lead to novel mathematical models and efficient computational
algorithms.

A drastic reduction of effective viscosity and increase of self-diffusivity of
the active ink due to the presence of synthetic self-propelled particles will be
studied. The reduction of the effective viscosity will enhance ink transport
through the nozzle. The increase of the effective self-diffusivity will enable
faster polymerization resulting in resolution enhancement and more accurate 3D
feature design. In addition, due to their fundamentally different response to
applied shear flow, the use of active particles may lead to the design of
composite materials with novel distributions of particles. The functionalization
of active particles also will allow tuning the properties of the hardened
polymer. New mathematical models will be developed and analyzed both numerically
and analytically. Their predictions will be experimentally verified. The
continuum partial differential equation model based on kinetic theory will be
analyzed asymptotically and numerically. A key challenge here is to find
stationary flow solutions by employing methods from fixed-point and topological
degree theory. In simulations of particle-based models, the challenge is to
accurately capture the dynamics of the reaction that occurs as the active rods
move. A difficulty in simulations of the continuum model is incorporating the
molecular-scale reactions into a mesoscale approach. By addressing these
challenges, the utility and applicability of these computational methods will be
significantly expanded, allowing them to be used for simulating a broad range of
multi-component, dynamical systems.