* 1735747
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cartographic Design for Public Communication of Environmental Information
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2019
* Cynthia Brewer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 06/30/2019
* USD 15,986.00

This doctoral dissertation project investigates how maps have been designed and
used by the mass media in stories about environmental issues, and what aspects
of map design prompt map readers to share these maps on social media. Scientists
and science communicators face the challenge of making environmental issues
relatable, tangible, and understandable for a broad audience. Maps and other
graphics are a powerful way of communicating such issues to the public as maps
can help visualize impacts as well as mitigation and adaptation strategies to
the public. To date there has been little specific research in cartography
focused on how maps with environmental science are produced, reproduced, and
shared across a wide range of media, social media, and government agency
outlets. The connection between what information is made public, and how, is not
well understood, yet has broad significance to science and society for
environmental mitigation and adaptation efforts. The results of this research
will be shared directly with scientists and science communicators and stands to
benefit society by helping to provide clear and transferable guidelines for
designing maps for public understanding and dissemination.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Maps are used ubiquitously to illustrate environmental
change. Few studies in cartography, however, have focused on the specific issues
associated with cartographically communicating environmental change related to
the complexity, uncertainty, and multi-dimensionality of the issues.
Additionally, within the cartographic research community, there has been a
recent push to focus on context-specific maps and on maps that matter for social
and environmental issues. This project uses a mixed methods research design to
answer four broad questions: (1) What organizations design environmental change
maps for the public in the United States? (2) What patterns emerge from
evaluating the content and cartographic design of these maps? (3) What are the
communication goals of environmental change mapmakers and how are these goals
reflected in the map and design decisions? (4) What aspects of cartographic
design increase map readers' likelihood to share these maps on social media? The
project integrates content analysis, interviews, and survey methods to examine
patterns related to where and how these maps are produced, what content and
cartographic design they employ, how design decisions are made for communicating
to a wide audience, and what aspects of cartography of environmental change maps
lead map readers to share these maps more broadly. Qualitative and statistical
analysis will be used to assess and synthesize these results. Findings will
provide a comprehensive assessment of cartographic design for better
communicating environmental change.