* 1735858
* Type II: Polsky Center I-Corps Program
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Steven Kaplan, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 358,413.00

This project, from the Polsky Center for Entrepreneurship and Innovation at the
University of Chicago extends their existing I-Corps Site grant.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded
entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support
multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. This is a
Type II proposal, requesting a "renewal" of funding for an existing I-Corps
Site. There are two types of I-Corps Site proposals. Type I proposals are
submitted by institutions that have not had prior funding as an I-Corps Site.
These proposals may request $100,000 per year for up to five years. Type II
proposals are submitted by institutions that have had prior funding as an
I-Corps Site. These proposals may request up to $100,000 per year for up to
three years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through their initial Site grant, the
University of Chicago served approximately 90 STEM teams, including innovative
faculty, researchers, and students from the University of Chicago community and
other Chicagoland institutions. Several of these teams were successful ? winning
further grant funding, raising outside capital, hiring staff, and launching
companies. Upon the renewal of their Site grant, the Polsky Center seeks to: 1)
continue serving campus constituents, and 2) broadening access of these
resources to underserved and underrepresented populations in the Chicagoland
region whose universities do not currently provide access to Site resources.
Through this goal, Polsky aims to increase economic development in Illinois and
empower innovators to test their ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Polsky Center
has been a recognized leader in the development and launch of ventures that
create economic value, supporting an increasing number of companies launching
from technical divisions, including: the Computation Institute, the Medical
Center, and the Institute for Molecular Engineering. Additionally, the
University of Chicago manages national laboratories, including the Department of
Energy Labs Argonne and Fermi, as well as the Marine Biological Laboratory in
Woods Hole. The University of Chicago is committed to also supporting technology
transfer from these institutions, which have received federal funding.