* 1735222
* Collaborative Research: NRT-INFEWS: Systems Thinking Training for Research ON Geography-based Coastal Food Energy Water Systems (STRONG-CFEWS)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Kristin Wilson Grimes, University of The Virgin Islands
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

With 40% of the world's population residing within 100 kilometers of a coast,
these environments are critical to local and global economies. In China, the
world's largest exporter, more than half of the country's population lives along
its industrialized coastlines. Population densities in the United States are
highest in coastal counties, representing 39% of the U.S. population. In such
densely populated areas, human activity related to the generation and use of
food, energy and water has been linked to impacts such as nitrogen pollution
that degrades the quality of coastal waters. This degradation affects reef
ecosystems, fisheries, and people's economic livelihoods and health.
Replenishment requires innovative systems thinking and better consideration of
the way food, energy, and water systems are integrated in terrestrial and
coastal environments. Systems thinking considers the whole system including
engineered infrastructure, the environment, and sociocultural aspects, rather
than an assembly of isolated parts. Integrating sociocultural dynamics and
meaningful engagement of community stakeholders is fundamental to this approach.
This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the
University of South Florida (USF) and the University of the Virgin Islands (UVI)
will develop a community-engaged training and research program in systems
thinking. Graduate Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
students will design innovative, holistic solutions (e.g., technological,
organizational) to better manage complex and interconnected food, energy, and
water systems in coastal locations. The project will train 109 graduate
students, including 23 funded PhD-level trainees from engineering and applied
anthropology at USF and 6 MS-level trainees from marine and environmental
sciences from the Historically Black University partner, UVI in four locations:
Tampa, Florida, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Barbados and Belize. This award will
prepare students to create innovative systems to address complex problems and
will serve as a model for training a STEM-focused
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supporting this training program
focuses on the leverage points (technological, policy, and organizational) in
designing food-energy-water systems in a specific geographic context to improve
the sustainability of the overall system across different scales. This NRT will
advance graduate training through: 1) a transformative research training
framework guiding students to conceptualize the interactions between food-
energy-water systems and define their research questions from a systems
perspective; 2) a context based interdisciplinary training approach including
newly developed co-taught courses, multi-discipline field-based training and
research experiences that take place in the U.S. and internationally, and strong
partnerships with local practitioners and community-grounded organizations; and
3) learning outcomes of our program in terms of interdisciplinary, 21st century,
and local and global competency skills of graduate students and impactful
research in the management of resources for food, energy, and water security.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to
encourage the development and implementation of bold, new potentially
transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The Traineeship
Track is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary research areas, through comprehensive traineeship
models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce
and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Louis
Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program. The LSAMP program
supports comprehensive, evidence-based, and sustained approaches to broadening
participation of students from racial and ethnic groups historically
underrepresented in STEM.