* 1735889
* Laboratory Technician Support: Enhanced Community Access to High-Precision U-Pb Geochronology Across the Earth Sciences
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Mark Schmitz, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 672,773.00

The science of geochronology provides the numerical measurement of geological
time, establishes the age of events in Earth history, and constrains the rates
and durations of geological processes that form and shape the Earth?s surface
and interior. Because of its key role in establishing correlation, causality,
and rates, geochronology impacts a broad spectrum of outstanding problems in the
Earth sciences, from the evolution and extinction of life to plate tectonics and
the uplift of mountain belts, and from igneous petrology and volcanic hazards to
geologic mapping and the search for mineral and energy resources. Advances in
analytical methods and technology now allow geochronological measurements at
unprecedented resolution and in greater quantities to address these challenges.
This grant for laboratory technician support in the Isotope Geology Laboratory
at Boise State University will expand its human resource infrastructure to
maximize the effective and efficient delivery of high-precision U-Pb
geochronology to a large cross-section of the national geoscience
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Isotope Geology Laboratory at Boise State
University has a decade of experience with state-of-the-art clean laboratory and
thermal ionization mass spectrometry methods and technologies to measure the
U-Pb isotope ratios and ages of Earth materials at the finest possible temporal
resolution. Built and maintained by a portfolio of federal, state, University,
and industry support, the laboratory has a proven track record of providing
high-precision U-Pb geochronometric data and geochronological expertise across a
broad user base. The new laboratory technical and applications scientist will
leverage our existing state-of-the-art instrumentation, personnel, and cost
recovery structure into a community-facing laboratory that can meet the
increasing demand for high-resolution dating of Earth systems and processes.
These resources will broaden community access, provide education, outreach, and
training, and foster innovative research and development. Beyond the increased
provision of the highest quality U-Pb zircon ages to diverse users, the
anticipated scientific impacts of this project will include technical
enhancements in ion formation and detection in the thermal ionization mass
spectrometer, improved interpretation of U-Pb zircon ages through the
petrochronological integration of in situ textural and geochemical analysis with
micro-sampled isotope dilution strategies, broadened use of tandem in
situ/isotope dilution analysis on the same crystals for refined detrital zircon
provenance and maximum depositional age estimates, and new strategies for the
statistical integration of radioisotopic dates, astrochronologies, and other
systems proxy data into age models essential to addressing the most demanding
problems of Earth systems science.