* 1735841
* Type II: UCF I-Corps Site - enhancing technology commercialization to develop a world-class innovation ecosystem
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2017,10/31/2022
* Thomas O'Neal, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2022
* USD 418,624.00

This project extends the University of Central Florida's (UCF) I-Corps Site for
an additional three years beyond their initial three-year award. NSF Innovation
Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities established at universities whose
purpose is to nurture and support multiple, local teams to transition their
technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice,
resources, networking opportunities, training and modest funding to enable
groups to transition their work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps
Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally
and contribute to the National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers,
entrepreneurs and investors. There are two types of I-Corps Site proposals. Type
I proposals are submitted by institutions that have not had prior funding as an
I-Corps Site. These proposals may request $100,000 per year for up to five
years. Type II proposals are submitted by institutions that have had prior
funding as an I-Corps Site. These proposals may request up to $100,000 per year
for up to three years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of the
I-Corps Site renewal project at UCF include the capture and curation of a deep
understanding of (1) the processes, methodologies and programs for
entrepreneurship education and technology commercialization, (2) Best practices
for transitioning research from the bench top into the marketplace, (3) and
distributing this knowledge to collaborators, partners, and affiliates
throughout the NIN, and (4) development and adaptation of programs for specialty
cohorts supporting local clusters and targeted populations. Additional knowledge
and understanding will be gained through the collection of longitudinal data
following I-Corps participants after they have completed the curriculum.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UCF is an active and engaged partner in the Central
Florida innovation ecosystem. The broader impacts from this project directly
contribute to the broader community understanding of innovation-based economic
development and the importance of research and commercialization. This is
critically important to a community that is dependent on tourism and hospitality
and the associated lower paying jobs in the region. Building on the initial
successes of the UCF I-Corps Site program, successful commercialization of
research and inventions generated at the leading research institutions and
affiliate organizations in the region, this renewal project has the potential to
significantly impact the regional economy. Further, with curriculum that
effectively serves Hispanic populations, there is the potential to produce major
social and economic impact on a national level. Florida has the third largest
Hispanic population in the U.S., with nearly 25% of UCF student population and
34% of Florida business owners being of Hispanic origin, making this an ideal
location to develop, deploy, and refine the curriculum.