* 1735260
* Type I: An NSF ICORP Site Program for Northeastern University
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Marc Meyer, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 503,599.00

This project creates an NSF I-Corps Site at Northeastern
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-
funded entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and
support multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps
Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the
National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Site leverages Northeastern's
entrepreneurship ecosystem as well as that of the larger Boston innovation
ecosystem. The foundation for the program is a growing body of funded research
which offers untapped opportunities for commercialization. To facilitate
entrepreneurship, Northeastern created a series of entrepreneurship courses for
undergraduate and graduate students, as well as an on-campus incubator feeding
ventures into the local investment community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Northeastern I-Corps Site program substantially increases both the quantity and
quality of STEM-related ventures founded through its Site. The I-Corps Site
program also leverage Northeastern's technology licensing office as well as its
Mentor and Investors Networks in support of Site teams. There are 280 active
individual Mentors supporting Northeastern's startups, as well as a variety of
angel and venture capital investors who regularly assess Northeastern ventures,
fifty of which have garnered $70 million in venture finance over the past three
years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Northeastern University's entrepreneurship system
is based on the meta-process of Educate, Incubate, and Launch. The I-Corp Site
program is a highly focused way to a) better recruit a specific graduate,
postdoc, and faculty population of potential technological entrepreneurs, and b)
provide initial entrepreneurship and innovation education and training for them.
Northeastern is also conducting research to more clearly understand the effect
of entrepreneurial learning for first time entrepreneurs in its own incubator,
focusing on the specific areas of developing customer insight, new product and
service solutions, and business models. Several I-Corp ventures are already part
of this study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Northeastern's Site goals are to increase
the number and quality of technology ventures emerging from laboratories and to
feed new ventures into the I-Corps National program. Another important impact is
that I-Corps offers a complementary pathway for early stage ventures to pursue
initial funding through I-Corps Node and SBIR/STTR programs. Another potential
impact is the expansion of this program in subsequent years to early stage
entrepreneurs working in the numerous research environments within one mile of
the Northeastern campus. These institutions include the medical schools and
hospitals affiliated with Harvard, Tufts, and Boston University, as well as
organizations pursuing research in robotics, cybersecurity, and IoT among other
STEM areas.