* 1735409
* Science Policy Research Reports: Educational Videos on Science Technology Innovation
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Deborah Stine, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 07/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

Conveying scientific research findings on topics related to science and
innovation which have relevance to policy remains a challenge in today?s world.
This project aims to bring together experts skilled in communicating science and
innovation to broad audiences. They will focus on how to produce videos which
summarize research findings in an accessible and straightforward manner and
consider how computer animation could be useful to illustrate and convey the
findings. The aim of the videos is to synthesize, summarize, and clarify
scientific evidence and increase its accessibility and utility for those who
deliberate over policy. This project will enhance the national interest by
providing analytically-based information based on evidence and provide an
opportunity to test the effectiveness of state-of-the-art videos to disseminate
research findings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project initiates research that
will be presented at a workshop in January of 2018. The workshop has three
focuses. The first includes funding team science, the infrastructure required
for interdisciplinary projects, the use of research portfolios in policy-making,
and facilitating the use of evidence in science making policy. A second topic
centers on innovation and examines the effects of patents on innovation,
diffusion, and access; employee non-compete agreements; the use of innovation
prizes in government; and regulation, deregulation, and technical innovation. A
third focus addresses workforce issues such as entrepreneurial career
opportunities for science and engineering postdoctoral researchers and the
scientific workforce. The videos will highlight the key points, animate them as
appropriate and refer to the written Science Policy Research Reports for further
information.