* 1735777
* Type I:  Establishment of an NSF I-Corps Site at the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Immanuel Edinbarough, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 589,067.00

This project at the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley (UTRGV) Center for
Innovation and Commercialization (CIC) creates an NSF I-Corps Site.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded
entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support
multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps
Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the
National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UTRGV-CIC is a center within the UTRGV
Vackar College of Business and Entrepreneurship (VCOBE). The UTRGV- CIC was
developed in order to accelerate the commercialization of student, faculty and
regional innovations into the marketplace, foster and facilitate the exchange of
ideas between the university and industry and prepare students to become
entrepreneurs. This I-Corps Sites project: &lt;br/&gt;1. Supports and expands an
entrepreneurial culture in a region where entrepreneurs historically have not
had significant assistance; &lt;br/&gt;2. Expands opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate business and STEM students so that they are able
obtain hands-on experience in the implementation of product validation
activities and to engage in real-world STEM-related business projects;
&lt;br/&gt;3. Assists STEM faculty to become more comfortable with the practice
of marketing their inventions by introducing them to the I-Corps theory and
practice of the I-Corps methodology; &lt;br/&gt;4. Integrates the I-Corps
methodology throughout the UTRGV infrastructure so that the university will be
able to carry out its mission of "transforming Texas and the nation through the
commercialization of university discoveries".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are
several advantages to having an I-Corps site at UTRGV: being located directly on
the U-S.-Mexican border, the UTRGV I-Corps is unique in that it the site is both
binational and bicultural; and, the region that UTRGV serves is one of the
fastest growing yet impoverished areas in the country. Promoting support for
entrepreneurship in such a region demonstrates how well the I-Corps methodology
works in a historically underserved area of the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the commercialization of
ideas that come from the STEM colleges and departments within UTRGV by providing
STEM faculty and students with a methodology to promote their products and ideas
in the marketplace. It also broadens the participation of normally
underrepresented Hispanic students in the commercialization process. Ultimately,
it will benefit the regional economy of deep-south Texas by providing support
for start-up businesses and it will enhance the research enterprise at UTRGV
through the creation of interdisciplinary teams.