* 1735838
* Type I: University of South Alabama Collaborative Research for Entrepreneurial Activities, Training, and Education (CREATE) Center
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2024
* Michael Chambers, University of South Alabama
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 612,670.00

This project, from the University of South Alabama (USA), in Mobile, creates an
NSF I-Corps Site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are
NSF-funded entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and
support multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps
Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the
National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The USA-Mobile Site is housed in the recently
established CREATE Center, in the Office of Research Innovation. The Mobile
region's economy is growing and features manufacturing and industries in a
number of STEM-rich clusters (Aviation, Steel, Maritime &amp; Shipbuilding,
Energy, Chemical, Transportation, and Technology). The USA Site is likely to
have broad regional impacts, particularly given this institution's involvement
in several community activities such as Start-Up Weekend and a Minority Business
Accelerator, leading to significant commercial and societal impact with
increased successful iterations of commercialized technology, entrepreneurial
work force development and employment activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The USA
Site itself is designed as a community asset made up of four, diverse Mobile
institutions including: an emerging research university (USA); a primarily
African-American community college; a Southern Baptist university; and, a 200
year-old Jesuit College. Teams formed at this I-Corp Site will include diversity
of students and mentors across institutions. In addition, placing business
students and technical writers on teams may provide a unique opportunity to
observe ?best-practices? that are not currently being applied elsewhere.