* 1735874
* Type II: UTSA CITE NSF I-Corps Site Proposal
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Cory Hallam, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 414,361.00

The University of Texas (UTSA) proposes to renew their NSF I-Corps Site with
additional goals of developing novel Intellectual Property (IP) policies that
promulgate faculty and student involvement in launching technology ventures from
the lab and bringing industry partners to campus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF
Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities established at
universities whose purpose is to nurture and support multiple, local teams to
transition their technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide
infrastructure, advice, resources, networking opportunities, training and modest
funding to enable groups to transition their work into the marketplace or into
becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation
locally and regionally and contribute to the National Innovation Network of
mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to fulfilling the Site goals, UTSA is also studying and working with
I-Corps teams to develop a deeper understanding of the educational constructs
associated with identifying and nurturing nascent technology entrepreneurs.
Together these suggest new paradigms for designing technology commercialization
programs and their impact on university-industry innovation ecosystems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SITE at UTSA has broader impacts that include the
creation of a transformational and progressive entrepreneurial ecosystem within
the university environment that is essential to foster, support, develop, and
commercialize new technologies. Such an ecosystem will not only help to change
academic mindsets and cultures, but also result in higher competitiveness in
global markets, increased external funding via follow-up research dollars, an
enhanced educational environment for students and faculty, increased
marketability of UT graduates, and greater financial returns to the university
and community via technology commercialization. In addition, as a minority
serving institution with a focus on veterans, UTSA has been very successful in
achieving diversity among their teams. With continued support and NSF I-Corps
designation, the CITE will expand its network of partnerships through the
I-Corps Nodes, the NIN, and the growing number of regional partners.