* 1735123
* EXP: Automatically Synthesizing Valid, Personalized, Formative Assessments of CS1 Concepts
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Min Li, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2020
* USD 620,027.00

Millions of people worldwide are trying to learn to code in schools, colleges,
universities, and online. To do so successfully, they need significant practice
and meaningful feedback that responds to their specific confusions and builds
upon the knowledge they already have. Unfortunately, good practice content is
challenging to create at scale and skilled teachers capable of providing
meaningful feedback are rare and often inaccessible. Moreover, popular online
learning technologies only provide a fixed amount of static content and do
little to provide meaningful feedback. Because of this, many people give up
learning to code, and only those with privileged access to friends, family,
mentors, or teachers who can provide this support persist. This limits access to
this critical 21st century literacy and ultimately harms the gender, racial,
ethnic, and intellectual diversity of our computing workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to address part of this problem,
applying advances in programming languages research that enable the creation of
infinite amounts of diverse practice content, and advances in machine learning
to build models of what learners do and do not know. By applying these two
advances in computer science, the project will create a novel online learning
technology that automatically generates assessment content, provides detailed
immediate feedback about solutions, and uses assessment information of learners'
performance to generate more personalized practice that individually targets
concepts that learners are struggling to master. In creating such a system, new
techniques for generating practice problems and new approaches to modeling
learner knowledge of introductory programming concepts will be realized. The
project will also explore students' current approach to practice, then deploy
the new system into a large introductory classroom setting to experimentally
measure its impact on learning and confidence. If the system is effective, the
discoveries have the potential to provide learners in a range of settings more
effective practice and learning. This may in turn improve both the competency
and diversity of learners who further engage in computing education.