* 1735723
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Reconstructing Hurricane Activity in the Northern Gulf of Mexico: A Multi-Proxy Approach Using Biomarkers and Stable Isotopes
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Kam-biu Liu, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Vadjunec
* 01/31/2020
* USD 15,806.00

This doctoral dissertation research will utilize multiple sedimentary and
organic geochemical proxies to develop a high-resolution record of past
hurricane activity at two sites on the northern coast of the Gulf of Mexico. The
research will provide a better understanding about the hydrologic processes that
influence deposition during hurricanes, as well as serve a proxy for marine
incursion events independent of overwash sand layers. When applied on a regional
level, the research has the potential of providing new mechanisms for
investigating past storm activity in regions that presently lack paleohurricane
reconstructions. Findings from this research will be used for coastal management
and risk assessment, and will be directly relevant to environmental managers,
community planners and coastal emergency management officials. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reconstruction of past hurricane activity is
largely reliant on sedimentary proxies of overwash due to hurricane storm surge.
A primary objective of this project is to develop a new proxy of pre-historic
hurricane activity by determining the source(s) of organic matter associated
with hurricane overwash deposits. The project will collect sedimentary cores and
perform multiple laboratory analyses including chronological, sedimentary,
geochemistry, isotopic and biomarker analysis. The combination of stable isotope
and biomarker analyses would provide a sensitive indicator of storm events and
will be used to assess whether such overwash deposits contain organic matter
derived from marine sources. This method will also provide information about the
complex interactions of storm surge and in-shore flooding processes which are
not yet well understood. Determining the relationships between these processes
is necessary for predicting the response of coastal environments to future storm
impacts, and are important considerations for coastal resource management.