* 1735325
* NRT-INFEWS: Integrated Urban Solutions for Food, Energy, and Water Management
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Stephanie Pincetl, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2023
* USD 3,000,000.00

By 2030, 60% of the world's population will live in cities requiring the supply
of large amounts of food, water, and energy (FEW) from locations currently far
from urban centers. The complex and intimate connection between food, energy,
and water is becoming increasingly central in socioeconomic and urban planning
decisions. Unfortunately, there exists a void in the workforce and leadership
with broad technical, economic, and social perspectives on such complex societal
problems. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to
the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) will combine research,
education, and communication training to educate future leaders who can deliver
innovative solutions to achieve sustainable supply of food, energy, and water to
growing urban centers under the pressure of global climate change. The project
anticipates training 110 MS or PhD students, including 33 funded trainees, from
engineering, physical and life sciences, social sciences, public affairs, and
public health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will provide graduate students
with classroom and hands-on training with a focus on urban systems. Three new
FEW graduate courses and a Business and Entrepreneurship Seminar Series will be
developed using project-based and peer-to-peer methodology. Hands on training
will consist of academic research and institutionalized non-academic graduate
internships with domestic partners. Three main interdisciplinary research
thrusts will be pursued: (1) FEW wastes reduction and up-scaling, (2) urban
sustainability, and (3) integrated solutions for FEW systems management in Los
Angeles. The research effort will result in a comprehensive scientific and
technological portfolio addressing high priority needs including (1) decaying
food sensors and behavioral science to reduce food waste, (2) novel polymeric
gels for enhancing soil hydration, (3) integrated technology solutions for urban
agriculture, water treatment, biofuel production, and zero-net energy buildings,
and (4) system-level understanding of UCLA and LA as testbeds to provide
practical ideas and actionable recommendations to stakeholders. Moreover,
trainees will gain experience in the art of communicating science and technology
by (1) developing the social media series FEW and Far Between, (2) organizing
the UCLA Sustainability Day, and (3) through the Urban FEWSingÂ© outreach
activity, in which they will interact with the general public at urban farms and
food deserts in LA. This approach will align the focus of UCLA and local
industrial and community partners on delivering innovation in FEWS, in line with
campus and city wide initiatives. This program will impact UCLA and the broader
community beyond its funded period, as the UCLA Institute of Environment and
Sustainability will adopt the new graduate courses for a newly approved Ph.D.
program and UCLA Extension will offer the courses
online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students
in high priority interdisciplinary research areas, through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.