* 1735460
* Transient Rip Current Dynamics: Laboratory Measurements and Modeling of Surfzone Vorticity
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Melissa Moulton, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 716,960.00

The nearshore region, valued as essential intertidal habitat and recreational
grounds, is often compromised by pathogens and excess nutrient supply from
terrestrial runoff. When an area becomes contaminated, beach closures,
ecological disruption, and associated economic losses can result. Understanding
the transport of materials throughout the nearshore region can have important
implications for ecosystem and human health. Previous studies analyzing cross-
shelf exchange suggest that transient rip currents are the dominant mechanism
driving exchange between the surf zone and the inner shelf. Evidence also
suggests that transient rip currents are generated from the coalescence of surf
zone eddies, with short-crested waves serving as the source of rotation. This
project will utilize a laboratory and numerical modeling to study the generation
and evolution of surf zone eddies to form transient rip currents. The knowledge
of mixing and exchange in the nearshore region will be significantly advanced
through this study, which will have important implications for the transport of
nutrients, larvae, and pollutants. In collaboration with National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration scientists, simple predictors of transient rip
currents will be developed to improve hazard forecasts for a broad range of
environments. This is essential information for human safety as rip currents are
the leading cause of fatalities and rescues on beaches. A graduate student will
gain valuable training and education through involvement in this project.
Outreach activities highlighting rip currents will be developed as a part of the
O.H. Hinsdale Wave Research Laboratory Outreach Program seeking to broaden
participation in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
(STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to establish a cradle-to-grave
picture of the injection of eddies into the surf zone by short-crested wave
breaking, coalescence to form larger eddies, and formation of transient rip
currents. The overall objective is to determine if the surf zone can be treated
as a two-dimensional turbulence box. This study will improve understanding of
the dynamics of surf zone eddy generation and evolution leading to transient rip
currents and associated cross-shelf exchange by addressing four specific
hypotheses: 1) short-crested waves are an important vorticity source at short
spatial and temporal scales, 2) smaller eddies coalesce to create bigger eddies,
3) surf zone eddy decay is controlled by bottom friction, and 4) eddies ejected
outside of the surf zone onto the shelf deviate from the two-dimensional
paradigm. Laboratory experiments will include in situ and remote (stereo visible
and infrared) measurements of sea-surface-elevations and velocities for a range
of wave heights, periods, and directional spreads. State-of-the-art numerical
modeling will be used to guide laboratory sampling, to analyze dynamics for a
range of conditions, and to assess the importance of frictional dissipation and
three-dimensional circulation properties. If the surf zone can be treated as a
forced two-dimensional turbulence box, simplified models with appropriate
forcing can be established to advance the understanding of the role of the surf
zone in land-to-sea transport.