* 1735687
* Type I: Rutgers University I-Corps Site for Entrepreneurship Acceleration
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2017,11/30/2022
* Dunbar Birnie, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2022
* USD 599,999.00

This project, from Rutgers University, creates an NSF I-Corps Site at this
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-
funded entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and
support multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps
Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the
National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rutgers University has funded research of over
$600M per year. This research generates over 150 patents each year and more than
$15M in licensing income annually. A challenge is to transition research
outcomes to the commercialization stage. The Rutgers University I-Corps Site
cultivates this pool of early stage ideas and assists with bringing viable
concepts through the commercialization pathway to the marketplace. Through the
I-Corps Site, with targeted training and mentoring, I-Corps teams are sourced
from the Rutgers Site partners. These include the Office of Research
Commercialization, educational activities ranging from the Collaboration for
Technology Entrepreneurship and Commercialization (CTEC) and Professional
Science Master's (PSM) programs, senior-year "capstone" engineering design and
Honors College programs, and many other feeder programs. Mentors are matched to
these teams. Inventors benefit from the larger innovation ecosystem in the New
Jersey/New York region, as the Site partners with the NYCRIN I-Corps Node.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Rutgers I-Corps Site provides training, mentoring, and
access to a large network of business, technical and financial resources. The
signature activity of this program is that each year, 30 teams participate and
test the commercial potential of their products with a broad base of consumers.
This program promotes the value of commercialization to both faculty and
students, and reinforces the concept that ideas generated by the academic
research process can have societal and commercial
value.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Rutgers I-Corps bridges the gap between the lab
and the marketplace, enhancing the University's commitment to fostering economic
development across New Jersey and beyond. As the number of spin-outs from the
university increases, jobs are created and companies hire students as interns
and graduates as full-time employees. The program's impact goes beyond the
University by tapping into local business leaders and entrepreneurs for team
mentorship as well as expanding programs to support the communities around
Rutgers campuses and to particularly assist underrepresented inventors and
business-owners. A key area of focus is to increase I-Corps participation from
women in STEM and ultimately to increase the number of women-owned businesses in
the region/state.