* 1735609
* CRISP Type 1: Protecting Coastal Infrastructure in a Changing Climate by Integrating Optimization Modeling and Stakeholder Observations
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Daniel Bienstock, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2021
* USD 515,310.00

Infrastructure - such as roads, bridges, railways - is the backbone of a
functional and healthy community. When parts of this infrastructure are
threatened, it is critical for society to respond to that threat or risk loss of
life and property. One of the most significant threats to our infrastructure in
recent U.S. history has been as the result of hurricanes, most memorably
Hurricane Katrina, which devastated New Orleans, and Hurricane Sandy, from which
the infrastructure of New York City is still recovering from. Addressing these
threats requires a multi-pronged approach that takes into account how
infrastructure is connected and how failures in one type of infrastructure can
impact the other. Questions then arise as to how we can protect ourselves from
these threats. This Critical Resilient Interdependent Infrastructure Systems and
Processes (CRISP) project develops a methodology that can answer questions
related to protecting infrastructure. For instance, if a community wanted to
build a sea-wall, questions such as "how high should it be?" and "where should
it be placed?" must be asked. Other important questions compare a sea-wall with
other protective options, such as: "Is a sea-wall the best protective measure?",
"What about artificial sand dunes?", or "What about raising the infrastructure
to a higher elevation?" And a related critically important question should be
"Can adopting this option for protecting one community be detrimental to the
safety of a neighboring community?" In addition to questions about the efficacy
of protective measures, there are questions about how coastal protection may
impact other coastal uses including recreational, cultural, and economic
activities, and how negatively impacting these uses can be reduced while still
maximizing protection. Resource constraints are also important to take into
account and the question of how to optimally protect a community given
constrained resources is critical. Such questions require the combination of
advanced computing, mathematics and social science approaches to design tools to
address these complex intersecting problems and placing these tools in the hands
of decision makers that need to make these types of critical decisions. This is
the goal of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interdependent critical
infrastructure in coastal regions has long been threatened by storm-induced
flooding. Events such as Hurricanes Sandy and Katrina punctuated the need for
plans to protect our infrastructure, but these events only reflect a possible
future threat and do not fully address the unknown probability and impacts of a
future threat. This uncertainty is only made more critical by the addition of
climate change to exacerbate and amplify impacts, in particular sea-level rise.
The goal of the proposed work is to address the threat from storm-induced
flooding to interdependent infrastructure, including transportation and power
systems and emergency services, by developing a methodology that can test
various adaptation strategies. Strategies in this context include, but are not
restricted to, building sea-walls or other physical, protective mechanisms. The
proposed methodology would optimize strategies to maximize their protective
abilities over time and space constrained by budgetary considerations. To
accomplish this the methodology will contain four conceptual steps: (1)
formulate a new strategy for adaptation, (2) computationally determine flooding
levels given an ensemble of storms representing the likely threat and future
sea-level rise, (3) estimate the damage over the ensemble to the infrastructure
considered, and (4) using appropriate metrics evaluate the relative suitability
of a given strategy including cost and social acceptability. This process would
repeat iteratively until a sufficiently optimal strategy is found. Developing
such a methodology will be challenging however. The magnitude of the
computational effort needed is significant. Using a set of computational models
that vary in accuracy and speed, the methodology will swap between models
appropriate for the optimization stage. The methodology will also not be
successful without stakeholder engagement. For this reason, interviews with key
stakeholders will be an important component of the methodology design and
implementation. Interviews will inform the identification of critical components
of infrastructure and the interdependencies among them that could be affected by
coastal flooding, assist in the design of the optimization metrics, and assess
how well the output of the methodology matches stakeholder expectations.
Community meetings will also be held to introduce and discuss the results of the
methodology with local communities who would potentially benefit from the
adaptation strategies. Finally, using New York City's complex infrastructure and
recent events, the methodology will be validated.