* 1735977
* EXP: Readily Available Learning Experiences: Turning the Entire Web into Progressive Examples to Bridge Conceptual Knowledge Gaps for Novice Web Developers
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Haoqi Zhang, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2022
* USD 549,815.00

Computing is changing our world, and there is an urgent need to train large
numbers of professional developers to meet the demands of our nation's economy.
While it is relatively easy to learn basic computing concepts, acquiring the
conceptual knowledge and problem-solving skills of professional developers is
challenging. Learners currently lack the materials needed to support their
progression from writing functional code to writing production-quality software.
To address this gap, this project will develop new technologies that transform
the entire web of professional examples into opportunities for authentic
learning. Professional web applications provide rich details missing from
training examples, and offer opportunities for learners to think in the modes of
the discipline. By making professional websites available as a learning
resource, this project aims to improve learners' conceptual understanding and
better prepare them for programming challenges in professional work.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Novice developers lack the expert knowledge and self-directed skills
required to (1) build conceptual models of professional examples; (2) implement
professional features; and (3) apply professional concepts to solve diverse
problems. This project aims to help learners overcome these challenges with
Readily Available Learning Experiences (RALE), a theoretical model and platform
that supports self-directed learning by: (1) scaffolding sensemaking to help
learners build conceptual models of professional website features; (2)
scaffolding process management to help learners implement concepts from
professional examples; and (3) scaffolding reflection and articulation to
support learning to apply concepts across diverse problems. To realize RALE in
software, the researchers will develop computational techniques for implementing
mixed-initiative scaffolds that leverage learner-created artifacts in
conjunction with automated methods to support learning. This project will study
the effectiveness of the RALE model using a design-based research process and
generate empirically-validated principles to advance our understanding of
authentic learning environments that provide a window into professional work.