* 1735779
* Type I: University at Buffalo I-Corps Site for Lean Entrepreneurial Growth
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Martin Casstevens, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 583,486.00

This project, from the University at Buffalo (IB), creates an I-Corps Site at
this institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are
NSF-funded entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and
support multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps
Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the
National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through their I-Corps Site, UB improves the way
technology is commercialized and entrepreneurship is cultivated. UB receives
over eighty invention disclosures annually that result in patents, licenses, and
the formation of startup companies. To train participant entrepreneurial teams,
UB's Business &amp; Entrepreneur Partnerships in the Office of Economic
Development (BEP) offers a unique two-phase, resource-efficient training process
in the areas of: Customer Discovery, Lean Startup methods, The Business Model
Canvas, Developing a prioritized list of testable hypotheses and open questions,
and Assessing the strength of an opportunity. Under Phase I, teams receive
workshop instruction, work closely with mentors and practice customer discovery.
Phase II training integrates intensive customer engagement. UB views the NSF
I-Corps Site program as an important way to: 1) perform more robust technical
and commercial assessments of new technologies; 2) increase inventors'
entrepreneurial skills leading to system-wide culture change; 3) improve the
quality of future research proposals; 4) increase commercialization success; 5)
prepare inventors and students for success in the I-Corps Node program; 6)
pursue SBIR/STTR funding; and 6) provide graduate students and postdocs with a
world class experience that will impact their entire
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UB I-Corps Site program broader impacts are
realized through the creation of a network of strategic partnerships between
researchers and engaged commercial interests. These relationships increase:
industry-sponsored research funding; competitive SBIR/STTR applications; pivotal
student experiences; campus-wide, interdisciplinary collaborations; the level of
industry mentorship; the number and quality of invention disclosures;
participation of 5-10 teams (annually) in the I-Corps Node Program; and overall
culture change (innovative, entrepreneurial, collaborative, multidisciplinary).
UB's Technology Transfer Office is joined by a number of other units and
strategic partners - an inclusivity that extends the impact of the I-Corps Site
award across the campus, into the business community, and supports a greater
public mission.