* 1735492
* Laboratory Technician Support:  University of Connecticut Helium Geothermochronology Laboratory
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Julie Fosdick, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2024
* USD 712,288.00

This award will fund a laboratory technician in the Helium Geothermochronology
Laboratory (HGL) at the University of Connecticut. The HGL supports research in
low-temperature (U-Th)/He thermochronology of a wide range of minerals,
including apatite, zircon, titanite, and monazite. This award will enable the
broader Earth science community to gain access to the HGL facility and will
support visitor training and applications and development in
geothermochronology. This laboratory technician support award will also promote
science in society by providing student training and education in a laboratory
setting, enhancing the research program of an early career geoscientist, and
promoting engagement of local Mansfield, CT community through science outreach
activities centering on deep time and dating methods in the tectonics,
geochemistry, sedimentology, paleoclimatology, and geoarchaeology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research in the HGL focuses on resolving the timing and
mechanisms of exhumation during mountain building, with specific concentration
on sediment provenance analysis using detrital multi-mineral (U-Th)/He
geothermochronology. This award will support HGL efforts to develop improved
methodology on a wider suite of detrital minerals, such as titanite, monazite,
and apatite, among others. The laboratory technician will be expected to (1)
supervise on-campus and visiting students and researchers, (2) contribute to
ongoing research and methodological development of (U-Th)/He geothermochronology
at UConn, (3) conduct routine laboratory duties and instrument maintenance, (4)
provide fee-for-service analytical support for scientific and applied research
projects, and (5) participate in community outreach activities to promote public
interest and knowledge in deep-time, geochronology, and Earth processes.