* 1735714
* Type II: California State University I-Corps Site
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2023
* Stanley Maloy, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 349,964.00

This project, from San Diego State University, creates an I-Corps Site at this
institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-
funded entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and
support multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps
Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the
National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors. This is a Type II I-Corps Site involving the extension of funding for
an existing I-Corps Site that was first funded in 2013. There are two types of
I-Corps Site proposals. Type I proposals are submitted by institutions that have
not had prior funding as an I-Corps Site. These proposals may request $100,000
per year for up to five years. Type II proposals are submitted by institutions
that have had prior funding as an I-Corps Site. These proposals may request up
to $100,000 per year for up to three years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Site
extensions of the California State University (CSU) Program for Education and
Research in Biotechnology (CSUPERB) for an additional three years builds on
experience as an I-Corps Site and grows institutional support for life sciences
entrepreneurship education and technology transfer. The activities involved in
this renewal aim to smooth the development path for nascent academic
entrepreneurs across the CSU. Specifically during Phase II, CSU I-Corps is:
recruiting biological sciences researchers and funding 30 Site Teams annually,
providing opportunities to discover biotechnology commercialization pathways;
building on CSU I-Corps' growing community of life science entrepreneurs,
alumni, industry experts and campus-based entrepreneurship resources to offer
tailored advice for research-based ventures; and developing a three-part program
for nascent biological sciences entrepreneurs to help them escape social and
cognitive biases, explore venture ideas, assess technologies to solve problems,
and discover commercialization pathways. The I-Corps Biological Sciences Site
nurtures CSU researchers so that they gain confidence in their entrepreneurial
abilities, greater understanding of biotechnology commercialization pathways,
and a better calibration of their concepts maturity level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More than a quarter of the CSU STEM baccalaureates are
from underrepresented populations - CSU educates more Hispanic, African-
American, and American Indian undergraduates than all other institutions in the
state combined. The CSU diverse student population is engaged in immersive
learning provided by biological sciences research and entrepreneurial
activities. Employers and investors value creative students who graduate with
demonstrated accomplishments in team-based research, the ability to solve real-
world problems, and experience with the unique challenges of biotechnology
commercialization. CSU I-Corps gives students and faculty access to mentors,
sources of capital, business expertise, and leadership opportunities.