* 1735794
* Type I: Greensboro I-Corps Training Site
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Lloyd Noel, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 581,840.00

This project, from the University of North Carolina at Greensboro, creates an
I-Corps Site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are
NSF-funded entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and
support multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps
Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the
National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Greensboro I-Corps Training Site (GRIT) is a
collaboration between the geographically adjacent University of North Carolina
at Greensboro (UNCG-lead institution) and North Carolina Agriculture and
Technical State University (N.C. A&amp;T). Expanding on the existing
entrepreneurship missions at the two universities, the GRIT facilitates the
commercialization of innovative ideas and research at both institutions, as well
as nearby institutions of higher education and the surrounding communities.
UNCG's North Carolina Entrepreneurship Center (NCEC) recruits teams from both
schools, provides training and measures outcomes of the program. The program
focuses on science, technology, engineering, and mathematics and also looks to
provide training to any innovation that offers scalable solutions to societal
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Site focuses on inclusion of diverse
perspectives from underrepresented cohorts by expanding the training of the
commercialization process to populations often underrepresented in
entrepreneurship. Expanding training opportunities to women, minorities, people
with disabilities, military veterans, and new immigrants fosters greater
inclusion. UNCG, a former women's college and a Minority Serving Institution
(MSI), and N.C. A&amp;T, the nation's largest Historically Black College and
University (HBCU), provide a large ideal population of diverse potential
entrepreneurs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Greensboro area is transforming its
economic identity by embracing entrepreneurial activities and inclusiveness of
underrepresented populations through establishment and support of community
accelerators and programs that will help advance this new growth. The GRIT helps
support local economic development collaborations between universities,
industry, and local government by providing a new source of trained
entrepreneurs and technologies, ultimately directly benefiting the community.