* 1735505
* CRISP Type 2: Interdependent Network-based Quantification of Infrastructure Resilience (INQUIRE)
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Albert-Laszlo Barabasi, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/28/2022
* USD 2,554,989.00

Critical infrastructure systems are increasingly reliant on one another for
their efficient operation. This research will develop a quantitative, predictive
theory of network resilience that takes into account the interactions between
built infrastructure networks, and the humans and neighborhoods that use them.
This framework has the potential to guide city officials, utility operators, and
public agencies in developing new strategies for infrastructure management and
urban planning. More generally, these efforts will untangle the roles of network
structure and network dynamics that enable interdependent systems to withstand,
recover from, and adapt to perturbations. This research will be of interest to a
variety of other fields, from ecology to cellular
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will begin by cataloging
three built infrastructures and known interdependencies (both physical and
functional) into a "network of networks" representation suitable for modeling. A
key part of this research lies in also quantifying the interplay between built
infrastructure and social systems. As such, the models will incorporate
community-level behavioral effects through urban "ecometrics" -- survey-based
empirical data that capture how citizens and neighborhoods utilize city services
and respond during emergencies. This realistic accounting of infrastructure and
its interdependencies will be complemented by realistic estimates of future
hazards that it may face. The core of the research will use network-based
analytical and computational approaches to identify reduced-dimensional
representations of the (high-dimensional) dynamical state of interdependent
infrastructure. Examining how these resilience metrics change under stress to
networks at the component level (e.g. as induced by inundation following a
hurricane) will allow identification of weak points in existing interdependent
infrastructure. The converse scenario--in which deliberate alterations to a
network might improve resilience or hasten recovery of already-failed systems--
will also be explored.