* 1735661
* The Capacity Challenge: Governing in an Era of Rapid Scientific, Technological, and Economic Change
* SBE,SMA
* 07/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Ann Keller, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Trapani
* 08/31/2020
* USD 373,045.00

The public relies on government to evaluate both the promise and potential risks
of widespread use of new technologies.  This study examines how federal agencies
function given the rapid pace of technological innovation, which requires new
evaluation routines and expertise.  For example, health applications using
CRISPR/Cas9 technology intentionally alter DNA, posing new types of ethical and
safety concerns.  Self-driving cars require the National Traffic and Highway
Safety Administration's (NTHSA) to build expertise in cloud-based technologies
and cyber-security. The study documents how federal agencies meet challenges,
and assess opportunities and barriers when faced with new technologies. The
study identifies best practices for federal agencies seeking to improve
performance, manage the potential risks of new technologies and enhance the
environment for scientific and technological
innovation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research contributes new thinking about
how to support the development of sufficient public technical capacity in order
to meet the current pace of scientific and technological innovation.  Several
current cases are evaluated to assess how government agencies are responding to
rapid technological change. This study draws from research that identifies the
practices private sector firms use to remain competitive in fields of rapid
scientific and technological change. Firms invest in their own technical
capacity and encourage exposure to innovations across a variety of technical
domains. This study asks whether the same principles of investing in internal
technical capacity and encouraging exposure to diverse technical domains can
support innovation in federal agencies. Because federal agencies face distinct
circumstances, the study identifies practices that public organizations use to
create and maintain technical capacity that are not relevant in studies of
private sector firms.