* 1735762
* Type I: Vanderbilt University I-Corps Site
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2017,12/31/2023
* Robert Webster, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 654,635.00

This project, from Vanderbilt University, creates an NSF I-Corps Site at this
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-
funded entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and
support multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps
Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the
National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vanderbilt University is investing in building
an innovation ecosystem in the Middle Tennessee region. The institution plays a
significant role in providing pathways to commercialization for scientific,
technology, engineering, and mathematics related research and new startup
endeavors. In 2016, Vanderbilt opened its Wond'ry, a new innovation center that
serves its entire community of faculty, students, and staff across all academic
disciplines. The Wond?ry provides a facility to host and implement the NSF
I-Corps Sites program. Since its opening, the Wond'ry inspired innovation and
entrepreneurial interest on campus. Combined with the I-Corps Site it becomes
the primary pipeline to commercialization for many aspiring innovators and
entrepreneurs. Implementing the I-Corps Site at Vanderbilt makes a positive
difference by advancing on-campus activities related to scouting, recruiting,
educating supporting and contributing to the National Innovation Network. The
two primary outcomes of the I-Corps at Vanderbilt Program are growing a talented
diverse and globally competitive workforce of STEM and Life Scientists that are
trained to think entrepreneurially about discovery, and nuturing and supporting
multiple, local teams to transition their new innovations and research into the
marketplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The I-Corps Site at Vanderbilt University
goals are twofold: 1) to effectively integrate educational opportunities for
both graduate and undergraduate students on innovation and entrepreneurship
within the traditional STEM and Life science curriculum, and 2) to motivate
scientists to engage further in customer discovery as part of their scientific
agenda, in the hopes that they will devote their science to addressing and
solving problems and real needs in society. The Site at Vanderbilt helps
overcome commercialization challenges by incorporating a for-credit course built
heavily on the I-Corps curriculum and through the hosting of workshops that
provide an introduction to customer discovery and business canvas development.
By providing a proven model of success and more cohesive structure, the program
ensures that faculty, staff, and students receive the best possible training and
are introduced to a vast array of regional and national entrepreneurial
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The I-Corps Site at Vanderbilt trains
participants to 1) create solutions to problems with significant positive impact
on communities, 2) focus on research with major economic development
opportunities, and 3) develop into globally competitive as STEM entrepreneurs.
Society will ultimately benefit via an improvement in quality of life through
the solutions created to address real-world issues. Middle Tennessee will
benefit by having a cohort of well-trained entrepreneurs who, by completing the
I-Corps program, will better understand how to identify a viable commercial
opportunity and subsequently oversee its successful operational implementation
and launch. This will speed the translation of research into new technologies.
The subsequent positive economic impacts will occur via these increases in
commercialization activities and the number of useful intellectual property
disclosures. Subsequent agreements with commercial partners will then grow the
region's entrepreneurial ecosystem and empower STEM-entrepreneurs in larger
numbers than ever before, thus increasing self confidence in undertaking
entrepreneurial endeavors and thus contributing positively to our nation's
overall economic growth and vibrancy.