* 1735788
* Laboratory Technician Support: For a new (U-Th)/He dating lab in the Department of Geology, UIUC
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* William Guenthner, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 673,589.00

Thermochronology is a vital tool in Earth systems science that allows
geoscientists to quantify the thermal evolution of rocks through time. Many
geologic processes perturb the temperatures of rocks in the upper crust
including the uplift and erosion of mountain belts, hydrothermal fluid flow
related to mineral resources, and the burial of rocks in regions that generate
hydrocarbons. This project will help establish a new thermochronology laboratory
at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC), by providing funding
for a laboratory technician to oversee the lab?s daily operations. This lab will
focus on a particular type of thermochronology?(Uranium-Thorium)/Helium
dating?and will be open to visiting researchers and collaborators from other
scientific institutions around the country. These visitors will include
undergraduate and graduate students who seek to further their training in an
important field of geologic study. Despite the prevalence, promise, and demand
for the (U-Th)/He dating method, only a handful of labs in the U.S. are
currently designed and properly staffed to accept visiting researchers on a
regular basis. The funding from this award will therefore allow greater access
to a wider pool of (U-Th)/He researchers that seek to advance the technique and
its applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The (U-Th)/He dating method consists of a
multiple step process, which the new technician will oversee. He or she will
have responsibilities that consist of both training and assisting visitors in
target mineral grain selection, preparation, and degassing methods necessary to
obtain He measurements, and supervising U, Th, Sm, Ca, and Zr analysis of
dissolved aliquots by ICP-MS. These methods require significant time commitments
and by joining the UIUC lab, the technician will expand the lab?s research
capabilities with increased sample through-put, and allow the lab to host
additional PIs with funding to use thermochronology. This grant will allow the
(U-Th)/He lab at UIUC to strengthen ongoing and develop new collaborations that
include projects focused on: 1) The use of correlations between zircon (U-Th)/He
age and effective uranium (eU) to constrain Proterozoic or ?deep-time? thermal
histories for orogens and cratons, 2) The development of Fe-oxide (U-Th)/He
dating in jasperoids from Carlin-Type Gold Deposits (CTGD) to constrain fluid
processes related to ore-formation, and 3) Advancing the zircon (U-Th)/He method
by parameterizing the process of radiation damage annealing in zircon.
Additional projects with current or future external collaborators where the UIUC
lab serves as the main center for (U-Th)/He dating will now be possible with
this support.