* 1735650
* Collaborative Research: The financial impact of inventor migration on individuals and regions
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Lee Fleming, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Joshua Trapani
* 07/31/2020
* USD 255,441.00

Silicon Valley contributes an increasingly disproportionate amount of innovation
and entrepreneurship to the U.S. economy.  If this trend continues, regional
innovation inequality in the United States will almost certainly be
exacerbated. Large segments of the nation?s potential scientific workforce might
fail to develop, or might be overlooked, if innovation is concentrated only in a
few regions. This project examines how the intra and inter-regional mobility of
engineers contributes to this process.  Among the many explanations given for
the rise of Silicon Valley to entrepreneurial and economic prominence is its
high-velocity labor market, in which workers are more loyal to their profession
than to any particular firm. However, companies clearly want to retain their
employees, both to recoup training investments and also to block them from
aiding rivals. This study will examine how intra-regional mobility influences
firm innovativeness, while also considering whether those employees might have
done better to start their own firm.  A region's overall welfare may also
benefit from increased mobility.  Inter-regional mobility also affects the
innovativeness of regions.  Concentration of innovation in a high tech region,
if the best inventors migrate, will likely increase regional innovative
inequality.  Migration not only between regions but also between firms may
affect inequality at the individual level as well. Workers may profit from
loyalty to their employer in that they become uniquely valuable by developing
firm-specific human capital, which would be lost if they left for another
organization, but it may prove more financially attractive for workers to
explore the labor market outside their current firm.  &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary data for this study will be patent holders. The project will first
curate a database of all inventor moves between firms and regions, based on U.S.
patents from 1976-2019. Although such might seem straightforward, lack of unique
identifiers as well as other subtleties of patent records render the
determination of moves non-trivial. For example, inventors sometimes assign
patents to multiple firms or file a series of patents at a set of alternating
firms such that it appears the inventor is bouncing and forth between two
employers. Next, the project will analyze trends in the regional migration of
inventors and assess the impact on productivity and inequality of such moves.
Given that moves are not random, outside factors influencing mobility such as
changes in employment laws and natural disasters will be utilized. These
resulting databases will also support dynamic visualization of inventor mobility
across all U.S. counties and time periods. Mobility will also be illustrated
with heat maps, illustrating net losses and gains of inventors across all U.S.
counties of the same time period and technology category. Ultimately,
policymakers will be able to visualize and inspect trends in regional innovation
inequality and determine which technical fields are becoming regionally
concentrated vs. dispersed. All data will be made available to the public.