* 1735708
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Assessing the Impacts of Global Amenity Migration on Land Use, Livelihoods, and Communal Identities
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2017,09/30/2019
* Melissa Wright, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 09/30/2019
* USD 14,400.00

This project examines the impacts of amenity migration from high income regions
in the Global North to middle and lower income regions in the Global South. As
property prices increase in high amenity destinations in North America and
Europe, a growing number of U.S., Canadian, and European citizens have sought to
buy residential property globally, allowing them relatively low-cost access to
tropical climates, beaches, and other lifestyle-oriented amenities. Often this
migration and its associated residential development has been heralded as
bringing economic development to poor rural communities, yet the specific
impacts of these flows on local residents' land ownership and use, housing
access, and means of making a living are not well understood. Scholars have
begun to document how global amenity migration increases inequality and social
fragmentation in communities, but little is known about the effects of such
migration on local land use, livelihoods, and housing, nor how these changes are
experienced by racial minority groups who have historically experienced social
and economic marginalization. This project will address these gaps and create
knowledge useful for constructing local, national, and international policies to
mitigate some of the potentially negative impacts of growing global amenity
migration on amenity destination communities. Â Further, the project will train
two undergraduate research assistants and provide support to enable a graduate
student to establish an independent research career. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to demonstrate how amenity-oriented migration from high income
regions in North America impacts ownership and use of land, the means of making
a living, and access to housing across race, class, gender, and nationality in
receiving communities. By analyzing these impacts in a predominantly Afro-
descendant community on Costa Rica's Caribbean coastline, this research advances
the study of amenity migration beyond its classic U.S.- and European-based
contexts toward a more careful examination of how race, alongside class, shapes
the experiences of residents in amenity destinations. The project employs mixed-
methods research, including geospatial analysis of satellite imagery to
establish broad patterns of land use change in the study area; analysis of land
sale records to indicate ownership patterns and property subdivision rates; and
a survey of past and present land-owning households to demonstrate patterns of
land ownership, housing access, and means of making a living for groups across
race, class, gender, and nationality. Finally, semi-structured interviews and
ethnographic observation will provide insight into individual and communal
experiences of land use, livelihood, and identity changes in the community.
Through community round table discussions, the project will broaden local
community representation within amenity development projects and local and
national planning efforts.