* 1735797
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Extra-Territorial Sovereignty, Nationalism, and the Politics of Development
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Jennifer Fluri, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 02/28/2019
* USD 15,991.00

This doctoral dissertation project will explore emerging questions in
geopolitics about interactions among extra-territorial sovereignty (the power
nation-states exert over people and places outside their borders), state-
building, ethnic nationalism, and multi-ethnic contestations over space, place,
and political expression.  The project will focus on the ways through which
foreign direct investments and foreign investments in infrastructure development
legitimize practices of extra-territorial sovereignty, how state security
operates to monitor and control the livelihoods of marginalized populations, and
how those populations then navigate the restrictions placed upon them.  The
investigators will analyze the way contemporary social, political, and cultural
transformations condition how different ethnic groups attach meaning to and
claim geographic places and how extra-territorial sovereignty shapes the
politics of development and produces new political beliefs, expectations, and
experiences.  The project will provide an empirical test of new theories
emanating from feminist geopolitical thought that will advance scholarly
engagements with affect, emotion, memory, and everyday practices to better
understand macro-scale geopolitics.  It also will contribute understanding about
how state and extra-territorial sovereignties interact to impact individuals in
their everyday lives. The project also will provide support to enable a graduate
student to establish an independent research career.   Through an ethnographic
case study of Chinese economic and political influence in Nepal, the doctoral
student will investigate the following set of core questions: (1) How do the
seemingly banal, everyday, and gendered practices of Tibetan nationalism and
place making in one part of Kathmandu reveal the messy intricacies of Chinese
extra-territorial politics of development in Nepal?  (2) How do Chinese extra-
territorial sovereignty and Nepali ethnic nationalism produce Tibetan refugee
subjectivities in Nepal?  (3) How do place based identity politics and Nepali
ethnic nationalism produce contestations between Tibetan refugees and members of
other ethnic groups in Nepal?  The recent intensification of Chinese politico-
economic influence in Nepal makes this project significant and timely.  In
addition to providing new insights regarding this specific case, the project
will have great value in helping to better understand the complex political,
cultural, and socioeconomic dynamics among people and states in a broader range
of other settings of interest to the U.S. from a national security and foreign
affairs perspective.  The doctoral student will employ a combination of
qualitative research methods, including interviews, focus groups, participant
observation, visual methods, and content/discourse analysis.  Using these
methods, the student will examine how everyday interactions, events, and
practices reveal the intricacies of macro-scale geopolitics.  In doing so, this
dissertation will provide additional linkages between feminist political
geography and geographies of sovereignty and territory.