* 1735824
* Science Policy Research Report: Metrics for Evaluating Big Science
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2017,02/28/2018
* William Bianco, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 02/28/2018
* USD 49,583.00

Big Science programs such as the International Space Station or the Large Hadron
Collider expensive and their true worth is fully realized only after years or
decades. The high cost of sustaining these programs often crowds out other
scientific research. To address this challenge, this project reviews mechanisms
to gauge the future productivity of Big Science projects. The analysis will
identify waypoint mechanisms and assess their predictive power. This research
will give government agencies and the scientific community an overview of tools
for understanding how best to evaluate and manage Big Science projects, thereby
increasing the efficient use of public and private dollars to advance scientific
progress. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Survey results of program directors at NSF, DOE,
NASA, and NIH characterize current best-practices for making interim assessments
of infrastructure-heavy research programs. New candidate waypoints are
developed, and tested by analyzing the scientific research supported by the
International Space Station. The quantitative analyses will control for a host
of project-specific factors such as the sub-discipline of the research, the
background and characteristics of the principal investigator, and the initial
funding date to ascertain the degree to which candidate waypoints provide
statistical rigor to predict the eventual attainment of valued outcomes.