* 1735627
* Type I: Invent Penn State I-Corps Site
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Lisa Erickson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 584,012.00

This project, from Penn State University, creates an I-Corps Site at this
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-
funded entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and
support multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps
Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the
National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Penn State I-Corps Site, operated under the
umbrella of the Invent Penn State Initiative and the Office of Entrepreneurship
and Commercialization, supports the translation of university research, develops
partnerships between the university and regional economic development
organizations and the national I-Corps Network, and trains students to be the
drivers of research commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Penn State
I-Corps Site teams that pursue commercialization through two different programs,
the TechCelerator@State College and the Happy Valley LaunchBox. These two
programs are structured to nurture innovator teams using Lean Startup
methodology and embody the notion of nurturing innovators both with deep craft
and fresh eyes, that is, people with some who have depth of technical expertise
as well as those with a fresh perspective on new markets, communication
technologies, and consumer concepts. The TechCelerator Program, established in
2011 seeks to accelerate the commercialization of University technology. The
Happy Valley Launchbox, created in 2015, is a community-university accelerator
that makes extensive use of Lean Startup principles and Design Thinking to help
teams bring their ideas into the marketplace. The I-Corps Site program provides
funds to teams that are either selected out of one of these programs or have
members combined from both programs to support the translation of university
technology. The I-Corps Site also engages the broad network of Penn State
Innovation hubs across the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of this project have the
potential for significant broader impacts across the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and the region. Initial activity focuses on Penn State's main
University Park Campus. However, Invent Penn State operates 13 community
innovation hubs throughout the State, affiliated with the University's network
of Commonwealth campuses. In addition, the Penn State I-Corps Site, in
collaboration with the Upstate New York regional I-Corps Node will run summer
programs to train leaders from the commonwealth innovation hubs in Lean startup
methodology and will engage their promising teams with the Upstate New York
(UNY) regional I-Corps Node.