* 1735095
* NRT: Interdisciplinary Training in Complex Networks and Systems
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Bernice Pescosolido, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2023
* USD 3,049,174.00

Understanding complex networked systems is key to solving some of the most
vexing problems confronting humankind, from discovering how dynamic brain
connections give rise to thoughts and behaviors, to detecting and preventing the
spread of misinformation or unhealthy behaviors across a population. Graduate
training, however, typically occurs in one of two dimensions: experimental and
observational methods in a specific area such as biology and sociology, or in
general methodologies such as machine learning and data science. With more and
more students seeking to gain sufficient expertise in mathematical and
computational methods on top of domain-specific laboratory and social analysis
methodologies, a greater demand for more efficient training is emerging. This
National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to Indiana
University will address this growing need with an integrated dual PhD program
that trains students to be "bidisciplinary" in Complex Networks and Systems
(CNS) and another discipline of their choosing from the natural and social
sciences. It will seamlessly integrate traditional education with
interdisciplinary hands-on research in a culture of academic and human
diversity. This program will provide unique interdisciplinary training for
thirty-four (34) PhD students, including twenty-two (22) funded trainees. The
program will provide additional training experience to 40 summer affiliate
students and a population of more than 300 participants across the participating
PhD programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The training program capitalizes on the new
Indiana University Network Science Institute (IUNI). The Institute's 165+
faculty members will serve in interdisciplinary PhD program committees to be co-
chaired by research mentors from both CNS and the target empirical domain.
Project-driven, team-based research at IUNI will seamlessly integrate academic
education with interdisciplinary hands-on scientific and industrial research.
Trainees will learn to connect the general-purpose, computational expertise of
CNS to the deep, domain-specific research methodologies of the natural,
behavioral, and social sciences thus bridging the gap between distinct training
cultures. They will be a new breed of STEM scientists that escapes the silos of
disciplinary training to address the complex problems of the 21st century.
Specifically, the four goals of training activity are: 1) provide dual research
proficiency; 2) develop collaborative skills via early integration into problem-
driven, interdisciplinary research; 3) produce a diverse workforce by recruiting
student cohorts from a broad set of disciplines and varied backgrounds to be
trained within a team culture; 4) establish a sustainable interdisciplinary
training model by enlarging the institutional channels created between
informatics and natural and social sciences to other Indiana University
departments and institutions. A science-of-science study conducted throughout
the NRT project will evaluate the efficacy of interdisciplinary training of the
students in this program. This project will develop a flexible dual PhD program
and best-practices to allow additional departments at Indiana University to join
the program in the future, as well as other institutions to develop similar
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students
in high priority interdisciplinary research areas, through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.