* 1735258
* NRT: Improving strategies for hunger relief and food security using computational data science
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Albert Esterline, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,999,999.00

Food insecurity occurs when individuals have limited access to safe and
nutritious food for an active, healthy life. It is a global issue that affects a
significant number of individuals domestically. To address it, humanitarian
organizations involved in hunger relief work collaboratively with the government
and private sector. Humanitarian organizations rely on uncertain sources of
supply, respond to uneven and variable needs, and make careful decisions
regarding how to use scarce resources. These organizations generate data on a
massive scale about food supply, food distribution, and food need, which helps
them to perform their function. Challenges arise from not only the uncertainty
of supply and demand but also from variations in information collected by
different organizations. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship
(NRT) award to North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University will
develop an innovative, interdisciplinary training model in data science designed
to grow the workforce that will help these organizations analyze their efforts
and improve the provision of food aid at the local, state, and federal level.
This traineeship seeks to provide a unique and comprehensive training experience
for a total of 50 masters and doctoral students, including forty-five (45)
funded trainees, by combining disciplines in industrial and systems engineering,
computer science, mathematics, agricultural economics, sociology, and public
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At present, no formal training mechanism exists by
which students can acquire the interdisciplinary knowledge needed to derive
insight from heterogeneous big data generated by the food aid supply chain
because (a) traditional STEM student training in this area does not include the
public policy perspective and (b) working with big data is limited to a subset
of the STEM population. To answer this need, this project's research and
education efforts will use existing data from the domestic humanitarian hunger
relief supply chain as the basis for an innovative, evidence-based, scalable
approach to training its future workforce. Our program will provide a model for
preparing the next generation of data scientists employed in the humanitarian
sector. The overarching goal is two-fold: (i) to create a sustainable training
model that improves the preparation of students in STEM fields to pursue careers
in data science and (ii) to provide training experiences that will orient
students on the use of big data to inform and potentially transform the delivery
of services that have societal impact. We propose to leverage big data to reduce
uncertainty in this supply chain and drive more effective modes of food
distribution by addressing information inequality, visualization, and
information-driven decision modeling. The program will feature a summer training
institute, industry/academia research clusters, professional development
seminars, and ongoing evaluation of the training model. Students who complete
all requirements will obtain new knowledge and skills with respect to big data
collection, interpretation, and its use in decision-making; obtain new knowledge
about using big data to address multidisciplinary problems in hunger relief and
food security; and obtain the training necessary to pass an industry-level
certification exam. At North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State
University, the award will help to establish a new certificate-based
interdisciplinary graduate training program in data science. In the larger
humanitarian sector, the research generated by this work will improve access to
food by reducing information inequality, enhance operational decision-making by
providing real-time adaptable visualization of information, and create new
information-driven decision models that can positively impact food aid policy
and operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program
is designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students
in high priority interdisciplinary research areas, through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-
funded by the Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP)
program. AGEP funds research and the development, implementation, and
investigation of models to transform the dissertation phase of doctoral
education, postdoctoral training and/or faculty advancement of historically
underrepresented minorities (URMs) in Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics (STEM) and/or STEM education research.