* 1735002
* RAPID: Increasing Accessibility and Discoverability at the Alaska Native Language Archive
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Siri Tuttle, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 07/31/2019
* USD 190,479.00

Endangered language archives play an important role in creating access to a
region's cultural, historical and linguistic knowledge for the general public
and scholars from a range of disciplines. Obtaining access to archived
information can be a complex task. For a non-specialist user, it can be
difficult to choose the right terms to type into a search box. The better the
catalogue description attached to an archived item, the better the chances that
a distant user may be able to access it. This project, focused on archived
Native American language materials, will create a process for describing and
integrating the combined knowledge that layers of annotation represent, so that
users can better access those materials. The Native American Languages Act,
passed by the U.S. Congress in 1990, enacted into policy the recognition of the
unique status and importance of Native American languages. Knowledge of these
languages deepens and enriches our understanding of our multicultural history;
it is in the national interest to preserve and share this knowledge. Linguistic
documentation of Native American languages has been preserved in libraries and
archives since colonial times, but modern technology has given archivists new
ways to share access to information. The Alaska Native Language Archive (ANLA)
handles Native Language materials for all of the twenty-two Alaska Native
Languages, as well as serving as a repository for related languages. This
project seeks to broaden and improve access to materials held by ANLA by
creating a workflow for the curation of important collections to create access
for stakeholders in Alaska Native communities as well as in academic and
pedagogical circles. Broader impacts also include the training of a graduate
student, and the benefits from modernization of the workflow and the protocols
for handling new deposits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ANLA seeks to increase
discoverability and reproducibility of data on the region's indigenous languages
through professionalization of the archive. The archive has always depended on
collection improvement by knowledgeable users. This used to take the form of
annotation to folders of papers, or transcriptions of recordings: a linguist
would contribute notes after studying the work of other linguists, and these
notes would form a new archived item. In the digital world, the layers of
relationships between a recording and its derivatives (like transcriptions or
other notes and annotations on the content) require careful organization to
maintain. With the rapid advances in information science, adding staff with this
expertise and ideally also in linguistics will enhance the discoverability and
usability of ANLA's data sets, which represent some of the richest language
deposits existing for Alaskan and Arctic languages. This project will develop
protocols, workflow, and collection management practices in line with best
approaches in archival sciences. As a test case, this project will develop a
workflow for collection improvement by focusing on a specific subcollection and
developing it to its best access level. To do this, a graduate student will
annotate and re-catalogue a large set of texts in a single language (Lower
Tanana Dene/Athabascan) to demonstrate how subcollection development can improve
access for academic and other stakeholders.