* 1735513
* CRISP Type 2/Collaborative Research:  Understanding the Benefits and Mitigating the Risks of Interdependence in Critical Infrastructure Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Margaret Eppstein, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 12/31/2022
* USD 979,525.00

This Critical Resilient Interdependent Infrastructure Systems and Processes
(CRISP) project will identify new strategies to increase resilience in
interdependent electric power, communication and natural gas networks. These
three critical systems increasingly depend on one another to keep our energy and
communication systems running. In some ways connections between these systems
can make them work better, but in other ways connections can increase the chance
of disastrous failures that could leave millions of people without heat,
electricity or the ability to communicate. For example, a severe winter storm in
the Northeastern United States could lead to both power grid failures and
natural gas failures, leading to failures in telephone and Internet services,
making it even more difficult to restore these critical services. Such
"cascading failures" make it even harder for these systems to recover from
natural disasters and intentional attacks. This project will identify strategies
to make interdependent infrastructure systems more resilient to these cascading
failures. Four Research Directions will combine to address this problem.
Research Direction 1 will adapt new computational algorithms, such as Influence
Graphs that can identify non-obvious critical connections and the Random
Chemistry algorithm that can rapidly find critical triggering events, to the
particular problems of cascading failures in interdependent infrastructure
systems. Research Direction 2 will create new models of interdependence among
natural gas, electric power and communication networks, which will form a
testbed for computational algorithms. The resulting models will balance
computational complexity and engineering detail by using detailed dynamical
models of each system when necessary and simplified mathematical models when
abstractions can be validated from real data. Research Direction 3 will develop
and evaluate engineering solutions and coordination strategies that can mitigate
harmful interdependencies and leverage beneficial interconnections. These will
leverage insights from the application of new computational algorithms to the
interdependence testbed, such as the identification of critical failure paths,
to develop both real-time dynamic rescheduling algorithms and cost-effective
long-term planning strategies. Research Direction 4 will use stakeholder
interviews to evaluate the diverse ways that the electricity, natural gas, and
communications industries understand risk, and facilitate discussion among key
industry participants regarding interdependencies among these systems. The
results will reveal the most effective paths to integrating new control and
planning strategies to increase resilience in these diverse
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create significant societal
benefits by uncovering new ways to reduce the risk of catastrophic failures
among critical infrastructure systems. Because of interdependence among
infrastructures, low probability, high cost cascading failures, which can have
billions of dollars of economic and societal impacts, can contribute more to
overall risk, relative to more frequent, small events. Reducing this risk can
have enormous benefits to society. To ensure that results from this project have
practical impacts the team will be guided by a Research Advisory Board that
includes a large power grid operator (ISO New England), a software vendor for
the electricity industry (GE/Alstom), a natural gas company (Vermont Gas), and
the MITRE corporation. Furthermore, the project will integrate education and
research through new curriculum and outreach to high school students. Public
data that result from this project will be released through the github
repository at: https://github.com/phines/infrastructure-risk, as well as through
the project web site at http://www.uvm.edu/~tesla/project/nsf-crisp/. All
research data associated with this project, including public and non-public
data, will be preserved for at least 5 years after the end of the project.