* 1735886
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Assessing the Effects of Tourism Development on Small-Scale Fisheries
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Karly Miller, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 01/31/2020
* USD 12,860.00

This project will analyze how the expansion of tourism into rural coastal
regions is changing the dynamics of human-environment interactions and
livelihoods related to small-scale fisheries. Overlooked for decades due to
their small and informal nature, small-scale fisheries have increasingly
garnered attention as their socio-economic importance and ecological impact is
better understood. In rural coastal ecosystems, small-scale fisheries are often
a primary source of livelihoods, protein, and micronutrients for local
populations and can be the dominant form of marine resource-use. Globally they
account for up to a third of global fisheries catches, and provide 50% of the
seafood caught for human consumption. Small-scale fisheries are
disproportionately concentrated in lower-income regions where their importance
to coastal communities is amplified by isolation and poverty, and high resource
dependence and limited environmental management make ecosystems vulnerable to
over exploitation. In many of these areas tourism is viewed as a pathway for
sustainable development, with the hope that new livelihood opportunities will
elevate the socioeconomic wellbeing of the community and reduce pressure on
natural resources. Despite the potential for such development, research
increasingly shows that the socio-economic and ecological implications of these
livelihood transitions vary widely, creating a disconnect between conservation
and development planning and actual social and environmental outcomes.
Understanding the mechanisms of how tourism affects coastal socio-ecological
systems will enable governments, managers, and communities to anticipate the
positive and negative impacts of tourism development, and be more prepared to
strategically mitigate or counteract the negative aspects. The project will also
contribute to the training of a doctoral student.

This research will investigate how the availability of alternative livelihoods
changes fishing behavior; how the influx of tourists changes the demand for and
local consumption of seafood; and how these changes affect community and
household socio-economic status and food security and impact marine resources.
Although this research project will focus on a case study in Colombia, the
research will provide new insights and approaches for dealing with tourism's
impacts in many other countries, including the United States. The research will
be conducted in eight communities on the Pacific Coast of Colombia that are
being transformed through tourism development. These communities share similar
sociocultural heritage and exist within a connected ecosystem, but differ in the
extent and nature of tourism development, allowing for a side-by-side comparison
of the livelihood transition and social and ecological consequences of tourism
development. Interviews, observation, and archival research will be used to
build upon previous fieldwork in order to contextualize, clarify, and probe the
causality of relationships that emerged in the analysis of quantitative
household surveys.