* 1735786
* Postdoctoral Researchers: The Impact of Labor Regulations and Visa Policy
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* John Bound, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 07/31/2022
* USD 464,323.00

Doctoral students and post-doctoral appointments are critical inputs to research
and develop scientific expertise. The combination of labor supply and research
demand has fueled the increasing prevalence of post-doctoral appointments at
U.S. colleges and universities, with numbers rising from 18,399 in 1980 to
63,593 in 2014. Even as job opportunities for faculty and permanent employment
in university science have stagnated, the number of post-doc appointments has
continued to grow, particularly in the life sciences and biomedical fields.
Concerns about basic employment protections and the long-term health of the
scientific talent pool stem from modest earnings for long hours and uncertain
long-term job prospects. Because the pipeline of new scientific discoveries and
innovation depends on the flow and persistence of talent in the scientific
workforce, this research informs questions and policy critical to the progress
of science and economic prosperity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research examines
how labor market regulations and immigration policies affect the scientific
labor market in terms of what universities must pay research personnel, the
costs of graduate education, and the flow of doctorate students and doctorate
recipients from abroad. This research focuses on three types of policies
affecting university scientific personnel: visa requirements and terms for
student (F- 1), exchange visitor (J-1), and high-skill specialty workers (H-1B);
tuition charges and other required expenses for doctorate students, and; labor
rules including the proposed change in the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA)
minimum salary threshold for exclusion from overtime requirements. This project
builds a database from administrative salary data from public universities and
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) releases from United States Citizenship and
Immigration Services and Department of Homeland Security which include doctorate
level individuals with F-1, J-1, and H-1B visa status. Econometric analysis will
be used to identify the demand for scientific personnel, including effects on
earnings and the distribution of employment.