* 1735038
* NRT: Transformative Research in Urban Sustainability Training (T-RUST)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Carol Miller, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,999,976.00

Changing industrial landscapes can lead to unique socioeconomic challenges in an
urban environment. For example, aging infrastructure and a decline in
manufacturing activity can leave cities with abandoned industrial sites,
polluted environments and declining populations. A shift to a technology-based
economy with a more STEM-focused workforce may be one solution for sustainable
cities. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship award to Wayne
State University will train graduate master's and doctoral students to work with
communities, businesses, industries, scientists, and policy makers to address
challenges faced in postindustrial urban settings and prepare them for public,
private, and academic leadership positions. This traineeship will take an
interdisciplinary approach integrating science, engineering, policy, economics
and communication. Altogether, this program will provide a unique and
comprehensive training and educational opportunity for one hundred twenty-two
(122) students, including fifteen (15) NSF-funded trainees, seven (7) additional
graduate students, and 100 undergraduate students, who will have the training to
solve national urban needs of sustainable future cities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trainees will gain unique technical and professional
training using an interdisciplinary systems approach. Education, research and
practice will be integrated across disciplines through partnerships with
entrepreneurial technology business and community based programs that are
innovating in the reinvention of urban areas. The research will feature three
complementary concentrations: Urban Ecological Systems; Urban Redevelopment and
the Blue Economy; and Sustainable Urban Water Infrastructure. Trainees will
learn how to apply systems analysis tools to evaluate natural and engineered
urban environmental systems while evaluating and communicating policy and
management options related to particularly challenging environmental problems
that the physical sciences alone cannot resolve. The goal is to move beyond the
constraints of narrow specialization and instead prepare holistically trained,
interdisciplinary scientists/engineers who can solve today's complex problems. A
second goal is to increase underrepresented minorities in STEM research and
prepare them for public, private, and academic leadership positions where they
can effectively address the complex issues of urban sustainability systems. In
support of these goals, the program will include an interdisciplinary
competency-based curriculum aligned with community environmental needs and labor
market demands, integrated with: a dual-title doctoral degree; disciplinary,
interdisciplinary and inter-institutional preparation that melds coursework;
community project-based learning and service; seminar/colloquia; video
documentaries; and internships. Internships will be identified with an External
Advisory Panel to ensure they are responsive to specific environmental issues
that have science, engineering, social justice, political, and economic
dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students
in high priority interdisciplinary research areas, through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.