* 1735173
* NRT-INFEWS: Indigenous Food, Energy, and Water Security and Sovereignty
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Benedict Colombi, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,994,286.00

About 35% of homes in the Navajo Nation are not connected to central power or
drinking water systems. To address this issue, the National Science Foundation
Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the University of Arizona, in partnership
with Diné College and Navajo Technical University, will develop a diverse STEM
workforce with intercultural awareness and multidisciplinary knowledge/skills
for high priority research in sustainable food, energy, and water systems
(FEWS). Such systems are appropriate in many remote regions of the world. By
partnering with Diné College and Navajo Technical University, the project will
directly engage underrepresented minorities in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics. Trainees will major in traditional disciplines while completing
the program, which consists of internships, a FEWS-themed minor, professional
development, and immersion in indigenous communities. Trainees will participate
in the design and construction of pilot-scale capstone projects in dispersed
water purification and greenhouse system design in underserved areas of the
Navajo Nation. The projects will produce learning models for FEWS infrastructure
development in areas that cannot be served from central facilities. The
traineeship will provide stipends for 12 MS and 14 PhD students from several
related science and engineering disciplines. Eleven students not funded by NSF
will complete the program (6 MS and 5 PhD). It is anticipated that an additional
40 students will complete the FEWS minor and about 400 students will be impacted
through participation in enriched courses cross-listed in multiple departments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The traineeship centers on the development of novel,
sustainable solutions for off-grid production of safe drinking water and
controlled environment agriculture systems. Research will focus on innovative
photovoltaics, holographics, sensors and controls, desalination of brackish
water, brine treatment and disposal, and materials and systems resiliency. Food-
energy-water systems will be integrated with cultural norms, working
collaboratively with indigenous communities using a coupled natural human
systems approach to design/build culturally acceptable technology. The research
program will employ (1) the use of semi-transparent organic photovoltaic
materials sheets as greenhouse cover to provide light of sufficient intensity
and quality to achieve substantial, high-quality crop yields while powering off-
grid controlled environment agriculture systems, and (2) solar-driven
nanofiltration devices operated with algal bioreactors to produce potable and
irrigation water using a treatment strategy tailored to the use of the water. In
both areas, the program will draw on indigenous knowledge of land and water
practices to make these technical innovations acceptable for widespread public
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed
to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new potentially
transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The Traineeship
Track is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary research areas, through comprehensive traineeship
models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce
and research needs.