* 1735087
* NRT: Boston UniverCity - Partnering Graduate Students and Cities to Tackle Urban Environmental Challenges
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Pamela Templer, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,999,530.00

More than half of the world's population lives in cities, and the shift to urban
population centers is anticipated to continue growing. Cities often face
environmental challenges such as air and water pollution, extreme weather
events, or storm surges. Addressing these issues in urban environments is
complex and requires diverse areas of expertise, including interdisciplinary
technical knowledge and the ability to communicate effectively with all
stakeholders. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship award to
Boston University will prepare graduate students to tackle the major
environmental problems confronting cities using an interdisciplinary approach
that fuses biogeoscience and environmental health, with an emphasis on
engagement and communication with policy makers, the private sector, and the
broader community. This project anticipates training 60 Ph.D. students,
including 20 NRT-funded trainees, from biogeoscience, environmental health, and
statistics. Graduates will be equipped to address foundational questions about
the physical environment and to reduce the impacts of the environment on both
ecosystem function and human health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The training model
has three linked elements, including (i) interdisciplinary coursework in
biogeoscience, environmental health, data analysis, field research methods, and
city governance offered at Boston University; (ii) workshops and internships
with cities and the private sector; and (iii) outreach through mixed media to
communicate urban environmental questions, science, and solutions to the public.
Student research topics will be formulated using a collaborative process that
involves students, faculty, policy-makers, members of the private sector, and an
external advisory council. This training program (i) will contribute to a
diverse and globally competitive STEM workforce through use of evidence-based
approaches in recruitment, mentorship, training, and retention of Ph.D.
students, with an emphasis on underrepresented minority students; (ii) will lead
to dissemination of a new training model that can be adopted by other
universities around the U.S.; and (iii) will result in translation and
communication of research results to policy-makers at multiple levels of
decision-making. The program will be evaluated through regular assessments of
trainee learning and communication skills and by assessments of how trainees?
efforts have affected decisions made by the city of Boston and other
stakeholders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program
is designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new,
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
Innovations in Graduate Education Track is dedicated solely to piloting,
testing, and evaluating novel, innovative, and potentially transformative
approaches to graduate education.