* 1735558
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Fire-Driven Alternative States and Spatial Variability in Forest Resilience at a Dry Forest Ecotone
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Alan Taylor, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 06/30/2019
* USD 15,939.00

This doctoral dissertation project will investigate the drivers of forest gain
and loss as well as tree regeneration and reburn severity in an area that is
highly sensitive to environmental change - the dry forests on the eastern slopes
of the Sierra Nevada Mountain of California. By examining vegetation change
since 1950 at the lower margins of dry forest, and how these systems have
changed in response to fires since 1986, the doctoral student will investigate
the potential for fire-driven alternative states of forest and non-forest and
how fine-scale spatial variability in topography and climate affect forest
resilience. Given observed and predicted dry forest loss due to changes in
temperature and increasing intensity and frequency of disturbances, determining
where and when dry forests are likely to shift to an alternative state is
critical to developing management plans to preserve forest cover. The results of
this project will help guide management treatments such as prescribed fire,
thinning and tree planting, by identifying portions of the landscape and
conditions conducive to rapid vegetation change. This project will also enhance
science training and education through participation of undergraduate students
in field and laboratory work.

Future change in dry forest systems is likely to be abrupt and nonlinear, with
severe disturbance potentially causing a conversion of forest to non-forest and
positive feedbacks between disturbance and vegetation to some extent
perpetuating the new mosaic of vegetation types. Ecotones, the boundary regions
between ecosystems, are at the leading edge of change dynamics. This project
will use aerial photographs to initially assess how the distribution of forest,
woodland and steppe have changed at a forest/steppe ecotone since 1950, and
relate shifts in distribution to topography, climate and disturbance history.
Next, a network of field plots will be surveyed at the same sites in areas
burned between 1987 and 2009 to evaluate post-fire tree regeneration and its
drivers and the potential for fire-originated alternative vegetation states.
Finally, remote sensing data on vegetation change, fire severity and disturbance
history will be used to evaluate the potential for positive fire-vegetation
feedbacks in areas burned twice since 1984 at the same ecotone. Insights gained
from dry forest dynamics in the eastern Sierra Nevada through this project will
be relevant to dry forest ecotones that are vulnerable to persistent fire-driven
vegetation change elsewhere in the U.S. and around the world.