* 1735688
* Collaborative Research: Science Policy Research Report: Government Brokerage of Innovation Networks
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Andrew Schrank, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 06/30/2018
* USD 24,789.00

Federal agencies offer American innovators at least two different sources of
support: first, seed money and consulting services that would be all but
inaccessible to early stage entrepreneurs at competitive market prices; and
second, introductions to potential partners in collaborative networks. Given
that innovation demands collaboration as well as competition, the latter
contributions are no less important than the former. But they are decidedly less
well known and understood. This is partly because federal efforts to build
collaborative networks tend to occur early in the process, before innovations
come to market and capture the public?s imagination; and partly because they are
informal, and public officials have an incentive to downplay their informal
contributions?which tend to go unmeasured and unrewarded by their agencies?and
highlight their formal roles, like offering small firms and start-ups low-cost
finance and consulting services. The unintended consequence of this oversight,
however, is that federal efforts to build innovation networks are hard to
document and duplicate. By evaluating the extent and importance of the federal
government?s role in network-building, this research report considers the
development of new mandates, metrics, and incentives that will encourage
beneficial brokerage by public officials, innovation by their private
counterparts, and prosperity in the country as a whole.

The report draws a distinction between two types of brokers: middlemen, who are
paid to transfer goods or services between unrelated parties and thus depend on
fees; and catalysts, who build mutually beneficial relationships between
unrelated parties free of charge and thus depend on external (e.g., government)
support. It gauges the extent and importance of catalyst brokerage in federal
innovation institutions by means of a systematic comparison of the National
Science Foundation, National Institutes of Health, National Network for
Manufacturing Innovation, National Institute of Standards and Technology,
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, and the Small Business Innovation
Research program, among others. And if offers policy recommendations designed to
foster catalyst brokerage, where valuable, at low (or no) cost--including
changes to the staffing, programming, and evaluation of federal agencies and
programs.