* 1735362
* NRT-INFEWS: Training in Theory and Application of Cross-scale Resilience in Agriculturally Dominated Social Ecological Systems
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Leen-Kiat Soh, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,998,886.00

This National Science Foundation Traineeship (NRT) award to the University of
Nebraska - Lincoln establishes a new graduate training program that focuses on
understanding the resilience of agricultural systems. Nebraska's agricultural
system in the Platte River Basin is of economic, social and natural value; but
the river basin's ability to resist damage from outside threats (e.g. pollution,
pests, draught) and recover rapidly is unknown. This training program at the
University of Nebraska will examine resilience of agricultural landscapes
through the disciplines of agronomy, natural resources, computer sciences,
engineering and public policy. The program anticipates training 25 PhD and 25 MS
students, including 23 funded trainees, from natural resources, environmental
science, agronomy, entomology, plant sciences, geosciences, biosystems
engineering, computer science, and public policy. Trainees will engage with
external partners from the agricultural industry, government agencies, and other
organizations that have an interest and stake in maintaining productive
agricultural systems. This broad graduate training will help develop a workforce
and agricultural industry better capable of managing future demands on food,
energy, and water systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NRT program will focus on
understanding aspects of resilience in water-stressed and energy-demanding
agricultural landscapes and will utilize resilience and panarchy theory,
adaptive management, novel sensing technologies and modeling, and policy
interventions. Such interdisciplinary training is rare in graduate programs in
the United States, but is vital to prepare the next generation of natural
resource scientists, producers, managers, engineers, and policymakers so they
may respond to the challenges created by increasing demands for diminishing and
interconnected resources, and the need to maintain and build resilience in
stressed watersheds. This NRT program will serve as the innovative foundation
for a permanent interdisciplinary graduate program in the resilience of agro-
ecosystems. The program will ensure that students, academic programs, government
agencies, and the private sector engage in building and preserving natural and
agricultural ecosystems to meet local and global demands for water, clean
energy, food, and ecosystem services. Graduate student research will focus on
the complex and intertwined ecological, technical, and societal systems involved
in managing resources in the 21st century, particularly in complex landscapes
managed for agricultural production. Further, the program will help develop
innovative tools for data collection, analysis, and synthesis to support
management and restoration decisions in agricultural systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to
encourage the development and implementation of bold, new potentially
transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The Traineeship
Track is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary research areas, through comprehensive traineeship
models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce
and research needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is co-funded by the
Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP), the Division for
Education and Human Resources (EHR) Core Research (ECR) program, and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). AGEP funds
research and the development, implementation, and investigation of models to
transform the dissertation phase of doctoral education, postdoctoral training
and/or faculty advancement of historically underrepresented minorities (URMs) in
STEM and/or STEM education research. The ECR program (NSF 15-509) of fundamental
research in STEM education provides funding in critical research areas that are
essential, broad and enduring. EHR seeks proposals that will help synthesize,
build and/or expand research foundations in the following focal areas: STEM
learning, STEM learning environments, STEM workforce development, and broadening
participation in STEM. EPSCoR co-funds projects that advance excellence in
science and engineering research and education.  Fostering sustainable increases
in research, education, and training capacity and competitiveness within EPSCoR
jurisdictions will enable EPSCoR participants to have increased engagement in
areas supported by the NSF.