* 1735551
* 6th ASM Conference on Cell-Cell Communication in Bacteria; October 16-19, 2017, Athens, Georgia
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2018
* Eric Stabb, American Society For Microbiology
* Standard Grant
* Devaki Bhaya
* 05/31/2018
* USD 9,100.00

This award will support students, postdoctoral researchers and early career
investigators at the American Society of Microbiology(ASM) Conference on Cell-
Cell Communication in Bacteria (CCCB6) to be held in Athens, Georgia in October,
2017. The conference showcases innovative new multi-disciplinary and theory-
driven research to garner a deeper understanding of the cell-cell communication
underpinning coordinated group behaviors in bacteria. Such signaling within and
between species of microbes, often termed ?quorum sensing?, controls a range of
microbial behaviors and processes with enormous consequences for human and
animal health, agriculture, energy, and the environment. The budget requested
will be used to support travel of early-career investigators, as well as
postdoctoral and student researchers, several of whom will be selected for oral
presentations based on their submitted conference abstracts. The organizers of
the conference have made a particular effort to be broadly inclusive in terms of
gender balance and minority participation.

The conference will bring together leading researchers in the field including
international participants. The organizers present a forward-thinking agenda at
this conference, complementing the microbiological focus with presentations by
theorists, synthetic biologists, computational biologists, engineers, chemists
and physicists. Sessions cover such topics as the role of bacterial cell-cell
communication in disease, the chemical diversity of signals, the evolution of
microbial social behavior, bacterial group behaviors, computational modeling of
regulatory circuits, ecological perspectives on cell-cell signaling, and applied
aspects of signal disruption.