* 1735199
* Summit on Two-Year College Data Science Curricula
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Roxy Peck, American Statistical Association
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 12/31/2018
* USD 49,986.00

The demand for qualified data professionals in industry and government and the
surge of four-year degree programs in data science create urgent opportunities
for two-year colleges. The current supply of data professionals cannot keep up
with projected demand if the sole source is four-year colleges and universities.
Moreover, two-year colleges serve a large number of first-generation college
students and students from groups underrepresented in STEM, and they therefore
provide a means of increasing diversity among data professionals. Two-year
colleges must play a crucial role in data science education, both by preparing
students to transfer to programs at four-year institutions and by offering
associate degree programs and certificate programs that will qualify graduates
for specialized roles in the data science workforce. This workshop will foster
the establishment and growth of data science programs at two-year colleges by
bringing together participants in previous NSF projects that have addressed data
science education, faculty and administrators from two-year colleges that are
developing data science programs, and data professionals from a variety of
industries. The workshop will also complement the in-progress National Academies
study on "Envisioning the Data Science Discipline: The Undergraduate
Perspective," which is establishing a vision for the emerging discipline of data
science at the undergraduate level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous projects have
considered potential undergraduate data science curricula and have proposed
career pathway models to guide two-year college data science programs, but these
efforts have proceeded more-or-less independently and from different
perspectives. The Summit on Two-Year College Data Science Curricula will
consolidate the results of the previous work and will allow a comprehensive
look, from the perspective of a range of disciplines and employers, at the
knowledge and skills that are needed in data science jobs. Outcomes will include
(1) a report summarizing the current state of data science programs at two-year
colleges, the challenges that face those who are trying to launch such programs,
and the further work and resources that are needed to increase the number of
such programs; (2) curricular guidelines for two-year college data science
programs, modeled after the Park City Mathematics Institute (PCMI) Curriculum
Guidelines for Undergraduate Programs in Data Science; and (3) documentation of
available resources for two-year colleges that are considering creating data
science programs. The discussions and the products of the workshop will focus on
the needs of three student populations: those seeking employment following an
associate degree, those seeking transfer to a four-year program, and those
seeking college-level courses and certificates in data science for professional
development.