* 1735591
* Workshop on Multimedia Challenges, Opportunities and Research Directions
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2017,02/29/2020
* Alexander Hauptmann, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 02/29/2020
* USD 44,524.00

Human communication and information consumption is multimodal by nature,
involving rich data and interaction of various modalities such as text, sound,
vision, touch, and more. The field of multimedia has been responsible for
developing theoretical foundations, novel methodologies, and effective system
designs for integrating data of heterogeneous modalities to extract useful
information, enhance interaction, and deliver optimal user experiences in
different multimedia applications. Today the use of advanced multimedia
solutions is pervasive in myriad applications and platforms such as social
media, virtual/augmented reality, distributive collaboration and communication,
online education, health care, scientific discovery, and many others. Now with
the explosive deployment of multimedia devices, processes, and systems, the role
of multimedia research has become even more important than ever, influencing our
abilities and prospects in advancing state-of-the-art technologies and solving
real-world problems underlying various challenges facing the society and the
nation in areas like global communication, security, environmental
sustainability, health care, education, etc. To respond to these challenges and
further advance the frontiers of the field of multimedia, this project aims to
develop an ambitious vision and concrete strategic action plans to guide the
research directions and plan the critical resources needed in the multimedia
field in the next ten years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will organize a
two-day workshop, in which invited leading researchers and practitioners from
academics, industry, and research institutes will work together to brainstorm,
discuss, and plan the most important research topics and directions for the
multimedia field in the next ten years. Participants will be asked to provide
assessment of the state of the art today, share best practices of organizing
large-scale collaborative multimedia research, point out weakness and missing
solutions and expertise in the community, and identify priority topics and
directions that require further efforts and investment by the community and the
funding agencies. Other important topics such as taskforce development,
university-industry interaction, entrepreneurial translation, cross-disciplinary
collaboration, and international collaboration will also be discussed. The
outcome of the workshop will include a report that integrates input from all
participants and conclusions from the workshop. The report and the input shared
by the participants will be available for public access on the workshop web
site. The workshop report will be disseminated through the mailing lists of the
multimedia groups of ACM and IEEE and other professional communities, and will
be included in the ACM Digital Library for archival and open access.