* 1735683
* I-Corps: Decision Support System For Risk Reduction in Health Care Facilities
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Svetlana Beltyukova, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 04/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
improvement of patient outcomes in long-term care facilities. As America ages,
the need for effective care of the elderly becomes more pressing, with more than
50000 facilities caring for more than 3.5 million patients at any one time. This
I-Corps project can lead to the adoption of the new decision-making technology
that incorporates unique predictive algorithms to help management teams in long-
term care facilities maximize the information from their currently collected
safety and clinical data. By adopting this new technology, management teams will
be able to predict where there may be deficiencies, prioritize key drivers
associated with specific patient outcomes, and prevent adverse events. The new
technology can be adopted as a cloud based information and data delivery system.

This I-Corps project supports customer discovery of an innovation using a unique
predictive modeling algorithm that identifies key drivers of specific patient
outcomes and produces meaningful benchmarks for each driver that management
teams can use to guide quality improvement efforts. The algorithm determines
where a facility is on each key driver in relation to each benchmark and
produces a prioritized list of actions needed for continuous improvement. The
algorithm provides a stable framework for improvement that is not sensitive to
data imperfections and does not allow those imperfections to distract decision-
making from real priorities. The algorithm was developed based on extensive
research and practice of applying the Rasch model and objective standard-setting
process in different settings, including health, psychology and transportation.
The most extensive of these applications were the development of rigorous risk
and defensibility assessments for long-term care facilities and hospitals, and
the development of differentiation algorithms for passenger experience in the
airline industry.