* 1735728
* Type I: University of South Carolina I-Corps Site for Entrepreneurship
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Chad Hardaway, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

This project, from University of South Carolina (USC), creates an NSF I-Corps
Site at this institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps)
Sites are NSF-funded entities established at universities whose purpose is to
nurture and support multiple, local teams to transition their technology
concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources,
networking opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to
transition their work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team
applicants. I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and
contribute to the National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers,
entrepreneurs and investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of USC's I-Corps
Site is to establish a sustainable innovation ecosystem with strong links to the
local entrepreneurial community. This Site nurtures science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) faculty and students who are engaged in
projects with potential to be transitioned into the marketplace using an
integrated entrepreneurship curricula, business mentorship, and assignment of
resources to early stage discoveries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The USC I-Corps Site
increases awareness and piques the interest of students and faculty in
technology, expands the engagement of seasoned entrepreneurs and investors with
researchers, and advances the translation of discoveries to commercial
applications. The program encompasses three major tasks: (1) enhances
entrepreneurial training based on the Lean LaunchPad methodology, (2) expands
USC's current engagement with seasoned entrepreneurs and investors to foster
mentoring of junior entrepreneurs. This is accomplished through a three-tier
strategy that entails one-on-one mentoring, an Expert-in-Residence program,
student internships in start-ups, and (3) fosters outreach activities by
disseminating the program curricular activities and best practices, and
directing strategies to enhance participation of underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The USC Site program addresses critical barriers to the
growth of academic entrepreneurship by providing an experiential learning
framework with an emphasis on customer discovery, networking, and strategic
partnerships. The tangible outcomes include new opportunities for research
funding, strengthened academia-industrial connections, and unique exposure of
students to real world translational research. A secondary outcome of this
program is the evolution of academic culture that values entrepreneurship and is
more proactive in taking risk and finding resources to bring ideas to reality.
This transition in academic culture enhances USC?s efforts to attract students
in STEM fields and strengthens its role in economic development and job
creation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outreach portion of this Site is geared
toward improving diversity inclusion and enhancing participation of
underrepresented groups through a wider dissemination of educational activities.
The broader impacts are four-fold. First, the educational framework offers an
immersive experience that prepares students to identify and pursue high impact
opportunities regardless of their vocation. Second, it fosters the innovation
ecosystem by promoting collaborations between faculty and business partners.
This stimulates the commercial translation of fundamental research, and exposes
the local business community to USC's research capacity. Third, it puts in place
a robust framework for I-Corps team formation to enhance the chance of success
of USC entrepreneurs in competing for SBIR/STTR and follow-on funding. Fourth,
the program facilitates the development of a unique model for an entrepreneurial
ecosystem that combines the best practices from Silicon Valley with the distinct
resources and assets available in the Southeast.