* 1735836
* EXP: Paper Mechatronics: Advancing Engineering Education Through Computationally Enhanced Children's Papercrafts
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Michael Eisenberg, Concord Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 09/30/2020
* USD 549,532.00

Professional engineering is a complex, multifaceted activity. Today's engineer
needs to be resourceful and innovative, to build models, and to test and improve
designs. Moreover, creating a new artifact is often an interdisciplinary effort.
The task may well involve elements of computational, mechanical, and electronic
construction. As a result, introducing young people to this field is a
particular challenge. This project, in response, introduces a new genre of
engineering education through Paper Mechatronics, an activity that extends
traditional children's papercrafts with novel, accessible, computationally-
enhanced tools and materials to create original and compelling artifacts.
Through paper mechatronics, children can create true working devices - machines,
robots, toys, automata, kinetic artwork - using paper as the foundational
building material. This project seeks to pioneer paper mechatronics by various
means: through sample curricular problems and projects, novel "smart" crafting
tools for paper, innovative design software, and instructional resources. The
research will also explore how young people learn engineering with paper
mechatronics, and study how novices develop adaptive expertise in this creative
and powerful medium. The overall effort will further a style of engineering
education that is at once interdisciplinary (integrating elements of
programming, electronics, and mechanical design) and realistic, yet also playful
and respectful of children's creativity.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This is a
particularly opportune time to explore paper mechatronics as a medium for
education and engineering. There is a burgeoning landscape of newly-accessible,
lightweight computational devices (microprocessors, power sources, sensors, and
actuators) that are readily integrated into paper constructions. These elements
may now be connected via innovative craft materials such as conductive threads,
paints, and inks. Paper mechanical elements may be designed and printed via
accessible high-precision fabrication tools such as desktop paper cutters and
laser cutters. Design patterns and mechanical building-blocks may be introduced
and communicated, and their construction facilitated, by powerful software
systems. In sum, the component tools and materials are now available so that
youth can create high-quality, expressive, personally meaningful, and even (as
expertise develops) challenging engineering projects. Moreover, paper
mechatronics has the potential to reach a wide audience in formal and informal
contexts because the materials are low-cost, and activities that use these
materials can be gender-neutral and appeal to varied populations of learners
with a variety of interest and backgrounds. To pursue this idea, this project
will make use of workshops and activities at the Children's Creativity Museum in
San Francisco as a venue for pilot tests to study the development of adaptive
expertise and to gather data on how children understand engineering. At the same
time, the project will extend the boundaries of paper mechatronics through the
design of software tools, computationally-enhanced handheld devices for working
in paper, and experimentation with novel paper-like (flexible) materials for
construction. The curricular materials and design software for these projects
are planned as open source, with materials using the code to be released under a
Creative Commons license, and distributed for free via the Concord Consortium
and the University of Colorado at Boulder's Craft Technology Lab website.