* 1735359
* NRT INFEWS: computational data science to advance research at the energy-environment nexus
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Ian Foster, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,995,055.00

In the near future, humanity will be confronted with unprecedented challenges as
we seek to maintain the economic growth that drives prosperity while managing
increasing environmental stresses. In particular, continuing development is
necessarily accompanied by rising demand for food, energy, and water. Advancing
the understanding of these complex and interacting systems requires training a
next generation of interdisciplinary scientists with the computational skills
required to exploit growing torrents of relevant data. This National Science
Foundation Traineeship (NRT) award to the University of Chicago will produce
students who are fully grounded in their respective disciplines and who have the
computational skills and breadth of knowledge needed to address and communicate
the food-energy-water system in all of its complexity. This project anticipates
providing training for thirty (30) MS and PhD students, including fifteen (15)
funded trainees, from across the physical, biological, and social sciences,
uniting them with a common focus on computation and data analysis. The project's
vision is to create a new model for interdisciplinary training that gives
students the ability to collaborate and work across fields and to apply cutting-
edge computational methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The trainees' educational
program is structured to generate a cohesive community of young researchers who
have regular, in-depth interactions and opportunities to share expertise across
disciplines. Program components include: (1) two-week bootcamps prior to the
start of each Fall quarter that provide skills training and introduce cross-
disciplinary material, including modules on computing, data analysis, and
statistics; (2) a year-long core course sequence consisting of an introduction
to the food-energy-water system followed by a data analysis practicum in which
students work in interdisciplinary teams to analyze datasets; (3) communication
and professional development training; (4) international experience
opportunities; and (5) community building activities. All educational elements
will be opened to students across the University of Chicago whenever possible.
An important goal of the program is to improve the recruitment and retention of
graduate students from underrepresented groups. Finally, to enable dissemination
of the educational model to other institutions, the project will quantitatively
evaluate the benefits of the education program and publicly disseminate all
educational material to facilitate its use. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of
STEM graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary research areas,
through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based,
and aligned with changing workforce and research needs.