* 1735278
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Search strategies and collaborative innovation of young firms: A natural experiment
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Jiang Bian, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 05/31/2019
* USD 10,048.00

The complex nature of physician-industry collaboration poses challenges in
policy making: regulations that center on enhancing transparency of financial
relationships between physicians and firms may cause unintended separation of
physicians from innovation efforts of medical device firms. This research
investigates how laws and policies that govern physician-industry collaboration
impact the rate and direction of technological innovation in the medical device
industry. Prior work has shown that approximately 20% of medical devices patents
could be attributed back to physicians, i.e. expert users providing critical
insights to the new product development process. However, physician-industry
interactions could also create a conflict of interest if physicians endorse
products of companies they collaborate with, which may adversely impact the
quality of patient care and elevate the cost of health care. By empirically
examining the effect of policy on physician-firm relationships and subsequently
on medical innovation, this project aims to provide a more comprehensive yet
nuanced understanding of the economic and social implications of user
innovation. The research suggests strategy to help young firms navigate external
search for new knowledge to enhance innovation performance. More broadly, the
research suggests policy refinement that could potentially expand the growth of
a vital part of the economy.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project uses a quasi-
experimental design to investigate physician-firm collaboration patterns, as
well as the changes in the direction and rate of firms' innovation outcomes.
Drawing on a social network perspective, the project further explores how firms
may be affected deferentially based on the ex-ante collaboration network
patterns of the firms themselves. This research makes both theoretical and
empirical contributions to the innovation and strategy literature. It extends
the user-firm dyadic focus to a broader network context, situates search via
users alongside other types of search channels, and examine the dynamics of
search patterns. The project provides a novel research design to make
significant inroads to establish a causal relationship between collaboration
ties and firm innovation. Taken together, this project aims to advance the
understanding of the issue of physician-industry collaboration and its
multifaceted implications.