* 1735017
* NRT-IGE: Integrating Team Science into the STEM Graduate Training Experience
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Meltem Alemdar, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 08/31/2023
* USD 570,790.00

Large interdisciplinary teams are frequently at the core of research on today's
complex science and engineering problems. Working in teams is challenging for
many scientists and engineers because the culture of universities, where they
studied, recognizes and rewards individual achievement. For example, a Ph.D.
student's final project report, the dissertation, must represent the student's
own original contribution. Likewise, universities promote individual faculty
members, not groups, through the ranks. Despite the importance of team-based
research, universities have historically provided little systematic preparation
for science and engineering graduate students to help them succeed in careers
involving greater collaboration. This National Science Foundation Research
Traineeship (NRT) award in the Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) Track to
the Georgia Institute of Technology will address these challenges by developing
materials to train graduate students to work in teams and by measuring the
effectiveness of these materials. The project will take a novel approach to
curriculum development by drawing on best practices in team training from a wide
range of sources such as the healthcare industry, aviation, and the military.
Adaptation of these materials to meet the needs of graduate students will ensure
that the students become effective team members and leaders who can advance
science and engineering throughout their careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to determine how graduate students learn to be effective team
members and team leaders. The project will investigate which instructional
materials and approaches are most effective for students to develop teamwork
competencies and which settings are most suitable for learning and retaining
specific transportable skills. This project has three goals: (1) develop
instructional materials and collaborative processes for team training; (2)
implement these instructional materials; and (3) evaluate the effectiveness of
instructional materials as well as the processes for developing and implementing
team training at the graduate level. Achieving these goals will add to the
knowledge base about effective graduate education. The project focuses on three
key considerations: competencies, audiences, and settings. The competencies
studied by this project are transportable, meaning they are useful in many
different areas of research. Examples include knowledge about the nature and
value of teamwork, skills in communication and conflict management, and
attitudes about diversity and inclusiveness. The audience for the project
includes M.S. and Ph.D. students across a wide range of STEM programs. To
maximize flexibility, the team will develop curricular materials in small units
that faculty can deliver in different settings. Settings where materials will be
developed and introduced include existing academic courses, short (60-90 minute)
or longer (half day, full day) workshops, and semester-long academic courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to
encourage the development and implementation of bold, new, potentially
transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The Innovations in
Graduate Education Track is dedicated solely to piloting, testing, and
evaluating novel, innovative, and potentially transformative approaches to
graduate education.