* 1735883
* Evaluating Impact of Student Debt on Early Career Choices
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Margaret Blume-Kohout, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 09/30/2019
* USD 230,647.00

The U.S. scientific community and industry groups have observed that the United
States is not producing&lt;br/&gt;sufficient numbers of skilled native workers
to meet demand, especially in the physical sciences,&lt;br/&gt;computer science,
and engineering fields that drive innovation. Merit-based aid, for
example,&lt;br/&gt;scholarships and fellowships, reduces both the immediate cost
to students of investing in higher&lt;br/&gt;education, and students' longer-
term risk of high cumulative student debt loads after graduation.
This&lt;br/&gt;project will evaluate both efficacy and consequences of merit
awards for increasing&lt;br/&gt;retention of women and racial/ethnic minority
students in STEM degree programs, and in the scientific&lt;br/&gt;workforce
after graduation. The project examines the extent of any observed effects of
merit aid&lt;br/&gt;on underrepresented students' early career choices are
specifically due to reducing students' risk of higher&lt;br/&gt;cumulative debt.
This research aims to inform policies and institutional strategies to retain
U.S. students&lt;br/&gt;and graduates in science and engineering careers. In
addition, because graduates in scientific and&lt;br/&gt;technical fields also
have greater expected lifetime earnings, encouraging broader participation in
these&lt;br/&gt;fields by historically underrepresented racial/ethnic
minorities, first-generation college students, and other&lt;br/&gt;economically-
disadvantaged individuals may help to address persistent and growing
socioeconomic&lt;br/&gt;inequality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will employ
linear and nonlinear econometric estimation for causal inference, leveraging
two&lt;br/&gt;existing data sources. First, using newly-developed institutional
administrative data from a large&lt;br/&gt;public Minority-Serving Institution
with student-level observations matched to publicly
available&lt;br/&gt;statistical data, the project will assess whether income-
contingent merit aid in particular, the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;Department of Education
SMART grants, or prior community college or associate's degree
transfer&lt;br/&gt;credit affected STEM degree completion among observably STEM-
interested undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;Then, using longitudinal survey
data under restricted-use license from the NSF National Center
for&lt;br/&gt;Science and Engineering Statistics, the project will estimate the
influence of different higher education&lt;br/&gt;funding mechanisms on
students' cumulative debt load at graduation, and further whether
higher&lt;br/&gt;cumulative student debt deters recent graduates in STEM fields
from pursuing science and engineering&lt;br/&gt;occupations.