* 1735124
* NRT-IGE: Fostering Effective Oral Communication Skills for STEM Graduate Students
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Chris Organ, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 08/31/2022
* USD 481,482.00

Graduate education in the sciences, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) rigorously prepares students to innovate in their fields, yet it often
does not include formal training in how to effectively communicate those
innovations to others. To ensure we live in a just and vibrant society, it is
vital that scientists are able to share their research findings with scientists
in other fields, non-science experts, and the public. Using knowledge from the
performing arts, this project will implement a novel pilot training program to
teach oral communication to STEM graduate students, facilitating a deeper
understanding of communication and providing practice in public speaking,
improvisational techniques, and reading body language. This National Science
Foundation Research Traineeship award in the Innovations in Graduate Education
(IGE) track to Montana State University-Bozeman will modernize STEM graduate
education by pinpointing aspects of oral communication training that positively
impact students' abilities to communicate orally to a wide variety of audiences,
and increase the public's understanding of and engagement with science. Three
recruited cohorts of eight STEM graduate students will practice and refine their
oral communication skills by creating podcasts and speaking at community events
in which they explain their research to the public. The team working on this
project includes domain experts in physics, biology, mathematics, and
engineering, as well as experts in public speaking, acting, education research,
and library sciences. This broad expertise will ensure that disciplinarily
diverse STEM students are recruited into the program, providing
interdisciplinary perspectives and instruction and facilitating the success of
this pilot graduate training program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
investigate whether targeted intervention in oral communication skills for STEM
graduate students improves their ability to effectively convey their research to
a broad audience. The project will use formative, summative, and longitudinal
assessments to determine how various portions of the intervention are successful
in developing students' oral communication skills in the following realms:
avoiding the use of jargon, public speaking skills, and non-verbal delivery
skills. Assessment data for year-long longitudinal studies of each cohort will
include survey data related to three areas of oral communication, self-reports
from students, and interviews with students and their mentors. To assess
competencies such as reducing jargon for communicating with the public, this
project will create, modify and use rubrics for effective public speaking. Pre-
and post-intervention data will be compared among students and cohorts to
determine the effects of each aspect of the training. Results and successes will
be shared nationwide with other STEM experts at domain-specific conferences as
well as at American Association for the Advancement of Sciences National
Conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new,
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
Innovations in Graduate Education Track is dedicated solely to piloting,
testing, and evaluating novel, innovative, and potentially transformative
approaches to graduate education.