* 1735862
* Chemical, Physical and Biological processes linking snow and sea ice to the Arctic Ocean mixed layer: Improving models through the MOSAiC platform
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Meibing Jin, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,502,784.00

Sea ice is a major component of the polar oceans. It serves as an important
platform for the accumulation and transport of dissolved and particulate
material, retained in the sea ice cover via atmospheric deposition, fluid
exchange with the underlying ocean, sediment inclusions, and biological
activity. This material, including nutrients, serves key functions in the Arctic
Ocean ecosystem. However, the influence of sea ice processes on nutrient cycling
and the seasonal cycle of important biogeochemical processes is poorly
understood, especially as related to changes in Arctic sea ice. This project
will quantify and track changes in the inventory and fluxes of key
biogeochemical and physical parameters above, within and below the sea ice
through a full year. Data collection and numerical simulations will improve
modeling of key processes and projections of future states of the Arctic Ocean
and its role in the Earth system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planed
Multidisciplinary drifting Observatory for the Study of Arctic Climate (MOSAiC)
project provides an opportunity to address pressing scientific questions
revolving around the rapid transformations underway in Arctic marine physical
and biogeochemical environments, linked to major losses in summer sea ice. This
study contributes to the broader MOSAiC goals set by the research community,
focusing on improved understanding and prediction of the Arctic through improved
sea ice/ocean and earth system model parameterizations of key physical and
biogeochemical processes. Collection of biogeochemical and physical data over an
annual cycle at MOSAiC's central Arctic drifting ice camp will be informed by
modeling needs, and apply community-endorsed standards and best practices for
sample acquisition, processing and analysis. Field measurements and sampling
will be closely coordinated with the MOSAiC team, with broad, rapid data sharing
to inform field studies and modeling work. The extended observation period is
essential to improve model parameterizations of snow-ice-ocean cycling of macro-
and micronutrients and their impacts on Arctic ecosystems. This project will
collect standardized ice data that are directly comparable with those of other
participants and that are guided by and improve model simulations and
projections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This field effort will greatly enhance our
understanding of sea ice seasonal cycles, including physical and biogeochemical
seasonal evolution. Standardized field data will be made available to a broad
international community. This project will leverage previously developed
sampling schemes, protocols, custom-made equipment and a biogeochemical model as
a strategic US contribution to the vast investment put forth by the
international community towards the MOSAiC expedition. Educational impacts
include the training and support of a graduate student and a postdoctoral
researcher. These individuals will participate in the expedition and gain
experience in standardized sea ice collection and multidisciplinary
collaboration. Science communication to larger audience will be accomplished
through annual participation in "Bering Sea Days", a 5-day event on the Pribilof
Island of St. Paul, a detailed blog featuring field experiences and science, and
a self-published book that depicts our field experiences targeting K-6
audiences.