* 1735404
* Partial Core Support on the Board of Physics and Astronomy
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2018
* James Lancaster, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 07/31/2018
* USD 75,000.00

This award provides partial core support to the Board on Physics and Astronomy
(BPA). The physics and astronomy communities cover a broad and diverse set of
research effort. The BPA monitors developments in and assesses the health of the
fields that make up this area of research. Its membership is drawn from
universities, industry, and national laboratories, and its members' areas of
expertise span much of the breadth of physics and astronomy. The experts
involved are broadly representative of the community and they provide their
informed perspectives on issues that affect the progress and vitality of physics
and astronomy research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal work to be supported
by this award will be to support the board's semi-annual meetings and non-
sponsored other activities associated with the board's carrying out its
responsibilities to support the physics and astronomy research communities. A
principal focus of the BPA in the period covered by this award will be the
development and initiation of the next round of physics and
astronomy/astrophysics decadal surveys. This award is co-funded by the Divisions
of Physics, Astronomical Sciences, and Materials Research, as well as the Office
of Multidisciplinary Activities, all within the Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences.