* 1735756
* Measuring R&D knowledge diffusion through large databases
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Christina Freyman, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 06/30/2019
* USD 298,277.00

This research increases understanding of the impact of federal research funding
on economic outputs by developing a new data source that enables new analyses of
science, engineering, and innovation. The project will improve the measurement
of R&D knowledge diffusion by collecting and linking three types of public data:
federal government grants and contracts, U.S. patents, and licensing agreements.
This project assists the federal government in communicating the impact of
public R&D investments to policy makers, stakeholders and citizens. By
understanding the factors that lead to commercial licensing of federal
government research, the federal government can invest its funds more
strategically and increase the productivity of R&D investment, accelerate
innovation and increase the United States? economic competitiveness. In
addition, this project directly addresses the goal to create a federal
government that is responsive and accountable to its citizens. The project
builds a data platform on an extensible, common data schema shared by all data
types, including patents, publications, and awards. Collecting and combining
these data will create a unique, novel, big data set. The government interest
section of a U.S. patent will be used to link patents and federal government
investments, which can be found in grant databases and the federal procurement
data system. Patent licensing is opaque and not generally available; however,
reports of technology licensing agreements are filed with the U.S. Securities
and Exchange Commission, providing a rich public dataset on technology
development. This project will use machine learning to extract these mentions,
building a licensing agreement database. Specifically, this database will then
be combined with the limited information available in the USPTO's licensing
database, and linked to types of federal investment. This approach represents a
new way to measure R&D impact by tracing knowledge flows through multiple
sources and points in time. The project will demonstrate the viability of
collecting licensing data on a large scale and linking the data back to the
supporting federal government investments. The resulting data set will be made
publicly available.