* 1735467
* SFI Workshop:  Modeling dynamics of violent radicalization in Western democracies
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Mirta Galesic, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2018
* USD 16,853.00

General Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop will bring together scholars
from a number of academic disciplines in an effort to develop new insights into
factors that lead to the violent radicalization of citizens in Western
democracies. In addition to drawing from a wide set of disciplines, the workshop
also aims to address causes at different levels -- individual, group, and
societal -- to identify factors that contribute to radicalization. By convening
scholars from across academic disciplines, and looking at multiple levels, the
organizers hope to gain new insight into the conditions that give rise to
radicalization. Based on these new insights, they plan to develop new
theoretical models that incorporate these causal elements and to compile data
sets that will allow them to measure these variables and test their theories.
This is especially important work given a number of recent examples in which
citizens from Western democracies radicalized and perpetrated acts of violence.
Understanding how and why such transformations occur is an important step toward
developing effective counter-radicalization strategies. Such findings will
presented to interested scholarly and policy-relevant communities
along.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop
will bring together scholars from political science, psychology, anthropology,
computer science, and mathematical biology to investigate factors that give rise
to violent radicalization of individuals in Western democracies. Existing
research on the topic tends to focus on the individual or micro-level. The
multi-disciplinary team will expand that focus to look not only at micro-level
causes, but meso- and macro-level causes as well. By drawing from a wide set of
disciplines and expanding the focus to include multiple levels of analyses, the
aim of the workshop is to get these diverse teams identify more precise and
possibly new causal mechanisms. From there, the aim is to use these insights to
build new theoretical models and construct appropriate data sets to test them.
This is especially important research in that it provides a means to encourage
research networks that reach across existing scholarly communities. The subject
matter being investigated is timely and of great interest to scholars and policy
makers alike. The team's plan is to disseminate the findings widely to both
academic and policy making communities. These findings have the potential to
help develop strategies to reduce violent radicalization in Western democracies.