* 1735664
* Collaborative Research: Biogeochemical and Physical Conditioning of Sub-Antarctic Mode Water in the Southern Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* William Balch, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,434,692.00

Cold surface water in the southern Indian Ocean sinks to about 500 meters and
travels in the dark for thousands of miles before it resurfaces some 40 years
later near the equator in the other ocean basins. This major water mass is named
the Sub-Antarctic Mode Water (SAMW). Nutrients it contains when it warms and
rises into the sunlit subtropical and tropical waters are estimated to fuel up
to 75% of the microscopic plant growth there. Before it sinks, the chemical
properties of the SAMW are modified by the growth and distinct physiology of two
common phytoplankton; diatoms with shells made of silica, and coccolithophores
with carbonate shells. Local physical dynamics influence where and how fast
these two phytoplankton classes grow. Consequently, differing nutrient and trace
chemical fingerprints are established at the point of SAMW formation. This
project is an exceptionally detailed field and modeling effort that will
document and quantify the remarkable, interconnected processes that chemically
connect two important oceanic ecosystems half a world apart. The scientists
leading the project will study the complexity of the biological and chemical
conditioning of the SAMW and thus provide critical data about the large-scale
oceanic controls of the biological carbon pump that removes atmospheric carbon
dioxide to the deep ocean over millennial timescales. Scientific impact from
this project will stem from significant peer-reviewed publications and improved
predictive models. Societal benefits will develop from training of a range of
scholars, including high school, undergraduate, and graduate students, as well
as technical and post-doctoral participants. A high school teacher and science
communication specialist will go to sea with the project and share experiences
from the ship with students on shore via social media and scheduled web
interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To examine how SAMW formation and subduction
controls the productivity of global waters well to the north, two January
expeditions to the SE Indian Ocean will identify, track, and study the unique
mesoscale eddies that serve as discrete water parcels supporting rich
populations of either coccolithophores or diatoms plus their associated
microbial communities. The eddies will be tracked with Lagrangian Argo drifters
and observations will be made of exactly how SAMW is chemically conditioned
(i.e. Si, N, P, Fe, and carbonate chemistry) over time scales of months. Using
data obtained on the feedback between ecological processes and nutrient, trace
metal, and carbonate chemistry in these eddies and on related transect cruises,
the project will have three main goals: (1) determine the rates at which SAMW
coccolithophores and diatoms condition the carbonate chemistry plus nutrient and
trace metal concentrations, as well as assess taxonomic and physiological
diversity in the study area with traditional methods plus next-generation
sequence DNA/RNA profiling, (2) explore growth limitations by iron, silicate
and/or nitrate in controlling algal assemblages and genetic diversity, and (3)
combine these findings with the Ekman- and eddy-driven subduction of SAMW to
examine biogeochemical impact on a basin scale, using both observations and
global numerical models. A meridional survey from 30 to 60 degrees south
latitude will be used to characterize the larger-scale variability of carbonate
chemistry, nutrient distributions, productivity, genetics and biomass of various
plankton groups as SAMW is subducted and proceeds northward.