* 1735682
* Science Policy Research Report: Advising the President on Science Policy and the Role of the President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Kirstin R.W. Matthews, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 06/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST), created
in 1990 under President George H.W. Bush, is an independent advisory committee.
Comprised of approximately 20 civilian members with diverse backgrounds in
academic research, industry, and military service, PCAST was co-chaired by the
president's science advisor. PCAST provided advice related to science,
technology, and innovation: jobs and economic growth, public health, national
and domestic security, energy and the environment, STEM education, emerging
technologies and research, and other specialized topics of value to the
president and provides timely recommendations to address urgent public policy
challenges. PCAST played a critical role in the development of federal research
initiatives and reviewed large-scale government science and technology programs
and ensured the president had the most up-to-date scientific and technical
information to make policy decisions. While always having the same goal during
each Presidential administration, the membership, operation, activities, and
impact of PCAST changed, reflecting the needs of the administration's highest
priority policy issues. This science policy research report examines the role
and influence of PCAST over the last four administrations of Presidents George
H.W. Bush, Bill Clinton, George W. Bush, and Barack Obama. The project compiles
a database of the demographics of PCAST members including their gender,
ethnicity, areas of expertise, and career background. Review activities of PCAST
including reports, meetings, and newsworthy events are analyzed to assess
PCAST's impact on science and technology policy and decision-making, with
suggestions for best practices and actionable recommendations to improve PCAST
in the current and future administrations.