* 1735810
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Philanthropic Investments in Academic Research Centers
* SBE,SMA
* 07/15/2017,03/31/2019
* Emily Nwakpuda, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 03/31/2019
* USD 26,785.00

Individual donors have a long history of making philanthropic gifts to colleges
and universities. This doctoral dissertation research project will examine
motivations and social benefits of private gifts to support scientific research
centers. The project will enhance the understanding of the scientific and social
outcomes of research centers established by gifts from individual donors. The
findings from this project will be used by governmental officials, university
administrators and scholars. The findings will be important to understand how
large gifts to science at colleges and universities influences scientific
discovery and the types of social benefit these gifts provide to science, the
local community and broader society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project relies on
qualitative and quantitative methods to provide systematic evidence of the
trends and outcomes of philanthropic gifts made by individuals to establish new
research centers at academic institutions. The project will employ advanced
computing and statistical modeling approaches to test for the significance of
donor and institutional variables impacting the establishment of over 100
research centers. In addition, semi-structured interviews with donors, academic
fundraising personnel and center directors will provide qualitative data on
donors' willingness to give and their expectations for their investments. Case
studies on selected research centers will be assessed for their varying levels
of scientific impact (e.g. number of patents and publications). The research
will provide new insights on how donors formally and informally impact
scientific outcomes when making large gifts to science. The database will be
made publicly available for researchers, policymakers and administrators.