* 1735807
* Type I: University of New Mexico Lobo Rainforest I-Corps Site
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Robert DelCampo, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 532,357.00

This proposal from the University of New Mexico (UNM) creates the Lobo
Rainforest NSF I-Corps Site to encourage and support entrepreneurs from all
disciplines and backgrounds to commercialize their projects, create new start-up
businesses, generate licensing agreements and business models, and submit
proposals to the I-Corps national program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation
Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities established at universities whose
purpose is to nurture and support multiple, local teams to transition their
technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice,
resources, networking opportunities, training and modest funding to enable
groups to transition their work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps
Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally
and contribute to the National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers,
entrepreneurs and investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Lobo Rainforest I-Corps
Site is a partnership between UNM's two innovation and entrepreneurial units,
the Innovation Academy (iA) and STC.UNM (STC). The iA provides students with
direct experience and real-world skills in entrepreneurship, equipping them with
the requisite proficiency to transition their original ideas into the
marketplace. iA offers a suite of courses, a scholars project-based program, a
minor in innovation, and an entrepreneurial literacy program. STC works with
entrepreneurial faculty and students at UNM to explore new inventions,
commercialize technologies, protect intellectual property and create start-up
companies based on UNM research innovations. iA, STC and their programs and
services co-locate at the Lobo Rainforest Building, a new structure with spaces
to accelerate commercialization of intellectual capital and generate successful
startup companies. NSF I-Corps Site funding leverages these innovation and
technology transfer services, physical facilities, expert staff, and business,
industry, and community connections and networks to support 117 new student and
faculty teams over a five-year period. Teams collaborate with two I-Corps Nodes
in the Southwest corridor, further building on local and regional ecosystems for
innovation, and connecting with the National Innovation
Network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New Mexico is a majority-minority state, and UNM
is a Hispanic Serving Institution with a strong track record of supporting
commercialization of faculty-originated technology, including 139 women
inventors. The iA is comprised of over 50% women, over 50% minorities, and over
65% first generation college students. UNM's demographic is unique for a
Carnegie R1 doctoral university (61% minority, 41% Hispanic, 56% female), making
it an excellent environment for recruiting and broadening participation of women
and minorities in entrepreneurial activities. UNM is also implementing an NSF
ADVANCE grant, focused on increasing the participation of women faculty,
particularly minority women, in STEM leadership positions, complementing the
Lobo Rainforest I-Corps Site program. The UNM I-Corps Site will focus on those
mechanisms most useful in expanding entrepreneurial opportunities for women and
other underrepresented groups.