* 1735732
* 3D Printed Particle Analogs for Coarse-grained Soils: Interpretation Framework
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Alejandro Martinez, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 02/29/2020
* USD 156,957.00

This project concerns the utilization of 3D printed particle analogs for the
fundamental study of coarse-grained soil behavior. These synthetic analogs will
address the pervasive challenge in geotechnical engineering caused by the fact
that soils are natural materials whose properties are defined by their geologic
history, and whose behavior depends on dozens of variables, including particle
morphology and size, gradation, and soil state. Development of an interpretation
framework, consisting of normalization of the compression and shear responses
based on the stiffness of the particles constituent material stiffness, will
allow for quantitative study of the response of soils comprised of different
materials. It will also allow for validation of results from numerical
simulations (e.g. Discrete Element Modeling, DEM). This research: (i) provides
the ability to systematically and independently control particle properties of
soil analogs, which can transform current research capabilities to study aspects
of soil behavior that are important for many applications, such as seepage,
pollutant transport, bacterial and fungal growth, erosion, bearing capacity,
interface friction, and earth pressures, (ii) facilitates the trans-disciplinary
transfer of knowledge among researchers from different disciplines within
engineering and the sciences, such as chemical, mechanical and material science
engineering and physics, who investigate phenomena in different granular
materials such as soils, powders, and grains, (iii) promotes use of 3D printing
in research to transform current experimental research techniques within
geotechnical engineering, and (iv) increases the involvement of Hispanic
students through the entire educational track by training teachers from local
middle schools and providing research opportunities to undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Qualitative understanding of soil behavior has been
achieved by many researchers through experiments on different soils or soil
analogs, Discrete Element Modeling (DEM) simulations, or advanced imaging
techniques. The two major barriers that have deterred the construction of
quantitative understanding using these tools are: (i) the inability of current
experimental methods to systematically change one characteristic of natural soil
particles, while keeping the others unchanged (affecting interpretation of
studies on natural soils), and (ii) the lack of a framework that allows for
study of behaviors independently from differences in constituent material
properties (affecting interpretation of studies on soil analogs). The hypothesis
of this research project is that the response of 3D printed soil analogs can
provide direct and quantitative understanding of the response of natural soils.
The effects of particle contact deformation are quantified in particle- and
element-scale 1D compression tests, and the coupled effect of particle contact
and soil skeleton deformation are characterized in triaxial compression shear
tests. These experimental insights, in combination with a stiffness-based
normalization scheme that accounts for differences in constituent material
properties, comprise a framework that allows for direct comparison of the
response of natural and analog soils that is only influenced by particle
characteristics and soil state. The developed 3D printed soil analogs and
interpretation framework will allow for systematic and independent prescription
of particle shape, surface roughness, and size for the detailed study of the
behavior of coarse-grained soils. This will advance the understanding of the
influence of particle constituent material stiffness on the compression and
shear response of soils at the particle- and element-scales, and incorporate the
effect of particle stiffness on the framework of critical state soil mechanics.