* 1735676
* Laboratory Technician Support: National sample preparation facility for broadening participation, research, and hands-on research training in cosmogenic nuclide studies
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2024
* Paul Bierman, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 01/31/2024
* USD 629,425.00

This project transforms an established, state-of-the-art, high-throughput,
geologic dating laboratory at the University of Vermont into a national facility
open for use by the broader science community. It will provide both intellectual
resources and a venue for consistent, reliable, high-quality, and safety-focused
preparation of samples using a hands-on model that integrates research and
research training. Over the past several decades, the use of these nuclides in
Earth Science has increased rapidly; however, sample preparation remains
tedious, difficult, and hazardous, requiring strong acids and complicated and
expensive clean laboratory facilities and expertise that are not readily
available. The approach of this facility is cost-effective because it relies on
existing physical and intellectual infrastructure and builds on demonstrated
research and research training successes. Working closely with experts, the
facility staff will broaden participation and build long-term relationships by
proactively engaging students, faculty, and administrators at both undergraduate
institutions and graduate institutions serving communities underrepresented in
STEM. The facility will use collaborative outreach activities including campus
visits and a seed grant program to bring minority students and their faculty
mentors to the laboratory&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a new approach aimed at
broadening participation in the rapidly expanding field of cosmogenic isotope
geoscience by opening a successful cosmogenic geochemistry laboratory to the
broader community. Building upon tested sample-processing and training
protocols, we will facilitate research and research training by increasing
access to 10Be and 26Al sample preparation. Because of limited laboratory
availability, the cosmogenic nuclide community has remained small. Providing a
national sample preparation facility will catalyze the inclusion of new and
different scientists, increasing the number and diversity of projects involving
these isotopes - a catalyst for transformative research. Supporting a community
facility for sample processing and research training has numerous different
broader impacts. 1) It directly addresses a current bottleneck in cosmogenic
nuclide studies: the extraction of 10Be and 26Al from rock, soil, and sediment
that precedes isotopic measurement. 2) It broadens participation by providing
open access to a state-of-the-art processing facility for the many students and
faculty who do not have such a facility at their home institutions. 3) The
outreach program, supported by the experience of Semken and Whittaker, goes
directly to faculty and students at institutions serving minority communities
and the seed grant program brings faculty/student teams from Historically Black
Colleges and Universities as well as Tribal Colleges to the laboratory for
meaningful collaboration and hands-on training. 4) Technician support will
provide for research training in isotopic clean lab methods for students,
researchers, faculty, and young investigators in a variety of geoscience
disciplines through lab residencies, lab consultancies, a yearly training course
for those wishing to adopt these methods or start a similar laboratory.