* 1735903
* Type I: UC Riverside - EPIC I-Corps Site for Entrepreneurship in Riverside County
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Rosibel Ochoa, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 599,999.00

This project, from the University of California - Riverside (UCR), creates an
I-Corps Site at this institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps
(I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities established at universities whose
purpose is to nurture and support multiple, local teams to transition their
technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice,
resources, networking opportunities, training and modest funding to enable
groups to transition their work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps
Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally
and contribute to the National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers,
entrepreneurs and investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps Site is managed
by the UC Riverside Entrepreneurial Proof of Concept and Innovation Center
(EPIC). EPIC is a regional program that operates in partnership with the County
and major local cities to offer a suite of services and tools to help teams of
innovators and entrepreneurs launch knowledge-based companies. In addition, UCR
partnered with Riverside City College to allow their upper level students to
participate as I-Corps team members. To ensure representative participation of
females and students from underrepresented minorities, EPIC designates
successful I-Corps graduates as Student Ambassadors to promote and mentor
students from those two groups. Teams completing the EPIC I-Corps workshops
receive additional support from EPIC's suite of services and from other programs
offered by EPIC's network of regional partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Active
collaboration with the region's universities and community colleges, regional
incubators and accelerators create synergies within the region and accelerate
development of the needed ecosystem that will attract and create knowledge-based
companies and jobs. The success of EPIC and the UCR NSF I-Corps site are
instrumental in the creation of the ecosystem needed to support innovation and
entrepreneurship at UCR and in Riverside County, a region that lacks history and
experience in entrepreneurism. Long-term outcomes of this initiative will be
greater retention of UCR graduates in the region, increased employment from
company creation and the relocation of knowledge-based businesses to Riverside
County. These high-paying technology jobs represent a major economic stimulus
into a region whose economy has historically been based on agriculture and low-
wage jobs.