* 1735235
* Collaborative Research: NRT-INFEWS: Sustainable Food, Energy, and Water Systems (SFEWS)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Aavudai Anandhi Swamy, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 09/30/2023
* USD 488,455.00

Large areas of land are needed to satisfy the food, energy, and water (FEW)
needs of an increasingly populated earth. This can lead to challenging land use
competition where local FEW needs cannot be met with current land use practice.
For instance, in areas where solar energy is produced, standard solar panels can
cast large ground shadows on agricultural land throughout the day, which greatly
impedes crop growth. An urgent need exists to develop solutions for sustainable
FEW systems (SFEWS) where food, energy, and water needs can be met using
available land collaboratively rather than competitively. One approach could be
to use the entire solar spectrum to maximize resource production from a given
land area. Achieving such solutions requires effective interdisciplinary
education and training to generate the resources and human capital for
leadership for a sustainable solar economy. This National Science Foundation
Research Traineeship (NRT) award to Purdue University and Florida A&amp;M
University will form an interdisciplinary traineeship program that will train
graduate students in the skills needed to produce sustainable supplies of food,
energy and water (FEW) for a more heavily populated earth. The project
anticipates training 48 PhD students, including 24 funded trainees, from
agronomy, agricultural and biological engineering, electrical and computer
engineering, chemical engineering, materials science and engineering, chemistry,
and agricultural economics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SFEWS project aims to meet
food, energy and water management needs locally with local solar energy.
Achieving this state requires studying highly complex systems with previously
unappreciated interdependencies and then developing innovative solutions by
combining basic scientific and technical principles from the diverse fields of
agriculture, engineering, and science. Out of many possibilities, solutions will
be identified based on their system-wide simplicity, economic impact, and
environmental footprint, in light of government policy and social impact. The
SFEWS cohorts performing these studies will provide a workforce trained in
interdisciplinary skills to identify underlying factors leading to competition
for land, to suggest innovative solutions, and then lead in global
implementation as researchers, business and industry leaders, policy makers,
teachers and entrepreneurs. The new scientific and technical knowledge, unique
systems analysis methods, and tools developed from this program will have impact
well beyond the SFEWS NRT. This team will develop new interdisciplinary courses
and training modules, globally disseminated through vehicles such as
nanoHUB.org. Through well-planned diversity recruiting and engagement, the SFEWS
NRT will help underrepresented and women students to help forge a sustainable
FEW economy. Successful execution of this program will introduce a new paradigm
where local FEW needs can increasingly be met with local solar energy for a
highly resilient economy, with the U.S. serving as a world leader in sustainably
meeting FEW needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT)
Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students
in high priority interdisciplinary research areas, through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-
funded by the Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program.
The LSAMP program supports comprehensive, evidence-based, and sustained
approaches to broadening participation of students from racial and ethnic groups
historically underrepresented in STEM.