* 1735604
* EAGER:  Collaborative Research: Plastid genome evolution in Cactaceae, a New World succulent radiation
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Kelly Steele, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Schneider
* 05/31/2022
* USD 149,086.00

This project will investigate genome evolution in cacti, the flowering plant
family Cactaceae. The 1500 species of cacti are among the most spectacular and
evolutionarily successful groups of succulent plants in arid and semi-arid
regions of the Americas. Despite their remarkably diverse life forms and extreme
physiological adaptations for life in arid, often hot habitats, genomic
resources in Cactaceae are still very limited. This research team, with members
from Arizona State University, the Desert Botanic Garden, and the University of
Arizona, will provide fundamental genomic information and resources essential to
our understanding of species diversity, ecology, photosynthesis and evolution of
cacti, with expected impacts in basic science as well as horticultural and
economic arenas. Undergraduates from underrepresented groups in science will be
trained broadly in genomics, bioinformatics, computational, evolutionary and
systematic biology techniques. Results from this project will be used to enhance
an undergraduate genetics course and a biology education website at Arizona
State University, and outreach programs at the Desert Botanical Garden. All data
from the project will be deposited in public databases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on the unusual size and
rearrangements of the plastid (i.e., chloroplast) genome within cacti, and in
particular the loss of multiple genes critical to the process of photosynthesis
observed in several large columnar North American species. The DNA sequence data
generated will be used to produce complete plastid genomes, as well as identify
multiple nuclear and mitochondrial genes, from a broad sampling of ecologically
and morphologically diverse cactus species. This will enable an investigation of
the distribution and pattern of specific structural genomic rearrangements and
test hypotheses about the causes and consequences of these architectural
changes. At the same time, the project will contribute data to generate a more
robust phylogenetic framework for investigating the evolutionary relationships
of specific groups of Cactaceae, as well as measuring rates of molecular
evolution and mutation across the family. Reconstructing the history of gene
losses and genome reconfigurations in this family of photosynthetic plants
offers a system for studying genome variation and evolution under the selective
pressures of life in the desert environment.