* 1735820
* Cognitive Control Theoretic Mechanisms of Real-time fMRI-Guided Neuromodulation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Keith Bush, University of Arkansas Medical Sciences Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 02/28/2021
* USD 422,610.00

Real-time measurement of neural activity with functional magnetic resonance
imaging (rtfMRI) can be used as a source of feedback to guide volitional control
(neuromodulation) of cognitive processing. Previous research has demonstrated
broad success of rtfMRI-guided neuromodulation of cognitive processes. However,
the neural mechanisms by which rtfMRI-guidance produces these outcomes remain
largely unknown. Engineering control theory posits a small set of elements with
specific component functions and causal associations necessary to achieve
closed-loop control. The engine of this loop is the control law in which past
control outcomes are evaluated to inform the selection of current control
decisions. Cognitive control theory, meanwhile, posits numerous empirically
justified measures by which the control law may evaluate outcomes as well as
neural processing regions that may support these evaluation and selection
functions, specifically, the medial and lateral prefrontal cortices. Dr. Keith
Bush of the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences will merge the
predictions of these theories to model and explain brain activity observed
during rtfMRI-guided neuromodulation. By advancing a mechanistic understanding
of guided neuromodulation, this research will benefit multiple disciplines
within cognitive science, psychology, and psychiatry that focus on self-control
processes such as brain-computer interfaces, cognitive skills development, and
cognitive therapeutics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will conduct rtfMRI-
guided neuromodulation experiments designed to facilitate volitional control of
affective processing in healthy individuals. Affective processing will be
volitionally modulated independently for the dimensions of valence and arousal
to explore task-generality of the underlying closed-loop control system. In the
first experiment, medial prefrontal cortex activity will be modeled with respect
to multiple measures of control outcome (error, conflict, predicted error-
likelihood, predicted response outcome, and expected value of control) to
determine the most likely basis of its function. In the second experiment,
control theoretic signals derived from this function will be used to locate
brain regions implementing control signal selection and execution. Finally, the
role of rtfMRI-guidance will be incorporated into the model to identify an
anatomical locus of external feedback processing and a mechanistic prediction of
how feedback informs the selection of control signals to improve closed-loop
performance. The control system identified in this project would represent a
biological basis of self-control processes across broad behavioral domains.