* 1735912
* Collaborative Research: Constraints on the Lithospheric Structure and Accretionary History of New England: Integrating Seismic and Geologic data sets
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Vadim Levin, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 08/31/2022
* USD 164,281.00

The Wilson tectonic cycle is one of the most fundamental processes leading to
growth and modification of continental crust on Earth. It involves the closing
of ocean basins, collision of continents, rifting (separation) of continents,
and formation of new ocean basins. Eastern North America provides a complete
record of the eastward growth of the continent during the closing of the
ancestral Atlantic ocean, ?Iapetus?, and the opening of the modern Atlantic
ocean. The region has been used as a type section and model of plate tectonics
for decades. Although the surface boundaries between former continental
fragments are increasingly well known, a persistent question involves the timing
and processes involved with the growth and stabilization of the deep crust and
mantle parts of the continent. The overall goal of this project, and a long-term
theme of the EarthScope project in general, is to integrate high-resolution
geophysical and geological data in order to build a truly four-dimensional
(space and time) model for the growth of continental crust in this classic
region. The density and distribution of seismic stations are excellent,
including the EarthScope Transportable Array and many long-running permanent
seismic stations. New geological, geochemical, and geochronological data have
led to revision of the tectonic history and a re-assessment of terrane
boundaries and ancestry in the northern Appalachians. This proposal aims to
understand the characteristics of continental lithosphere (the crust and mantle
parts of the tectonic plates) in New York and New England, to identify the
boundaries between distinct terranes both at the surface and especially at
depth, and to address long-standing open questions about the tectonic history of
the northern Appalachians. New models and hypotheses developed in this project
will have wide implications for character of the North American continent, the
nature of the deep crust and mantle, and our understanding of continental growth
in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to associate the interior
structure of the lithosphere of Eastern North America with its tectonic history,
and to draw broad inferences for the nature of continental assembly.
Specifically, this proposal will address the following scientific questions: (1)
What is continental lithosphere? Can we identify distinct lithospheric blocks
and intra-lithospheric boundaries? What are the origins of these structures? (2)
What/where are the major terrane boundaries? To what extent can geological
boundaries be extended to depth? When were the major terranes added to the North
American continent? To address these questions, the project will develop a
comprehensive seismic model of the crust and the mantle lithosphere in eastern
North America. An advanced wave propagation simulation and inversion will
provide a powerful way to constrain the three-dimensional seismic features of
the crust and the mantle lithosphere. Teleseismic receiver function analysis
will be used to identify and delineate sharp velocity/density discontinuities.
Laterally variable and depth-dependent anisotropy will be resolved with receiver
functions and shear-wave splitting studies, and used to highlight patterns of
lithospheric deformation. Compilation and synthesis of existing geological data
sets, and collection of new surface rock samples will complement the seismic
component. A systematic integration of geological, geochronological and
geochemical data sets will inform a re-assessment of the regional tectonic
framework. The project will support the career development of an early-career
female geoscientist and help the development of a new seismology group at UMass
Amherst. Expansion of seismology research and teaching has outstanding potential
to attract undergraduate and graduate students at the Five-College Geology
Consortium. It will support training of undergraduate and graduate students at
UMass and Rutgers. Findings from this project will be introduced to 8th-12th
grade girls through the Girls Inc. Eureka! Program (a national organization), a
strong STEM-based collaboration between Girls Inc. of Holyoke, MA and UMass.
Surficial geologic compilations will be uploaded and made available to schools,
colleges, and universities throughout New England for critiques, collaboration,
and educational use.&lt;br/&gt;