* 1735695
* Direct Conversion of Carbon into Q-carbon and Diamond and Fabrication of Novel Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Jagdish Narayan, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2020
* USD 286,495.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This project focuses on a transformative approach for
synthesis and processing of carbon-based nanostructures that are needed for
next-generation high-power devices for smart grids, cutting tools, quantum
electronics and biomarkers. In this project's new approach, disordered carbon is
converted into diamond or Q-carbon (a new phase of carbon that is harder than
diamond) at ambient temperatures and pressures in air. This route to create
diamond avoids the conventional extremely high temperatures and pressures needed
in an inert atmosphere. Thus, this new approach provides a very inexpensive and
rapid way to convert disordered carbon into useful (hard) diamond or Q-carbon
structures for a variety of applications. This research involves a close
collaboration with Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) where their Advanced
Atomic-resolution instrumentation is quite complementary to atomic scale
characterization facilities at North Carolina (NC) State University. This
project engages research collaboration and training of graduate and
undergraduate students from a nearby Historically Black Colleges and
Universities, NC A&amp;T and Shaw. To disseminate nanomaterials research, NC
State University has launched an MS (Master of Science) in Nanoengineering
through Engineering Online network under the leadership of the principal
investigator, where students around the globe complete their Master?s degrees.
The students trained in this area are highly sought after for the employment in
microelectronics, optoelectronics and biomedical industries. The principal
investigator is continuing with a very successful ASM (American Society for
Materials) Materials Summer Camp, where high-school students are trained for a
week on new materials and technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:
This research develops a fundamental understanding of basic mechanisms involved
in the direct conversion of disordered carbon into Q-carbon and/or diamond. The
next step is to use this understanding to create novel Q-carbon and diamond
nanostructures with unique properties for a variety of applications. By using
nanosecond pulsed laser irradiation, carbon layers are melted in a super
undercooled state at around 4000K (about 1000K below the melting point of
carbon) and are quenched subsequently into a new phase of Q-carbon or diamond in
the form of nanodiamonds, microdiamonds, nanoneedles, microneedles or large-area
single-crystal films. These structures are doped with n- and p-type dopants,
thus opening a new frontier in diamond nanoelectronics and high-power devices.
Doping of nanodiamonds with nitrogen atoms (N) and vacancies (V) results in NV
nanodiamonds which are grown epitaxially on sapphire substrates for atomic
sensors and quantum computing applications. As a part of Nanoengineering
program, the PI teaches a series of courses where students learn about the
latest developments in new materials, thin film epitaxy, defect control,
processing, characterization and modeling and next-generation multifunctional
smart devices.