* 1735579
* CRISP: Type 2/Collaborative Research: Design and Control of Coordinated Green and Gray Water Infrastructure to Improve Resiliency in Chemical and Agricultural Sectors
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Jon Miller, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,874,988.00

Scientists, along with the public and private sectors, are abuzz with the
potential for "green infrastructure," an approach for water management that
protects, restores, or mimics the natural water cycle. This approach is
economical: Wetland construction or restoration can be far more cost effective
than building a new water treatment plant. Green infrastructure also lessens
manufacturing risks, while it enhances community safety and quality of life. For
example, restored wetlands would improve water reliability for manufacturers,
create habitats and open spaces for wildlife, and dampen the risks of drought
and floods on public water supplies. The big, unanswered question about green
infrastructure is whether managers would be better able to control water systems
if green infrastructure was coupled with traditional gray infrastructure, such
as reservoir operations. Modeling, data, and decision-support tools for blending
gray and green water infrastructure, however, do not yet exist. This Critical
Resilient Interdependent Infrastructure Systems and Processes (CRISP) project
advances a modelling framework that couples gray and green water infrastructure
systems and processes. The project also incorporate the effects of economically
motivated human players into the coupled system. Specifically, this
collaboration of scientists and water managers aims to minimize the impacts of
extreme weather (drought and flood) on infrastructure processes in the chemical,
petroleum, and agricultural sectors along the coastal basins of Texas. This work
leads to: (1) A knowledge exchange between water-rights holders and regulators,
including between private and public-sector actors. (2) An online learning
platform to disseminate project results into curricula to train corporate
sustainability officers and river authorities. (3) Training at least three
graduate students, three postdocs, and many undergraduate students, including
some from a minority-serving institution (Texas A&amp;M University at
Kingsville), and nurturing the collaboration between Arizona State and Texas
A&amp;M at Kingsville Universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The big, unanswered
question about green infrastructure is whether the benefits - improved base flow
reliability, damped peak flows, local storage - might be better controlled by
being coupled to traditional gray infrastructure, such as reservoir operations.
Modeling, data, and decision-support tools for blending gray and green water
infrastructure do not exist at present. This project advances a control-theory
framework that couples gray and green infrastructure subsystems and processes,
and explicitly incorporates the effects of economically motivated human players
into the system. The project framework minimizes the negative effects of extreme
weather (drought and flood) on infrastructure processes in the chemical,
petroleum, and agricultural sectors of the coastal basins of Texas. The work
includes an integrated analysis of grey infrastructure for water storage and
conveyance along with green infrastructure that provides environmental and
aesthetic benefits. Although gray and green infrastructure are often
intermingled, they are usually analyzed independently. For this integrated
analysis, the engineering component is a model of ground and surface water
interactions in both arid and humid regions in Texas. The computer science
aspect is a synthesis of coupled grey-green infrastructure systems and the
generation of environmental service flows. The socioeconomic study is an
application of competitive game theory that seeks to understand and augment
water trading to promote in-stream flows from water rights that have been
allocated for commercial, industrial, or municipal use. The project also
includes visualization and stakeholder engagement in the application of water
trading.