* 1735702
* Type II: I-Corps Site at Carnegie Mellon University: A Model Promoting University Innovation, Entrepreneurship, and Regional Growth
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Lenore Blum, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 299,569.00

This project, from Carnegie Mellon University, creates an I-Corps Site at this
institution. NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities
established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support multiple,
local teams to transition their technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites
provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking opportunities, training
and modest funding to enable groups to transition their work into the
marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also
strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the National
Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a Type II proposal, requesting a
"renewal" of funding for an existing I-Corps Site. There are two types of
I-Corps Site proposals. Type I proposals are submitted by institutions that have
not had prior funding as an I-Corps Site. These proposals may request $100,000
per year for up to five years. Type II proposals are submitted by institutions
that have had prior funding as an I-Corps Site. These proposals may request up
to $100,000 per year for up to three years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A primary goal
of the CMU I-Corps Site is to build a comprehensive program that is adaptable to
other universities and regions across the country; one that leverages and
augments local resources and that integrates into the NSF I-Corps program. To
this end, the CMU I-Corps Site works with a network of regional Sites and
national Nodes to prepare teams to enter the National I-Corps training program.
The CMU I-Corps Site model curriculum incorporates an agile methodology focused
on customer discovery and product adaptation, and provides effective mentoring,
strong collaborations with regional stakeholders, and the incorporation of
programs and perspectives of regional partners. A goal is to create an
entrepreneurial community of students, faculty and community members who not
only benefit directly from the program, but also become experts in mentoring and
advising others. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CMU I-Corps Site accelerates the
effective transfer of university research into successful commercial ventures,
enabling government funded university research and innovations to promote
regional growth and benefit the public. Many sectors serve to gain, for example,
healthcare, transportation, energy, and sustainability. Incorporating regional
expertise and collaboration benefits both the university and the community and
helps broaden participation. The program provides an adaptable model to
strengthen the entrepreneurial and innovation ecosystem of universities, their
regions and the nation.