* 1735731
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Temporal Variations in Pacific Ocean Dust Fluxes
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Soo Hyun Kim, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 12/31/2019
* USD 13,171.00

This doctoral dissertation research project investigates the history of Asian
dust deposition on islands in the Pacific and how variability in climate has
impacted rates of dust deposition over the past 43,000 years. Asian dust from
deserts contains iron and phosphorous, two nutrients that can greatly influence
ecosystems in the North Pacific. Dust influxes have been influenced by
differentials in three major processes, the amount of dust in the air, long-
distance wind transport, and dust settling via rainfall to the ocean or soils.
Despite these important connections, long-term records of temporal variations in
Asian dust flux onto islands in the Pacific have not been reported. By analyzing
proxy measures available in several cores extracted from peat bogs on Hawai'i,
the doctoral student will generate an original long-term record of Asian dust
flux on islands in the Pacific. This record will help better detect Asian dust
flux-climate-ecosystem interactions, variations, and timescales beyond those
available in modern observations. This new record will be made available through
several broadly accessible databases which can be used by other investigators in
ongoing efforts to model the role of dust in atmospheric processes. The research
results will also be used to develop a science enrichment activity for minority
and low-income high school students in Wisconsin.

The abundance of quartz in the soil of some Pacific islands such as Hawai'i
demonstrates continuous addition of continental dust from East Asian deserts to
the North Pacific. This project focuses on three research objectives: 1)
reconstructing the history of quartz accumulation rates in Hawai'i; 2)
distinguishing climate- from human-induced quartz flux in the paleodust records;
and 3) comparing the quartz flux paleorecords with independent records of
climate history to infer the influence of climate change on dust deposition in
Hawai'i. Proxies include quartz accumulation rates for Asian dust flux, mean
quartz grain size for the intensity of winds transporting Asian dust to Hawai'i,
organic carbon accumulation, C/N ratio and Br content for Hawaiian
paleohydrology, and mean grain size distribution for human-induced local dust
emission intensity. By reconstructing and correlating these proxies, the
doctoral student will demonstrate how climatologic variation has influenced
Asian dust flux in Hawai'i over the last 43,000 years. The results will
contribute to ongoing efforts to model the linkages among climate, atmospheric
dust, and connections among remote ecosystems.