* 1735306
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Coffee Farming, Drought, and the Effects of Eco-Certification on Farmer Resilience
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Elinor Benami, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 02/29/2020
* USD 15,945.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will analyze how governance
structures, such as eco-certification programs and cooperatives, impact coffee
farmers' responses to environmental stress. Coffee farming currently supports
the livelihoods of millions of people worldwide. Yet, the crop is very sensitive
to temperature and precipitation conditions. As changes in both precipitation
and temperature regimes are projected to alter the suitable coffee-producing
regions in the world, eco-certification programs have been expanding their reach
among producers and consumers alike. Despite suggestions from eco-certification
programs that they can enhance farmer resilience to shocks, little is known
about the actual interaction between eco-certification and farmer resilience. A
recent severe drought in a major coffee producing region affected both certified
and non-certified farmers and offers an opportunity to investigate if and how
eco-certification may mitigate the experience of severe environmental stress
among coffee farmers. This project will evaluate how certification programs are
achieving their objectives of enhancing farmer resilience, which can help inform
American consumers on the value of certified products. Additionally, the
research aims to assist members of local coffee cooperatives to identify best
practices for developing resilience. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this research will provide support to enable a student to
establish a research career. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study seeks to
characterize how participation in eco-certification programs may influence
farmer outcomes during periods of environmental stress, while taking into
consideration choices and constraints among production practices, farmer
profiles, and geographic variation. The doctoral student will focus her
dissertation project on a better understanding of (1) the processes that lead to
the adoption of climate-smart agricultural practices; (2) the sufficiency of
those practices to positively impact farmer livelihoods during drought
conditions; and (3) the development of a profile of who adopts climate-smart
agricultural practices. The student will evaluate records on the quality of
coffee produced over an eight-year period, and how quality relates to
participation in certification programs over time. The student will also conduct
and then analyze semi-structured interviews with farmers on their perceptions of
how environmental risk, certification, and varying management practices
influence their production systems. Lastly, the student will evaluate the
changing incentives for farmers to participate in certification programs and
cooperatives in the study region, and assess how these factors influence farm
management practices. This study will address these questions by investigating a
case study in Brazil, the largest supplier of coffee globally, and one of the
leading sources of U.S. coffee imports, but the project's findings will be
applicable to other regions and commodities.