* 1735245
* Evaluating the Roles of the Ocean, the Atmosphere, and External Forcing in Atlantic Multi-Decadal Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Amy Clement, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2022
* USD 674,245.00

Sea surface temperatures (SSTs) over the Atlantic north of the equator show a
form of variability in which the entire basin slowly warms and cools, which is
referred to as Atlantic Multidecadal Variability (AMV). AMV can be characterized
by the Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO), formed as the average detrended
SST in the North Atlantic (equator to 55 North) after smoothing. The roughly
100-year record of the AMO shows two cycles of oscillation, with cooler
temperatures in the early 1900s, warming from the 1920s to about 1960, cooling
again from the 1960s to around the millenium, and warming after that. These
temperature variations matter for the surrounding land areas as warmer SSTs are
associated with increased rainfall in the southeast US and North Africa,
increased hurricane activity, and warmer winters in Europe and North Africa.
Generally opposite conditions prevail when the AMO is in its cool phase, for
example the Sahel drought occurred during the most recent cold
period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The driving mechanisms of AMV are not well
understood. Variations in the strength of the Atlantic meridional overturning
circulation (AMOC) are the most commonly invoked explanation for the slow
fluctuations of the AMO, and simulations in which AMOC strength is deliberately
reduced show an AMO-like SST response. But recent work by the PIs and
collaborators suggests that AMO-like variability can be produced in models which
do not represent the AMOC. They looked at climate model simulations in which the
ocean model was replaced by a non-circulating "slab" representing the upper
ocean, and these simulations produced the AMO SST pattern and behavior similar
to standard climate models. Other work suggests that AMO variability can be
generated by external forcing factors such as and anthropogenic aerosols and
volcanic aerosols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project the PIs perform a series
of numerical model experiments designed to address the roles of external forcing
and oceanic and atmospheric processes in driving AMO variability, with further
effort devoted to understanding AMO/AMV impacts on surrounding landmasses. The
work addresses three general questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) How much is the
ocean contributing to multi-decadal variations in the Atlantic basin? What are
the dominant ocean processes responsible for this?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) How
much is the atmosphere contributing, including externally forced changes in
composition, as well as cloud-radiative feedbacks?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) What
are the causes of the impacts associated with the AMV around the Atlantic
basin?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These questions are addressed using a combination of
diagnostic heat budget analysis and numerical experiments with a hierarchy of
model configurations designed to isolate or eliminate particular processes. In
addition to the standard climate model and "slab" ocean model configurations
discussed above, the PIs use an ocean model configuration in which each ocean
column simulates vertical mixing but ocean circulation is still not simulated
(see AGS-1650209). Another configuration allows ocean circulation (including the
AMOC) but does not allow changes in the surface winds to affect the circulation,
thereby ruling out explanations in which winds and ocean currents act together
to generate the AMO. Research on the role of external forcing uses an aerosol
dataset from the Max Planck Institute in which analytically specified plumes
represent aerosols from the major emission centers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
work has societal as well as scientific relevance given the connections between
AMO variability and surface climate on surrounding landmasses, including
hurricane activity that affects the US east coast. The work also promotes the
development and use of a hierarchy of models connected to the freely available
Community Earth System Model, and these model configurations will be made
available to the research community. In addition, the work supports a graduate
student and includes outreach to K-12 students and the general public.