* 1735225
* NRT-UtB: Science of learning, from neurobiology to real-world application: a problem-based approach
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Stormy Chamberlain, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 07/31/2023
* USD 2,999,806.00

Learning is the basis of human mental development and the process of learning
continues throughout our lives. Perhaps more than anything else, how and what we
learn shapes who we are. This project has the dual aims of achieving a deeper
scientific understanding of learning, and communicating a deeper understanding
of the science of learning to scientists and the public. Over several decades,
diverse fields including genetics, neuroscience, linguistics, education, and
psychology have generated a wealth of knowledge about myriad aspects of how
humans learn, but a grand challenge remains: to integrate that knowledge into a
unified understanding of learning based on these diverse fields, and on scales
ranging from the gene to the neuron, brain, and human behavior. This National
Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the University of
Connecticut will help prepare the next generation of researchers to meet this
challenge. The traineeship, focusing on the science of learning, will train
fifty (50) PhD students, including twenty-five (25) funded trainees, from
education, genetics, linguistics, psychology, neuroscience, and speech-language-
hearing sciences. By emphasizing a problem-based approach (learning by doing),
embracing collaboration across a broad a spectrum of disciplines, and
integrating hands-on training in communication and leadership skills that enable
effective multidisciplinary project design, management, and scientific
discovery, this program will offer trainees unique preparation for a range of
careers in academia, industry, and the public sector. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
training program has five major components: an intensive one-year seminar that
surveys the science of learning across all participating fields, a hands-on
practicum where trainees learn to design and implement multidisciplinary
research, faculty-student research interest groups that serve as brainstorming
launch pads for new scientific challenges, data stewardship modules, and
integrated training in outreach and communication. The seminar provides a cross-
disciplinary introduction to the science of learning and the challenge of
technical communication, while the practicum emphasizes practical skills crucial
in academic and nonacademic careers that graduate education too often lacks:
project design and management, budgeting and resource allocation, and external
communications. The research interest groups, which will evolve as promising
research proposals emerge from the practicum, serve as both focal point for
research and organizational structure for the participants. From their first day
in the program, students face the challenge of how to clearly and effectively
share ideas without assuming prior knowledge or relying on technical jargon, a
skill that not only enables excellence in research, but empowers trainees to
become ambassadors for their work to society as a whole. This program will also
promote diversity in careers requiring advanced training through best practices
in recruitment and retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship
(NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of
bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education
training. The Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary research areas, through
comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and
aligned with changing workforce and research needs.