* 1735671
* Type II: MIT Innovation Corps Site
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2024
* Roman Lubynsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 347,713.00

This project, from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) extends their
NSF I-Corps Site for an additional three years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF
Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities established at
universities whose purpose is to nurture and support multiple, local teams to
transition their technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide
infrastructure, advice, resources, networking opportunities, training and modest
funding to enable groups to transition their work into the marketplace or into
becoming I-Corps Team applicants. &lt;br/&gt;I-Corps Sites also strengthen
innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the National Innovation
Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps Type II proposal is to continue the
existing NSF I-Corps Site program at MIT. There are two types of I-Corps Site
proposals. Type I proposals are submitted by institutions that have not had
prior funding as an I-Corps Site. These proposals may request $100,000 per year
for up to five years. Type II proposals are submitted by institutions that have
had prior funding as an I-Corps Site. These proposals may request up to $100,000
per year for up to three years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Site will continue to
support MIT researchers that are working on new, innovative and differentiating
technologies. To date, over seventy teams have participated in the MIT I-Corps
Site training programs and the total will be well over 100 by the end of the
initial award. Ten teams have completed the NSF National Team Program and two
more have been accepted. Collectively, the graduates have received over $8
million in additional grants or awards to continue developing their
technologies. Six companies have submitted SBIR or STTR proposals and four have
been awarded so far. Two companies were accepted into accelerator programs. The
startups have raised over $6.5 million in early stage investment and at least
twenty-five new jobs have been created. Three of the companies have successfully
reached commercialization of their publicly funded new technologies. Additional
outcomes show that participants learn new skills both professionally as well as
in entrepreneurship. The training contributes to their current research and has
affected how they will conduct their future research by including
commercialization potential as part of their planning. Site participants benefit
from a Team Mentoring approach through a partnership with the MIT Venture
Mentoring Service that continues beyond their I-Corps training. The mentor team
framework increases rates of learning and provides continuity in nurturing the
teams as they advance their ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MIT's activities are
likely to have broad impact including: encouraging entrepreneurial aspirations
and providing researchers with training and activities to understand the
entrepreneurial process allowing them to greatly increase their future prospects
while still within the academic environment; attracting and supporting a greater
number of students, faculty and other researchers to actively explore the
possibilities of translating their research into future commercial applications,
ensuring the supply needed to fuel the continuous flow of innovations needed by
society; and, encouraging more women and other underrepresented participants to
become engaged and reach successful outcomes, serving as visible role models to
accelerate the participation of others. Finally, through its existing and active
Outreach Program, MIT VMS will disseminate both the knowledge and practical
techniques to its large and growing network of universities that have launched
mentoring programs based upon the VMS model.