* 1735512
* Laboratory Technician Support: Expanding the capacity for U-Pb geochronology at Princeton University
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Blair Schoene, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 749,050.00

An increase in understanding of how the Earth system operates in the present,
and how it has evolved over billions of years, has led geoscientists to ask ever
more precise questions about the timescales of geologic processes and the
feedbacks between the ocean-atmosphere system, the biosphere, and the solid
Earth. In order to provide quantitative answers to these questions, high-
precision time constraints are required. Radiometric dating, or geochronology,
is the most reliable way to provide such time constraints, and U-Pb
geochronology is the most versatile method available. In order to meet the
growing demand for geochronologic data in the Geosciences, this grant provides
technical support for the U-Pb geochronology lab in the Department of
Geosciences at Princeton University. This will create a new position that will:
1) increase the lab's capacity to take on new projects and host additional
external scientists, including faculty and graduate and undergraduates students;
2) maintain efficient operations of clean lab facilities and analytical
equipment; 3) streamline knowledge transfer between incoming and outgoing
graduate students and postdocs; 4) provide a more reliable means for method
development and improvement of precision and accuracy in U-Pb geochronology; 5)
improve the integration of laboratory research into undergraduate and graduate
curriculum; and 6) assist in outreach efforts to bring the lab?s science to a
broader community. Given the unquenchable thirst in the Geosciences for
geochronology, additional technical support will help the Princeton lab do its
part to fill the deficit between user demand and capacity of existing
geochronology labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides much-needed
technical support within the U-Pb geochronology laboratory in the Department of
Geosciences at Princeton University. U-Pb geochronology is the most broadly
applied system for determining the rates of geologic processes, and current
demand for high-precision ID-TIMS U-Pb dates far outweighs the capacity of
geochronology labs to generate them. The U-Pb lab at Princeton University,
overseen by PI Schoene, wishes to expand its operations in order to host more
outside users and devote more time to technique development that is required to
place high-precision U-Pb dates into petrologic and/or stratigraphic context.
Research themes within Schoene's lab range from understanding the evolution of
continents and volcanic systems, calibrating rates of climate and biologic
change in the deep past through ashbed zircon geochronology of stratigraphic
sections, measuring the flux of flood basalt eruptions and understanding their
environmental impact, and increasing the precision and accuracy of geochronology
of Lunar samples. Each of these topics includes externally-funded collaborators
from outside of Princeton University that send students to carry out the work.
The new technical support will expand the ability of the lab to train both
internal and external users and, in conjunction with upcoming facilities
expansion, will provide new opportunities for integration of TIMS and laser
ablation ICPMS U-Pb geochronology. These efforts serve both the need for
assessing and increasing the accuracy of resulting ages and how to interpret
them as chronometers of a wide range of geologic processes.