* 1735149
* NSF Student Travel Grant for the 2017 International Convention on Shape, Solid, Structure &amp; Physical Modeling (S3PM-2017)
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2017,02/28/2018
* Sara McMains, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 02/28/2018
* USD 30,000.00

This proposed project will support student participation in S3PM-2017, the
International Convention on Shape, Solid, Structure, and Physical Modeling,
which will be hosted and co-sponsored by ICSI at UC Berkeley in June 2017. This
event combines two prestigious symposia: SPM, the Solid and Physical Modeling
Symposium (June 19-21), and SMI, the Shape Modeling International Conference
(June 21-23). SPM is an annual international forum for the exchange of recent
research in applications of solid modeling and processing in design, analysis,
and manufacturing, as well as in biomedical, geophysical and other emerging
application areas. SMI provides a forum for the dissemination of new
computational techniques for modeling and processing digital representations of
shapes and of their properties across a wide range of application areas. The two
conferences have been attracting the top international researchers in their
respective fields for two decades, advancing knowledge of mathematical and
algorithmic principles for the design, modeling, representation, processing,
analysis, and visualization of shapes, solids, structures, materials,
properties, and behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will support
registration, travel, and housing for approximately 20 student S3PM participants
from U.S. institutions. Students will learn about cutting edge research in
shape/material/structure models, including advances in representations of
manufacturing knowledge, algorithmic innovations in CAD, and new interfaces for
specifying and interacting with design and manufacturing services. It will give
them the opportunity to present their work, obtain feedback from international
experts, listen to presentations describing state of the art results, witness
lively discussion panels, attend keynote lectures from world renowned speakers,
and network with industry R&amp;D leaders, training the next generation of the
U.S. workforce to continue to lead in research and engineering innovation.
Student selection will prioritize supporting female and underrepresented
minority students to support their career development.