* 1735960
* Near-Surface Structure of the Continental United States Using Distant Earthquakes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Miaki Ishii, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 08/31/2018
* USD 63,889.00

This project examines shallowest structure of the United States using a novel
approach that utilizes EarthScope USArray seismic data. Depth-dependent
estimates of both compressional- and shear-wave speeds will contribute not only
to the studies of the subsurface imaging, but also to seismic hazard assessment
and earthquake engineering. The new method is non-invasive, such that well
drilling or field experiments using explosives are not necessary, and can be
applied to any site with a single seismic station or dense arrays. Furthermore,
if depth dependence is not sought, easy-to-install and inexpensive instruments
can be used, allowing detailed variations&lt;br/&gt;in the soil/crust structure
to be revealed at low cost. The near-surface structure obtained from this study
can be used as an input model for ground motion simulations, and will contribute
to such programs as earthquake early warning that requires shaking predictions
at critical locations. This project will also promote multidisciplinary research
on the geological study of the continental United States. Since the technique
can resolve seismic structure of top few kilometers or less, the lateral
variation revealed from this study can be compared to and interpreted with
geological provinces observed at the surface. The shallowness of the target also
starts to bring together the global seismological analysis (using distant
earthquake data) with near-surface critical zone studies, and contribute to our
understanding of complex processes that occur at the Earth's
surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new technique utilizes body-wave polarization
to resolve wave speed immediately beneath a seismic station. Seismic wave
polarization information has been relatively unexploited compared to other
quantities such as travel times, and the essential theoretical framework for
relating the polarization information of teleseismic body waves to near-surface
wave speeds will be established and tested. Counter-intuitively, the
polarization of teleseismic P waves is sensitive to shear-wave speed, while that
of S waves is sensitive to both compressional and shear-wave speeds. Moreover,
examining the frequency dependence of the polarization data allows a depth-
dependent wave speed model of the shallow subsurface to be constructed. The
method will be applied to the USArray data to produce the near-surface wave
speed model of the continental United States. The spatial variation of the wave
speeds, in both vertical and horizontal dimensions, will be studied at different
scales through different frequency filters and combination of data from
Transportable Array, Reference Network, and Flexible Array. The results will
provide better constraints on the crust properties, and can be used to improve
crustal corrections used for other types of studies such as global or regional
seismic tomography.