* 1735884
* Socio-Hydrological Dynamics Workshop
* SBE,SMA
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2018
* Marion Dumas, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 06/30/2018
* USD 59,889.00

Traditionally, scientists and water mangers have thought of the water system as
a part of nature that humans act upon. However, as the hydrological system
becomes more variable and human demands on this system grow, a more integrated
understanding is needed. Human choices and institutions can fundamentally alter
the natural water system. In turn, water systems shape regional economic
activity and the institutional systems that we devise to manage that water. To
better manage the relationship of societies to their water resources, we must be
able to conceptualize and model these interactions, both on the short and long
run, and from the local to the global scale. The broader impact of this workshop
is to progress in our scientific understanding of interactions between human
social systems and the physical systems, and support national security by
ensuring that our water resources are managed in a way that is secure,
resilient, and robust to the social and environmental changes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary workshop integrates research in the
physical hydrology of water with research on the social, economic, and political
management of water. Participants analyze how current research and methods used
in the field can be extended to include dynamic feedbacks between the sociology
and hydrology of water use and management. This workshop is organized around an
innovative concept of research jams, in which small groups of participants
brainstorm on how to extend and enrich concrete research projects. The
challenges and opportunities that participants identify in these focused
"research jams" then inform the debates and conversations participants have in
plenary sessions. Plenary sessions aim to identify the strengths and weaknesses
of different theoretical frameworks and empirical methods, as well as identify
some of the most critical questions for the field as a whole. This workshop will
inspire new interdisciplinary projects within a rigorous theoretical framework
of social and hydrological systems, provide participants ample time for rigorous
discussion on their early stage research and contextualize this research within
the broader goals of the field and offer the public a synthesis of the state-of-
the-art and of the most exciting directions for the future of water-society
interactions.