* 1735998
* Conference Proposal:  Strengthening Methods and Public Engagement in Cultural and Psychological Anthropology
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Eileen Anderson-Fye, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2017
* USD 19,916.00

This project aims to give scientists more of the knowledge and tools they need
to produce robust and reliable research. By providing a forum to engage with
national colleagues renowned for their expertise in research design, methodology
and public impact, this project will enhance both the quality and relevance of
future research efforts. The workshop provides a platform for scientific
collaboration, the results of which will benefit those working to develop more
effective methodologies and avenues for the dissemination of findings from
anthropological research to promote public scientific understanding. Products
from the workshop (in both written and video form) will be made publicly
available. The project also contributes to the training of graduate students in
methods of scientifically-grounded and empirical data collection.

Dr. Eileen Anderson-Fye of Case Western Reserve University will organize and
oversee a workshop at the biennial meeting of the Society for Psychological
Anthropology in New Orleans, LA, from March 9-12, 2017. The workshop will focus
on four themes: (1) conducting multi-site collaborative research; (2)
effectively communicating scientific research findings; (3) person-centered
interviewing; and (4) cultural consensus analysis. Based on two separate surveys
that were previously conducted, these areas were identified as most likely to
have a sustained impact on methodological development, as respondents identified
them as subjects lacking systematic mechanisms to gain knowledge and training.
The workshop will advance psychological and cultural anthropology through
advancements and innovations in research design and methodology. Because
concepts that have been extensively developed and theorized in the subfield of
psychological anthropology have been increasingly abstracted more widely in the
behavioral and social sciences, a strong multiplier effect beyond the specific
subfield is expected. It is anticipated that more than 100 scholars will
participate in person in these workshops.