* 1735204
* NRT-IGE: STEM Professional Awareness, Advancement, and Development (PAAD)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Robert Beitle, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 08/31/2022
* USD 499,344.00

While STEM graduate students have exciting career options that expand upon the
technical knowledge gained during their studies, new challenges and
opportunities provided by technology advancements, digital influences, and
commercialization interests, for example, mandate a revitalization of graduate
education. Because millennial generation students will likely change careers
multiple times, students must become trained for a broad variety of employment
opportunities. Graduate training, therefore, should incorporate new and
transferable skillsets to adequately prepare students for these numerous career
paths. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award in the
Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) Track to the University of Arkansas will
develop, test, and assess a curriculum model that incorporates STEM and non-STEM
disciplines in professional awareness and development training of STEM graduate
students. Additionally, the project will provide an innovative training approach
for STEM and non-STEM faculty to think beyond the bounds of traditional academia
and to better prepare STEM graduate students for a variety of careers. The
project will create a new graduate education training cycle, from recruitment of
students to successful graduation and employment, through the incorporation of
curricular and co-curricular activities and with significant input from
stakeholders in education, government, industry, non-profits, and communities.
This new training model will result in better career preparation and success of
STEM graduate students through assimilation of new skillsets that include not
only depth of expertise in specific technical disciplines, but also a breadth of
talent and ability in diverse technical and non-technical areas, such as
communication, project planning, and management. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Based on
student, corporate, and community responses to current and previous programs at
the University of Arkansas, this project will develop a new model to provide a
holistic approach to career awareness, advancement, and development for STEM
graduate students by providing broad professional preparation intertwined with
technical training. NRT-supported faculty from STEM and non-STEM fields will
receive training that will help them propose and develop novel curricular and
co-curricular concepts and methods that support one or more of the tracks for
student training (patent law, public policy/government, academia, or
commercialization/entrepreneurship). Students will select one of these four
professional tracks and integrate learning activities that include outreach and
experiential learning into their technical programs. Data collected throughout
the project will examine career awareness and placement outcomes, success of the
model, and adaptation to other programs. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new, potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The Innovations in Graduate Education Track is dedicated
solely to piloting, testing, and evaluating novel, innovative, and potentially
transformative approaches to graduate education.