* 1735448
* Collaborative Research: Evaluating fault creep in California using geodetic and seismic observations
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Takaaki Taira, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 07/31/2023
* USD 79,748.00

There is a 99.7% chance a magnitude 6.7 earthquake or larger will strike
California within the next 30 years. Earthquakes are a mode of fault slip that
cause seismic waves to be radiated into the Earth. Within earthquake cycle,
however, faults may also undergo aseismic slip (or creep), which radiates no
seismic wave. The occurrence of seismic versus aseismic slip depends on the
initial frictional properties of the fault zone and their variation as a
function of fault slip rate. Understanding, why, when, where and how creep rate
varies on a fault is essential for quantifying earthquake potential on
California's fault systems. The knowledge of spatial distribution of fault creep
allows estimating location and size of future earthquakes, while the temporal
variation of creep rate can be used to determine frictional properties of the
fault zone. In this project we integrate measurement of ground surface
deformation obtained from space-borne Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar
and Global Positioning System with seismic observations through numerical and
analytical models to constrain spatially and temporally variable creep rates
along the Central and Southern San Andreas Faults. We will analyze large data
sets of Synthetic Aperture Radar images acquired by several radar satellites
spanning period 1992 - 2020, to generate maps of surface deformation time series
at unprecedented resolution and accuracy. The results from this project will be
used to investigate active crustal deformation and provide new insight into the
its underlying mechanisms and dynamics, and allows better recognition and
assessment of earthquake hazard and its associated risk in California. In
particular, we will work to answer important questions: How much elastic vs.
permanent strain occurs adjacent to the San Andreas Fault? Does this proportion
change along the length of the fault? How do fault slip rates change and evolve
over time? How do short-term geodetic measurements match with long-term
geological measurements? How do earthquakes initiate? How do fault geometry,
rheology, and history combine to determine the propagation, size, and location
of earthquakes? What is the friction on a fault at the depths and conditions at
which big earthquakes rupture? What role do fluids play in the generation of
silent slip events? &lt;br/&gt;This project will also bring together young early
career scientists, including one female, from American and British universities
and will provide them with partial support. It will also provide valuable
research experience for a graduate student. The results from this project will
be incorporated in undergraduate teaching, including Physical Geology as well as
graduate courses Crustal Deformation and Radar Remote Sensing, which both
include numerous case examples from the San Andreas
Fault.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An improved knowledge of the spatially and
temporally variable surface deformation field and the link to seismic and
aseismic slips on faults are critically important for understanding active
tectonics, mechanics of faulting and triggering large earthquakes. Unique to the
San Andreas Fault is the combination of rich historic data sets, the recent
deployment of EarthScope instrumentation, fault complexities and variety of
natural transient phenomena, making it a natural laboratory for studying
faulting processes. This 3-year research project is a collaboration between 3
early career scientists from 3 universities to advance understanding of aseismic
faulting processes and underlying mechanisms in California. The study is
inspired by seismic and geodetic observations of interseismic creep rate
variations along the Central and Southern San Andreas Fault. Through this study,
the full capacity of vast seismic, geodetic and geologic data sets provided
through EarthScope will be explored. An advanced multitemporal interferometric
synthetic aperture radar (InSAR) algorithm will be applied to large data sets of
SAR images acquired by several radar satellites (e.g., ERS1,2, Envisat, ALOS,
TerraSAR-X, CosmoSkyMed and Sentinel-A,B) spanning the period 1992 - 2020. In
combination with Global Positioning System (GPS) observations, this effort
provides observations of surface deformation time series at unprecedented
resolution and accuracy. Time-dependent kinematic models will be applied to
constrain spatiotemporal distribution of fault creep, integrating InSAR,
Creepmeter, GPS and repeating earthquakes. Dynamic models informed by creep time
series and lab measurements allow linking fault transient and long term
behaviors to its frictional properties, evolution of effective normal stress and
crustal lithology. Lastly, the link between rate changes on creeping segments
and occurrence of major earthquakes on the adjacent locked sections will be
investigated through static stress transferring.