* 1735971
* CREST Center for Sustainable Lightweight Materials (C-SLAM)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Maria Auad, Tuskegee University
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 08/31/2024
* USD 5,000,000.00

CREST Center for Sustainable Lightweight Materials&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST) program
supports the enhancement of research capabilities of minority-serving
institutions through the establishment of centers that effectively integrate
education and research. CREST promotes the development of new knowledge,
enhancements of the research productivity of individual faculty, and an expanded
presence of students historically underrepresented in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
CREST program support, Tuskegee University will continue development of its
Center for Sustainable Lightweight Materials in collaboration with Auburn
University, Cornell University and National Laboratory partners. This work will
accelerate research and development of multiscale advanced lightweight materials
with potential applications in areas such as automotive, building, biomedical
and tissue engineering, among others, where synthetic materials are found to be
toxic, non-degradable and non-sustainable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center
articulates three research thrusts: (1) Nanobiomaterials Extraction, (2)
Biopolymers Design and Synthesis, and (3) Advanced Green Composites. The aim of
all three research thrusts is to gain fundamental understanding of the emerging
field of sustainable lightweight advanced materials. Activities in Subproject 1
include synthesis of a variety of nanomaterials from waste resources like rice
husk, bone ash, and fish scales, extraction of cellulose in various forms and
lignin from plants, and production of nanofibers. Subproject 2 includes
synthesis of biopolymers from lignocellulosic biomass, development of resins
with excellent thermal and mechanical properties from agricultural and food
processing wastes. Subproject 3 activities focus on development of advanced
green composites through use of plant fibers, fibers from liquid crystalline and
bacterial cellulose. In addition, durability and toughening characteristics of
advanced composites will be enhanced through development of autonomously self-
healing polymers and composites, toughened fibers and resins.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center will enhance STEM research and education at
Tuskegee University, produce new knowledge, strengthen the research
competitiveness of faculty and promote interdisciplinary collaborations within
Tuskegee University and with partner research centers. Center activities will
enhance the research and development enterprise and infrastructure at Tuskegee
University, making it nationally competitive in the emerging field of
sustainable lightweight advanced materials. Intellectual property will lead to
the creation of patentable products and
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students, traditionally underrepresented in the
STEM disciplines, will be provided with meaningful research experiences at a
readily accessible advanced research facility and a pathway to Ph.D. programs.
Center activities will provide education and research integration and exposure
to students from middle school to the doctoral level, and to the general public,
including persons with disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.