* 1735040
* NRT: A training incubator for addressing urban environmental change from Ridge to Reef (R2R)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Kristen Davis, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,999,970.00

Urban and suburban areas, particularly in southern California, face multiple
environmental challenges such as wildfires, pollution, and sea level rise. To
address these challenges successfully will require strong partnerships that
cross academic and government agency boundaries and that engage all
stakeholders. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award
to the University of California, Irvine, will establish the Ridge-to-Reef (R2R)
training model for community-engaged graduate training through partnerships with
government agencies, non-governmental organizations, and the private sector. The
primary goal of R2R is to train the next generation of professionals with the
skills required to translate conceptual knowledge into practical environmental
solutions in urban landscapes. R2R anticipates training forty-five (45) PhD or
Master's students, including twenty-five (25) funded trainees from ecology,
engineering, and earth system science programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
graduate research training program will foster a skilled workforce to tackle
relevant problems facing urban environments. The R2R training program will
actively engage with government agencies, non-governmental organizations, and
the private sector to develop research questions and methods so that outcomes
align with real-world problems. A Research in Action Internship (RAIN) program
will provide students with hands-on skills training guided by the partners and
academic faculty. The R2R curriculum will focus on interdisciplinary knowledge,
communication skills, and professional development. A summer institute will
teach data analysis skills, and an environmental solutions practicum will
require trainees to apply their knowledge to real-world problems and datasets.
Trainees who complete program requirements and an internship will receive a
Certificate in Urban Ecosystem Management to facilitate career placement.
Research products and curriculum materials will be disseminated to enrich
graduate programs outside UC Irvine. By training the next generation of
environmental problem solvers, R2R will enhance the sustainable management of
urban ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT)
Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students
in high priority interdisciplinary research areas, through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.