* 1735793
* EXP:  Collaborative Research:  Cyber-enabled Teacher Discourse Analytics to Empower Teacher Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Sidney D'Mello, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2022
* USD 262,466.00

This project will use multiple sources of middle school classroom data to give
feedback and assessment information to teachers so that their teaching ability
is enhanced. The data includes anonymized student performance data (grades and
standardized test results) and anonymized existing audio recordings of classroom
discussions between students and teachers. The audio data will be used to
analyze the student-teacher discussions for effectiveness of the student-teacher
discussions in student learning. As the effectiveness measures are developed,
feedback for instructional improvement will be provided to the teachers in a
design cycle for continuous improvement. The technological innovations are in
the analysis of the student-teacher discussions, in natural language
understanding of student-teacher discussions, and in machine learning to
classify effective from non-effective student-teacher
discussions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance cyber-enabled,
teacher analytics as a new genre of technology that provides automated feedback
on teacher performance with the goal of improving teaching effectiveness and
student achievement. The exemplary implementation will autonomously analyze
audio from real-world English and language arts classes for indicators of
effective discourse to enable a new paradigm of datadriven reflective practice.
The project emphasizes six theoretical dimensions of discourse linked to student
achievement growth: goal clarity, disciplinary concepts, and strategy use for
teacher-led discourse, and challenge, connection, and elaborated feedback for
transactional discourse. The innovation aims to help teachers develop expertise
on these dimensions and will be developed and tested in 9th grade classrooms in
Western Pennsylvania. The team will first generate initial insights on how
teacher discourse predicts student achievement via a re-analysis of large
volumes (128 hours) of existing&lt;br/&gt;classroom audio. Next, they will
design and iteratively refine hardware/software interfaces for
efficient,flexible, scalable audio data collection by teachers. The data will be
used to computationally model dimensions of effective discourse by combining
linguistic, discursive, acoustic, and contextual analysis of audio with
supervised and semi-supervised deep recurrent neural networks. The model-based
estimates will be incorporated into an interactive analytic/visualization
platform to promote data-driven reflective practice. After refinement via design
studies, the impact of the innovation on instructional improvement and student
literacy outcomes will be evaluated in a randomized control trial. Finally,
generalizable insights will be identified at every stage of the project to
promote transferability to future cyber-enabled, teacher-analytics technologies.