* 1735252
* NRT-UtB: Training the Next Generation of Researchers in Engineering and Deciphering of Miniature Brain Machinery
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Jonathan Sweedler, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,999,996.00

This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship award to the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign will address the next frontier in biotechnology: to
engineer, and then decipher and harness, the living three-dimensional brain. The
program will provide doctoral students with the skills and knowledge base to
develop and utilize miniature brain machinery in an effort to understand and
regulate brain activities. To achieve the goals of developing cross-disciplinary
researchers, trainees will learn diverse fundamentals in biology, mathematics,
engineering, and cognitive science, relevant to miniature brain machinery. The
training grant anticipates providing a unique and comprehensive training
opportunity for sixty (60) PhD students, including thirty four (34) funded
trainees. Trainees will be recruited from neuroscience, cell and developmental
biology, molecular and integrative physiology, chemistry, chemical and
biomolecular engineering, bioengineering, electrical and computer engineering,
and psychology. The training program will foster a culture of innovation and
translational research, and will produce a new generation of scientists and
engineers prepared to tackle major problems in brain studies that can improve
the quality of human life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research and training
program will bridge two dominant, non-overlapping brain research paradigms: i)
cognitive and behavioral studies, focused principally on understanding of
adaptation, decision-making, psychology, and learning of an individual using
bioimaging and computational tools vs. ii) cell and tissue studies, focused on
activities of multiple neuronal cells by altering their internal and external
microenvironments comprised of biomolecules, extracellular matrix, and external
stimuli. The goal of this NRT training program is to unite these two dominant
paradigms in brain science studies and bridge the expertise of cell and
molecular biologists, physiologists, chemists, nano/micro technologists, and
cognitive neuroscientists. This training program prepares students for studies
that enable control over the networks producing behavior and thus to study
causal relations. The overarching goal of the program is to provide students
with an interdisciplinary curriculum grounded in problem-based learning and an
immersive research experience that blends techniques from multiple disciplines.
A second goal is to increase the participation of women, underrepresented
minorities, and students with disabilities in neuroscience, life sciences,
chemical sciences, and engineering fields. A third goal is to train students in
communication skills with the public. Evaluative studies conducted throughout
this research traineeship project will explore the dynamics and efficacy of
interdisciplinary collaboration by students in this program. Project outcomes
will be a demonstrated, evaluated model for transformative graduate training
that is effective in developing broadly trained professionals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to
encourage the development and implementation of bold, new potentially
transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The Traineeship
Track is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary research areas, through comprehensive traineeship
models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce
and research needs.