* 1735840
* Type I: Innovation Binghamton I-Corps Site
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Per Stromhaug, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 659,999.00

This project, from Binghamton University, creates an NSF I-Corps Site at this
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-
funded entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and
support multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps
Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the
National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Binghamton I-Corps Site strengthens the
ecosystem at Binghamton University. By integrating existing innovation support
programs and technology transfer with entrepreneurship and business incubation
services, technologies stemming from faculty research, student ingenuity, and
community innovators are evaluated for commercial viability. Experienced
technology transfer professionals, technical experts resident in Binghamton's
industry-facing centers, and on-staff entrepreneurship and financial advisers
recruit teams and promote promising teams into the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Entrepreneurship and engineering faculty,
entrepreneurs-in-residence (EIRs), and community coaches and mentors stimulate
ideation and team building, and guide the innovators through theory and
practice, and, ultimately, the go / no-go decision. By virtue of a rigorous
selection process and hands-on training, the teams with customer-validated,
technology- and manufacturing-feasible products and services proceed with
commercialization with further support from the university, local businesses,
and funders, as well as the I-Corps regional and national nodes. The process
creates a growing cadre of entrepreneurs who continue to innovate, build
businesses, mentor and invest in others, and overall recharge the
entrepreneurial ecosystem, making Binghamton and the University a hub for
entrepreneurs, investors, and start-up companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Binghamton I-Corps Site is meant to transform the mindset of University faculty,
staff and students, as well as that of community members and leaders by
providing a practical, achievable approach to generating new, sustainable
ventures built around technologies. Demonstrating this path forward creates
positive and powerful relationships between universities, the local business,
professional services and investor communities, industry, and government.
Generating trust and interactions between academia-private sector-government has
ripple effects far beyond the teams going through the program, and propagate a
self-sustaining, entrepreneurial ecosystem driven and replenished by new
launches. Furthermore, by bringing together entrepreneurs and intrapreneurs,
this Site program blurs lines separating big and small business, manufacturing
and service industries, academia and the private sector, and spurs efforts
towards the common goal of value and job creation through new ventures.
Successful launches of companies inspire Binghamton University researchers,
students and graduates, and instill optimism about the prospects for creating
wealth and fulfilling jobs in Binghamton, or wherever their careers take them
throughout the nation.