* 1735890
* Building a continent: Integration of surface geology, rock physics, and seismic observations to investigate the tectonic history of the contiguous United States
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Vera Schulte-Pelkum, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 08/31/2023
* USD 284,196.00

The North American continent formed over billions of years via the collision of
continental fragments and the rifting apart of larger continents. Geologists can
read some of this history by looking at rocks exposed at the Earth's surface
that were deformed in the past. The aim of this project is to extend this
ability below the Earth's surface. While buried rocks cannot be seen and mapped
directly, they are constantly traversed by seismic waves from earthquakes around
the world. These waves are imprinted with information on the rocks they travel
through before reaching the Earth's surface. We combine mapped rock deformation
at the surface with seismic information from the subsurface in order to find out
how to extract the imprinted information from the seismic data. The information
can then be used to map how the Earth's crust was deformed. The project advances
knowledge of Earth science by allowing us to read the record of past geological
processes beneath the surface. Because current geological processes also deform
rocks, the method can also be used to map the roots of earthquake-generating
faults, which is useful for estimates of seismic hazard. The rock
characteristics investigated in this process are also relevant to mapping
geological resources. Additionally, accurate knowledge of the imprint of rock
fabrics on the seismic signal enables us to avoid biases in other uses of the
seismic data, such as for location and characterization of natural and human-
made seismic sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A stated goal of the EarthScope
program is to derive constraints on the deformation history of the continent.
This project aims to bridge the scales from microstructural rock fabrics
measured in the laboratory, to deformation structures mapped on outcrop
exposures, and to rock fabrics causing seismic anisotropy at km-scale seismic
wavelengths. Project components are 1) integration of seismic anisotropy
observations from multiple techniques and seismic networks, 2) contribution of
existing digital structural data sets containing foliations, lineations, and
mapped major ductile and brittle faults to existing EarthCube-funded and U. S.
Geological Survey-held databases as well as calculation of bulk elasticity
tensors from ~1:100,000 scale maps to hand samples and 3) synthesis and joint
interpretation of seismic observations and structural data extracted from
EarthCube-funded databases using straightforward correlations as well as an
explicit scaling from elastic tensors representative of rock types to geological
foliation maps to seismic wavelength-scale anisotropy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ability to relate crustal seismic anisotropy to the strain history of the crust
requires 1) a representative catalog of elastic properties of crustal rocks and
how they average at scales of seismic wavelengths and 2) a compilation of major
structural parameters such as orientations of dominant rock fabrics (foliation
and lineation) in metamorphic and igneous rocks and their internal coherence in
unique domains, as well as orientations of more discrete features such as fault
zones, in order to enable quantitative comparisons to anisotropy measured
seismically. The proposed work will centralize existing compilations and make
them widely available online.