* 1735891
* Laboratory Technician Support: Luminescence Geochronology
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Amanda Keen-Zebert, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 680,536.00

The research activities enabled by this award include fundamental
geochronological research on landscape forming processes in river and dune
landscapes over a range of environments from the humid mid-continent to the
Great Basin of North America, to river systems in China and South Africa. These
collaborative projects address the impacts of human-landscape interaction,
natural hazards, and sustainability and thereby have significant potential for
informing decisions regarding policy and management. This funding supports a
full time technician for the Desert Research Institute E.L. Cord Luminescence
Laboratory (DRILL). The technician is critical to better serving the user
community, training of visiting students and scientists, maintenance of the
DRILL, and timely completion of projects. The DRILL is dedicated to luminescence
research, which is a geological dating technique that enables geochronologists
to define the burial age of sediments and some artifacts. This award also
facilitates fundamental research in luminescence dating and training of visiting
students and scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
farther develop the DRI Luminescence Laboratory (DRILL) to better serve the
geochronology user community and to become a center of learning about
luminescence through the support of a full time technician. The research
activities enabled by this award include fundamental research on landscape
evolution and process geomorphology in addition to technique development
including directly dating volcanic glass and the extension of luminescence data
to understanding geomorphic processes such as sediment transport in rivers and
particle mixing on hillslopes. The goals are to better serve those needing
luminescence dating in their projects and training the next generation of
luminescence practitioners.