* 1735210
* NRT-IGE: PhD Career Ladder Program: A grassroots approach to career development
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Nancy Goroff, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 08/31/2023
* USD 488,339.00

Stony Brook University's PhD Career Ladder Program, developed by graduate
students, for graduate students, serves as a nimble and cost-effective national
model for PhD career development and exploration. The traditional career pathway
for PhD students in the sciences, leading to a faculty job, is no longer
reliable. Numerous recent reports have called on universities to provide better
career development and preparation to help these highly-trained scientists and
engineers go on to productive and satisfying careers in a broader range of job
sectors. To create the necessary culture change and provide these resources,
institutions need cost-effective, easily adaptable models that can transform
from the bottom up. The PhD Career Ladder Program is a student-led career
mentoring program that takes students through an eight-step curriculum of self-
assessment, career exploration and preparation for a job search. Because the
program is grassroots and peer-to-peer, it creates a supportive space for
exploration of career paths inside and outside of academia and encourages
persistence toward students' career goals. This National Science Foundation
Research Traineeship (NRT) award in the Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE)
Track to Stony Brook University will focus on expanding, improving and
institutionalizing the PhD Career Ladder Program, and testing its effectiveness
as a career development tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will allow Stony
Brook to expand the existing PhD Career Ladder Program (PCLP) to new cohorts and
develop standardized training for new peer leaders. The success of PCLP will be
assessed through evaluation of its impact on participants as well as the
effectiveness of its programmatic elements. Key measures include increasing
student career knowledge and skills, enhancing students' confidence in their
career prospects, transferable skills and job-search skills, broadening
students? career horizons to include the pursuit of careers beyond academia, and
cultivating a pipeline of new student leaders. The assessment also will measure
research-grounded psychosocial variables such as shifts in scientific identity
and perceived identity compatibility with diverse career pathways. The program,
including the new train-the-trainers component and the expansion of PCLP to new
student cohorts, will be assessed formatively throughout the project as well as
summatively at the end of the project. Finally, findings on this highly
adaptable and cost-effective model will be disseminated broadly, through an
online clearinghouse of archived material and a program implementation
toolkit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new,
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
Innovations in Graduate Education Track is dedicated solely to piloting,
testing, and evaluating novel, innovative, and potentially transformative
approaches to graduate education.