* 1735301
* NRT-IGE: Team Science Training for Coastal Ocean &amp; Estuarine STEM Graduate Students
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Linda Schaffner, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 08/31/2023
* USD 498,840.00

Solving today's most challenging societal problems requires innovative,
integrated breakthroughs and novel solutions that transcend individual
disciplines, reaching a deeper level of knowledge integration. However,
achieving such integration through collaborative team science (research
conducted by more than one discipline in an interdependent manner) has proven
elusive due in large part to deficiencies in key professional, teamwork, and
leadership skills among the team members. This National Science Foundation
Research Traineeship (NRT) award in the Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE)
Track to the College of William &amp; Mary's (W&amp;M) Virginia Institute of
Marine Science (VIMS) seeks to address these deficiencies by designing and
testing team science professional development training for coastal ocean and
estuarine STEM graduate students. The project will be implemented through the
Virginia Sea Grant College, which is composed of VIMS/W&amp;M, the University of
Virginia, Virginia Tech, and George Mason, James Madison, Old Dominion, and
Virginia Commonwealth Universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project assembles a
multi-disciplinary team of faculty facilitators to guide a class of diverse
doctoral and master's students from the natural and physical coastal, marine and
environmental sciences, engineering, design, and social and economic sciences.
An innovative workshop series trains students in the principles of team science,
collaborative leadership, and effective self-reflective tools and strategies to
improve teamwork. Working closely with coastal community partners (e.g.,
municipalities, NGOs), this community-based climate-resilience project enables
students to practice team science research and use reflective practices to
improve their competencies in teamwork. Assessment of the reflective practices
(using team reflexivity, Comprehensive Assessment of Team Member Effectiveness,
and expertise coordination measures) will improve understanding of how to
nurture self-reflective competencies in the short-term and build capacity for
team science research that will enhance students' careers over the long term.
The lesson plans, training modules, and implementation strategies will be
compiled into an online toolkit and shared broadly through professional
societies of graduate school deans, multiple conference presentations, and
workshops, and extended through alumni networks at the participating
institutions for peer mentoring and executive coaching. Further, collaboration
with the Virginia Council of Graduate Schools will help to enhance recruitment
of diverse participants, reinforce learning with workshop alumni, promote global
dissemination, and institutionalize benefits into existing courses and degree
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new,
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
Innovations in Graduate Education Track is dedicated solely to piloting,
testing, and evaluating novel, innovative, and potentially transformative
approaches to graduate education.