* 1735139
* NRT: Disaster Resilience and Risk Management (DRRM) - Creating quantitative decision making frameworks for multi-dimensional and multi-scale analysis of hazard impact
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Christopher Zobel, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2023
* USD 3,175,730.00

Every human being can be impacted by a disaster, especially in coastal areas. At
present, six out of ten people live near the coast and are susceptible to
hurricanes, tsunamis, and other hazards. Coastal and other hazards also threaten
economic and geopolitical stability, and national security. Hurricanes Sandy
(2012) and Katrina (2005) and the Tohoku tsunami (2011) and Typhoon Haiyan
(2013) are reminders of the immense long-term impacts such hazards pose. Despite
the accelerating risk of such events, resource allocations and coping strategies
are often complicated and by varying stakeholder interests. This National
Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to Virginia Tech will
synthesize expertise in science, engineering, planning, and business to address
the critical issue of growing disaster losses attributed to both natural and man
made hazards. The program will train a new community of multi-disciplinary
researchers, practitioners, and leaders at the master's and doctoral levels.
Over five years, the project will support 26 trainees on NSF stipends, and an
estimated 150 additional students will participate in at least one element of
the program. Each trainee will pursue a degree through existing academic
entities at Virginia Tech or through the university's new Individualized
Interdisciplinary PhD program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop
new transdisciplinary approaches critical for advancing knowledge and
understanding of disaster-resilience and risk management across different STEM
and non-STEM disciplines. The involved faculty are not only experts in their own
disciplines, but also have a shared history of transdisciplinary disaster-
resilience and risk management research and education. Trainees will work with
faculty and each other to develop innovative, comprehensive, inclusive, and
sustainable methods and practices that seek to mitigate disasters emanating from
natural and manmade hazards. Trainees will also learn about and lead stakeholder
engagement exercises that explore how people and institutions respond to
disasters and risk. Integration of student research with stakeholder interaction
and engagement provides a novel and potentially transformative educational
component that could be replicated in other transdisciplinary graduate programs.
Intentional training in the societal context in which disasters unfold has the
potential to deepen communications among disaster-resilience and risk management
professionals and researchers and the communities they serve. Educational
innovations include i) integrating research and education through a unique
approach to stakeholder engagement, ii) emphasizing intentional development of
transdisciplinary thinking, and iii) integrating faculty and graduate students
into a community of practice that fosters diversity and inclusion. The result
will be diverse, globally competitive scholars who understand the fundamental
aspects of disaster resilience and its broader implications outside traditional
STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students
in high priority interdisciplinary research areas, through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.