* 1735445
* Quantifying Upper Ocean Export and Remineralization of Bioactive and Particle Reactive Trace Elements along the US GEOTRACES Tahiti to Alaska Transect
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Ken Buesseler, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2021
* USD 603,461.00

The goal of the international GEOTRACES program is to understand the
distributions of trace chemical elements and their isotopes in the oceans. A
core approach of GEOTRACES involves coordinated expeditions that measure
multiple trace elements and isotopes (TEIs) across key gradients in the ocean,
such as changes in productivity, redox/oxygen, boundary scavenging intensity,
and hydrothermal activity. However, trace elemental distributions are not enough
to meet the GEOTRACES goal to "identify processes and quantify fluxes that
control the distribution of TEIs in the ocean and to establish the sensitivity
of these changing distributions to environmental conditions." To measure rates
of processes requires the use of other measurements, such as natural ly
occurring radioactive isotopes. This project involves the measurement of two
isotopes of the element thorium on a U.S. GEOTRACES expedition in the Pacific
Ocean, from Alaska to Tahiti. Thorium has a tendency to become associated with
particles in the oceans, and therefore it can be used to measure the sinking of
other elements out of the ocean surface. Thorium isotopes with short half-lives
can be used to track processes that occur on faster timescales (weeks or
seasons), such as those related to biology in the surface waters of the ocean,
while isotopes with longer half-lives are useful for studying processes that
occur on longer time scales like that of ocean circulation. This project would
use measurements of thorium-234 and thorium-228, with half-lives of 24.1 days
and 1.9 years, respectively, to estimate sinking rates of thorium and other
elements in the upper ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is broken down
into four main activities: 1) Use short-lived Th-234 to estimate particle export
and remineralization rates; 2) use ratios of Th-234 to major biogenic phases
(e.g., carbon, nitrogen, biogenic silica) and trace elements (e.g. iron,
manganese, etc.) to derive flux profiles of other major and trace elements; 3)
extend the export and remineralization rates in time/depth using Th-228; 4)
examine how changes in #1-3 are related to expected gradients in particle
concentration and type, plankton community shifts, net community production,
aerosol inputs/dust, physical forcing (e.g. upwelling), hydrothermal plumes, and
other features along this GEOTRACES transect. Profiles of total Th-234:U-238
provide quantitative estimates of Th-234 flux vs. depth, which along with
parallel size-fractionated particulate profiles of Th-234 and TEIs allow us to
empirically calculate the vertical profile of net particle export for any TEI.
With high resolution vertical and spatial sampling, the application of Th-234
can be extended below the zone of net removal in the surface ocean to include
quantification of particle export and remineralization in the upper several
hundred meters. Based upon prior studies, the Th-234 flux model will need to be
adjusted for physical transport, especially upwelling across the equator.
Selected Th-228 profiles can extend these flux and remineralization estimates
even further with depth and over longer time scales. The project will support a
Ph.D. student.