* 1735701
* Science Policy Research Report: Funding Team Science
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Jonathon Cummings, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 05/31/2018
* USD 44,000.00

Team science is the collaboration of two or more researchers working
interdependently towards a common research goal. As funding agencies continue to
encourage and promote team science, it is important to evaluate and synthesize
what we know about the consequences of team size. Given scare financial
resources, an important science policy issue is how to effectively allocate
funding to research teams. For example, given an overall project budget of
$1.5M, when is it better to fund a team of three researchers at $500,000 each
versus a team of 10 researchers at $150,000 each. On the one hand, funding fewer
researchers (with more money per researcher) increases their incentives and
makes coordination easier, but reduces the amount of team expertise available.
On the other hand, funding more researchers, with less money per researcher,
decreases their incentives and makes coordination more difficult, but increases
the amount of team expertise available.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Through an
interdisciplinary review of the academic literature on team science, this
project advances our knowledge of the benefits and costs of funding teams of
varying size. Related topics will be explored as well, including the role of
team complexity (e.g., number of disciplines and number of institutions), the
life cycle of teams, for example, funding early in the life of the team vs
funding later in the life of the team, and the stage of research development,
for example, funding early-stage research vs funding late-stage research. To
ensure that the evidence identified is robust and reliable, three categories
will be used to classify what is known about team size: (1) strong causal
inference (e.g., laboratory experiments and field experiments), (2) moderate
causal inference (e.g., longitudinal studies with appropriate controls), and (3)
weak causal inference (e.g., cross-sectional surveys and observational studies).
Based on the evidence, policy recommendations will be made to guide the
efficient allocation of resources to team science in order to facilitate complex
problem solving, new research discoveries, and technological innovation.