* 1735715
* Theory and Models of Ice Sheet Surface Melting Instabilities in the Past and Future
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Victor Tsai, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 224,758.00

Sudden accelerations in melting at the junction of merged ice sheets are thought
to have caused some of the most rapid sea level rise events in history. Existing
theories of ice sheet surface melting do not consider such regions and are not
able to reproduce these sudden accelerations in ice sheet surface melting. To
predict the likelihood of such rapid sea level rise events in the future, it is
important to understand why such events happened in the past. This project will
develop a new mathematical theory for ice sheet surface melting instabilities
within ice saddle regions. It will compare the predictions of this theory to
complex ice sheet models and perform more realistic simulations to determine
whether the Greenland Ice Sheet may undergo such a sudden acceleration in
melting under future warming. This project includes a number of broader impacts.
Sea level rise threatens life and infrastructure along coastlines throughout the
world. Accurate projections of potential periods of rapid future sea level rise
will inform strategic decision-making about mitigation strategies and
infrastructure design. The project will also contribute to STEM workforce
development by supporting the training of a post-doctoral associate and a
graduate student. A web-based application employing the simple model developed
during this project will be produced as an effective outreach tool for
explaining ice sheet dynamics to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
goal of this project is to develop a theory that explains the occurrence of
deglacial meltwater pulses from land-based ice sheets under a warming climate. A
new variant on the classical single-dome ice sheet model that relaxes previous
assumptions and considers an ice-saddle geometry will be produced. This new ice-
saddle model will be numerically tested to determine the conditions under which
it produces a significant deglacial meltwater pulse. Asymptotic mathematical
techniques, such as multiple time scales analysis, will be used to derive
functional expressions for the magnitude and speed of meltwater pulses predicted
by these models. The utility of the ice-saddle theory in explaining reality will
be evaluated by comparing it to more complex ice sheet models and proxy records
of sea level rise during meltwater pulses. Finally, multi-millennial simulations
of the Greenland Ice Sheet under different scenarios of future climate change
will be developed.