* 1735371
* NRT-IGE: Indigenous Graduate Education in Science and Engineering - Southwest (IGESE-SW)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Ronald Trosper, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 08/31/2021
* USD 387,926.00

Scientists and Engineers are tasked with tackling some of the largest and most
complex national and global challenges this century, making jobs in this sector
the fastest growing of any other sector in the United States. But the fields of
Science and Engineering have a diversity problem which inhibits a vibrant,
creative, and diverse talent pool. Many higher education programs have responded
to this issue by creating programs intended to narrow the diversity gap in STEM
fields. While these efforts have begun to bridge the gap for some
underrepresented minority populations, American Indians and Alaska Natives
(AI/AN) remain the least represented group of students in graduate degrees in
STEM fields. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award
in the Innovations in Graduate Education (IGE) Track to the University of
Arizona (UA) will improve persistence of AI/AN engineering students and impact
faculty perceptions and attitudes through the inclusion of indigenous and more
conversational methods of interaction. This project addresses the issue of low
numbers of AI/AN science and engineering practitioners by implementing and
investigating several culturally relevant program components designed to impact
the relationships among AI/AN students, faculty mentors, and Tribal Nation
leaders. The novelty of this pilot project is in the systematic implementation
and assessment of program modules, grounded in education science and social
theories that are hypothesized to dramatically improve persistence of AI/AN in
STEM graduate programs, especially in engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
program will transform the graduate education experience for indigenous
engineering students and university engineering faculty. The approach
acknowledges and leverages the cultural and social capital present in the AI/AN
students at UA, and is framed in research on critical race theories and family
education models. UA has a unique opportunity to work with the 22 federally
recognized tribes that lie within the state of Arizona. These nations occupy
over one quarter of Arizona, and are the home to over 250,000 American Indians.
This UA-based IGE testbed uses ethnographic methods to study the meaning of
actions and events surrounding the concepts of engagement, belongingness, and
other components critical to persistence in graduate school study from the
perspective of AI/AN students, faculty mentors and Tribal Nation leaders. The
model contains four major components that reflect a holistic, empirically-based,
systems approach to the successful persistence of AI/AN graduate students: 1)
Financial Assistance: partnering with the SLOAN scholarship program at UA for
tuition funding for indigenous engineering students; 2) Community-driven
research: relationship building with local tribal partners; 3) Indigenous
Faculty Mentoring: Indigenous Mentoring Program as part of a faculty training
initiative; and 4) providing student integration and professional skills
development to increase a sense of belongingness and professional engineering
preparation. These four components are individually critical, collectively
powerful, and provide an empowering, positive, and persistent graduate academic
career for AI/AN students from all tribes and Native communities. Successful
elements of the testbed will be scaled to other regions nationwide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to
encourage the development and implementation of bold, new, potentially
transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The Innovations in
Graduate Education Track is dedicated solely to piloting, testing, and
evaluating novel, innovative, and potentially transformative approaches to
graduate education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the
Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) program. AGEP
funds research and the development, implementation, and investigation of models
to transform the dissertation phase of doctoral education, postdoctoral training
and/or faculty advancement of historically underrepresented minorities (URMs) in
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) and/or STEM education
research.