* 1735234
* NRT-IGE: Augmenting, Piloting, and Scaling Computational Notebooks to Train New Graduate Researchers in Data-Centric Programming
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Philip Guo, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 08/31/2021
* USD 498,751.00

Every research area is confronting torrents of data arriving with increasing
velocity, volume, and variety. The unprecedented scales of data, the
accelerating pace of its accumulation, and disappearing disciplinary boundaries
bring exciting research and development opportunities but also challenge
traditional graduate education. A central challenge for virtually every
discipline is ensuring students have the computational skills needed for
increasingly data-intensive research and necessary for a competitive and rapidly
evolving job market. Across the biological, physical, and social sciences, one
common approach to addressing this challenge is to create bootcamps, which are
introductory short courses for new graduate students. This National Science
Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award in the Innovations in Graduate
Education (IGE) Track to the University of California - San Diego will expand on
the bootcamp approach and simultaneously exploit the growing movement for the
creation of computational notebooks by augmenting Jupyter Notebook, a web-based
notebook with novel online facilities for data-centric programming training for
graduate students in a wide range of disciplines. This has the potential to
improve the efficacy of training graduate students in data-centric programming
and expand its impact by making new instructional facilities widely available
via the web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on open-source Jupyter Notebook
software and widely deployed educational tools the investigators have developed
to support tutoring (Python Tutor), feedback (PeerStudio), discussion
(Talkabout), and activity capture (ChronoViz), the project will augment Jupyter
Notebook to assist in training new graduate students in data-centric
programming. This project will iteratively design, pilot, and evaluate the
augmented notebooks and associated new companion curricula in bootcamps and
ongoing classes to validate the approach, and make the resulting system,
tailored to specific discipline requirements, available online to be widely
shared, evolved, and extended in bootcamps, graduate classes, and online
courses. In addition, project members will participate in the UC San Diego STARS
(Summer Training for Academic Research Success) outreach program and involve
high school students from the innovative Preuss School on campus and other high
schools in the area. To extend impact beyond publication, education, and local
outreach, project members will work closely with the Project Jupyter team to
form a community to further develop and evolve this approach for training
students in data-centric programming and help fulfill the promise that increased
sharing of data and analyses holds for advancing open scientific collaboration
and reproducible science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship
(NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of
bold, new, potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education
training. The Innovations in Graduate Education Track is dedicated solely to
piloting, testing, and evaluating novel, innovative, and potentially
transformative approaches to graduate education.