* 1735992
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: The statistical mechanics of bed load sediment transport: Scaling particle motion to fluvial form
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* David Furbish, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2023
* USD 223,868.00

The streams and rivers of the United States are in a state of flux due to the
building, and now decommissioning, of tens of thousands of dams, as well as
changes in water use and land use influencing river flows. Extensive field
studies have documented complex changes to the geometry and substrate of gravel-
bedded rivers affecting fish and other biota. Due to the patchy, intermittent
nature of the motion of sand and gravel carried by turbulent river flow, current
models of sediment transport are unable to predict most of these critical
riparian changes. This project investigates and describes sediment motion at the
level of individual grains and turbulent eddies using physics-based
supercomputer algorithms and advanced laboratory imaging techniques. Statistical
physical principles are applied to these supercomputer and laboratory results to
produce a theoretical framework that is expected to provide predictive
capabilities, and thus, policy guidance regarding dramatic changes occurring in
the country's waterways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental work involves
gravel-bed flumes and high-speed video to illustrate the basis for changes in
streambed topography, and how the characteristic length-scales in this problem
are determined by the distribution of particle motions. Laboratory experiments
will be replicated by particle- and turbulence-resolving supercomputer
simulations coupled in momentum. The work also is aimed at parameterizing
statistical theory for the case of alternate bar formation, thus providing the
basis for further clarifying channel-scale morphodynamics problems in which
patchy, rarefied transport conditions exist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
cofunded by the Geomorphology and Land-use Dynamics Program and the National
Strategic Computing Initiative.