* 1735968
* CREST   Center for Complex Materials Design for Multidimensional Additive Processing (CoManD)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2017,02/29/2024
* Subramanian Ramakrishnan, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 02/29/2024
* USD 5,402,797.00

The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST) program
supports the enhancement of research capabilities of minority-serving
institutions through the establishment of centers that effectively integrate
education and research. CREST promotes the development of new knowledge,
enhancements of the research productivity of individual faculty, and an expanded
presence of students historically underrepresented in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With CREST
program support, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University will establish
the Center for Complex Materials Design for Multidimensional Additive
Processing. The Center will promote advancements in the manufacture of novel
combined materials in the micrometer scale for applications in magnetic
shielding, energy and bio-medical technology. The ability to pattern multiple
materials, on micrometer length scales, in three dimensions is critical for
several technological applications including composites, microfluidics,
photonics, and tissue engineering. The Center will be comprised of an
interdisciplinary team of faculty from Chemical and Biomedical Engineering,
Industrial Engineering, Biological and Agricultural Systems Engineering,
Chemistry, Pharmaceutical Sciences and Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Simulations
coupled with experiments will result in a molecular level understanding of the
forces governing self-assembly in different materials. Printing of three
dimensional tumor cell cultures on a chip using appropriate hydrogels will allow
evaluation of the cytotoxicity of anticancer drugs and nanoparticles. Enhanced
cell efficiency of printed photovoltaic cells will impact applications in
portable electronics and power generation in automotive and space applications.
The combined effect of flow and magnetic field induced orientation of novel
nanoparticles will result in lightweight materials with enhanced dielectric
properties for shielding and sensing
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate courses based on fundamentals
of self-assembly, nanoparticle synthesis and characterization, additive
manufacturing, nanomaterials in biology, and nanoparticles in medicine will be
developed and offered to Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
students. A laboratory course in materials will be offered to graduate and
undergraduate students involved in materials research. The Center will produce
15 Ph.Ds., directly impact 40 undergraduates and influence 100 graduate students
and 300 undergraduates through collaborations and coursework.