* 1735407
* CRISP Type 2/Collaborative Research: Defining and Optimizing Societal Objectives for the Earthquake Risk Management of Critical Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Linda Nozick, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 488,194.00

Critical infrastructure systems, such as electric power and water supply, are
vital to the economy, national security, and public health, and therefore must
be designed, managed, and operated so they function reliably and efficiently
even in the case of an extreme event. Nevertheless, the way infrastructure
system services meet societal needs and the way disruptions of those services
impair the ability to meet societal needs are not well understood. That is, a
lot remains unknown about the relationship between the percentage of customers
receiving water or power from a utility, and the ability of businesses to
operate; emergency services to perform their duties; households to get to work
and school; individuals to eat, drink, and bathe. In this project, we will
define the societal objectives for infrastructure system performance in
earthquakes and develop a method to comprehensively optimize a broad range of
risk management strategies to meet them. The method will provide a scientific
basis to help infrastructure managers and policymakers in such crucial functions
as emergency planning, retrofit planning, and drafting design codes. To
accomplish these goals, this interdisciplinary project explicitly recognizes
that infrastructure systems include not only physical objects, but also the
uses, preferences, capabilities, and decisions of infrastructure operators and
users. It also considers the adaptive strategies employed by operators and users
in the event of a disaster that interrupts service (e.g., delaying demand, or
supplementing supply with bottled water or a generator). We will improve
academia-industry partnerships by engaging with our practitioner partners at the
Los Angeles Department of Water and Power on a full-scale case study for
electricity and water in Los Angeles, and with other agencies through a sequence
of expert interviews. The project will help broaden participation in disaster
research and practice by providing summer internships for the underrepresented
scholars who are William A. Anderson Fund Graduate Fellows. Post-docs and
graduate and undergraduate research assistants will participate in all aspects
of the project. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Specific project tasks include: (1)
Developing a probabilistic scenario-based model of the risk of multiple
infrastructure systems to earthquakes with the ability to evaluate alternative
risk management strategies; (2) Integrating the complementary strengths of
social media, household surveys, and economic impact analyses to empirically
assess societal objectives, users? adaptive strategies in responding to
disruptions, and the relationships between them and traditional measures of
system functioning; (3) Developing an optimization model to optimize risk
management to meet societal objectives; and (4) Demonstrating models through a
full-scale case study for electric power and water. The new knowledge will
provide the scientific basis to support more effective and efficient risk
reduction by optimizing for the true societal objectives and over a broad range
of strategies, including component design, upgrading, and repair and restoration
planning. Defining societal objectives will help strengthen the business case
for any required interventions.