* 1735033
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: An Investigation of Long Term Culture Contact and Accommodation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Takeshi Inomata, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 25,200.00

The goal of this research is to understand how communities adapt to exposure to
a new religious influence, how this is incorporated into a traditional extant
world view and the material manifestations of this process. This issue is of
central importance in the world today as lack of successful integration lies at
the heart of conflicts in many regions of the world. Through the examination of
the colonial process in which pre-hispanic New World cultures were exposed to
Christianity through Spanish colonization it is possible to examine multi-
religion interaction over extended periods of time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under
the direction of Dr. Takeshi Inomata, Mr. Victor Castillo will conduct
archaeological investigations at Chiantla Viejo, a small highland Maya
settlement that transitioned to Spanish colonial rule during the 16th century.
In order to address the mechanism of community survival in colonial settings,
Castillo's research will study how the continued use of the plaza by the local
community for public concentrations and massive rituals left room for
negotiation between external innovations and traditional ritual practices.
Combining the analysis of site layout, targeted excavations, and laboratory
analyses, this project will provide a substantive dataset to evaluate the
dimension of culture change as a political outcome during a critical
transitional period for small local communities. Castillo´s work will provide
new grounds for addressing religious change beyond traditional models of
acculturation and syncretism by studying a more complex and localized scenario
of cultural interactions within the framework of colonialism. The investigations
at Chiantla Viejo also integrates a constructive dialogue with the modern
community surrounding the site since the place is treasured as the ancestral
location of the modern town of Chiantla, thus raising awareness about the
protection and preservation of the local archaeological patrimony. Ultimately,
this work will present a more proximate and locally situated account of the ways
in which native Maya groups responded to the colonial impact and how pre-
Hispanic communities managed to transition successfully to colonial life and
even outlasted the Spanish domination up to modern times.