* 1735694
* Type I: Tenleytown I-Corps Site
* TIP,TI
* 08/31/2017,02/28/2023
* Kathryn Walters-Conte, American University
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2023
* USD 355,703.00

This project from American University in Washington DC creates an NSF I-Corps
Site that will have a close affiliation with the Washington DC I-Corps Node.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded
entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support
multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps
Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the
National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Tenleytown I-Corps Site for Science and
Innovation creates a culture of innovation through student led technology
entrepreneurship. Internal collaborations between the College of Arts and
Sciences, the Kogod School of Business and other American University entities as
well as external collaborations with the University of the District of
Columbia's Community College (UDC-CC) will promote a venture landscape in
Washington, DC and beyond. The College of Arts and Sciences hosts a maker space
(STEAMworks) for prototype development and the Kogod School of Business hosts a
business incubator. Each of these assets are now housed in a single
interdisciplinary technology building, the Don Myers Technology and Innovation
Building, fostering innovative technology ventures. The Tenleytown iCorps Site
will open unprecedented technology entrepreneurship training for
underrepresented students by sponsoring pitch competitions, customer discovery
workshops, and prototype fabrication sessions within the new building. Student
teams will join the AU Incubator, perform customer discovery under the Lean
Launchpad model, and continue to work within the Innovation Center to prepare
for I-Corps regional and national programs, and/or to obtain further funding
from innovation competitions, grants, and venture capitalists. The Tenleytown
I-Corps Site will (1) develop creative and interdisciplinary ventures with
students from a liberal arts university and a community college; (2) develop the
innovators' entrepreneurial skills; (3) diversify the profile of venture
founders; (4) increase commercialization success of student led technology
ventures; (5) prepare students for success in I-Corps regional and national
programs; and (6) adequately prepare students and faculty to pursue SBIR/STTR
funding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Tenleytown I-Corps Site's program broader
impacts are realized through the creation of a network of strategic partnerships
between two diverse institutions and the neighboring technology community.
Specifically, each of these institutions have the capacity to increase minority
and female representation among business leaders. Activities will include multi-
campus, interdisciplinary collaborations; industry mentorship; participation of
5-10 teams (annually) in the I-Corps Node Program; and an overall culture of
change (innovation, entrepreneurship and collaboration) at American University
and the University of the District of Columbia Community College.