* 1735081
* FASEB 2017 Conference on Genetic Recombination and Genome Rearrangements; July 16-21, 2017, Steamboat Springs, Colorado
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Scott Keeney, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 05/31/2018
* USD 12,000.00

The FASEB Research Conference on Genetic Recombination and Chromosome
Rearrangements will be held at Steamboat Springs, Colorado on July 16-21, 2017.
This is the seventeenth in a series of bi-annual conferences devoted to
promoting cross-disciplinary discussion at the leading edge of research on DNA
recombination. The 2017 meeting features an increased emphasis on quantitative
approaches that bring new understanding to various areas comprising genetic
recombination; for example, high-throughput sequencing and copy number variation
analysis to study genome rearrangements globally within organisms and across
populations; mass spectrometry-based methods that globally assess protein and
DNA marks; single molecule approaches to recombination biochemistry. This
meeting also features research that is needed to understand and exploit emerging
genome engineering technologies such as CRISPR-Cas9.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this conference is to bring together researchers from around the world
who work in recombination and the related field of genomic rearrangements, and
to give young and starting investigators the opportunity to present and discuss
their work. The format of the meeting involves talks from invited speakers who
are leaders in the field, speakers chosen from submitted abstracts, and poster
sessions. For 2017, there are 47 invited speakers, 36% of whom are women
(including the keynote speaker) and 30% of whom are new to the conference. The
number of program slots to be filled from submitted abstracts has been increased
significantly (to 24%) with the goal of increasing participation opportunities
and visibility for underrepresented groups and young
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The requested funds will be used for
fellowships to help defray travel and meeting costs for 10 junior scientists.
The organizers will prioritize support for underrepresented groups and
preferentially graduate students and post-doctoral fellows with NSF funds.