* 1735693
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Integrating Image Spectroscopy and Microbial Biogeochemistry to Analyze Woody Shrub Encroachment
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Martha Gebhardt, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Vadjunec
* 01/31/2020
* USD 15,999.00

This doctoral dissertation research will investigate the landscape-scale effects
of shrub encroachment on plant and soil nutrient dynamics in a semi-arid region.
Shrub encroachment, a persistent threat to dryland ecosystems worldwide,
fundamentally alters ecosystem processes by changing plant community diversity,
net primary productivity, and soil functioning. This doctoral dissertation
research project will use innovative methods that combine hyperspectral remotely
sensed data with field measures of soil biogeochemistry and microbial parameters
to infer foliar chemistry and quantify the impacts of shrub encroachment on
nutrient dynamics in drylands. The project will provide a more holistic
understanding of the spatial dynamics of microbial communities and plant
communities that are linked by biogeochemical cycling. The project includes a
strong educational component by providing opportunities for K-12 training and
ongoing outreach and education initiatives with local underserved communities.
In addition, K-12 teachers will be involved in inquiry-based STEM curriculum
development. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award
will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hyperspectral imagery offers a
unique opportunity to study large scale shifts in ecosystem structure and their
effects on ecosystem services. The doctoral student will integrate land cover
remote sensing data products with in situ measurements of plant and soil
nutrient dynamics to determine how shrub encroachment affects plant chemistry,
soil microbial communities and activity, and ecosystem processes, across the
landscape in southeastern Arizona. Outcomes from this project will determine (1)
the link between soil nutrients, topography and the abundance of shrubs and
grasses; (2) the potential effects of shrub encroachment on landscape-scale
nutrient dynamics; and (3) the utility of imaging spectroscopy to inform land
management practices. This integrative approach offers the opportunity to
revolutionize research on soil nutrient availability and biogeochemical cycling
at landscape scales, and monitor the effects of different vegetation
encroachment management strategies.