* 1735978
* A Modeling Study of Easterly Waves and Their Intraseasonal Variability in the East Pacific
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2022
* Eric Maloney, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 10/31/2022
* USD 431,851.00

Easterly waves (EWs) are wavelike atmospheric disturbances with a ridge-to-
trough size of roughly 1,000km which propagate from east to west at low
latitudes. EWs are important weather makers in much of the tropics and play a
critical role in hurricane development. Much of the research has focused on
African EWs, which along the easterly jet over the Sahel and propagate westward
over the North Atlantic. The genesis of these waves is often explained in terms
of jet instabilities particular to the easterly jet, yet similar EWs are found
in the tropical eastern Pacific where the large-scale flow characteristics are
very different. One explanation for the presence of EWs in the eastern
equatorial Pacific is that they originated as African EWs, formed through
processes associated with the African easterly jet, and subsequently propagated
across the Atlantic and the Caribbean to reach the eastern Pacific. While there
is some evidence to support this theory, previous work by the PI (see
AGS-1347738) suggests that EWs can form in the tropical eastern Pacific despite
the clear differences between this region and the
Sahel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests the hypothesis that east Pacific
EWs are largely caused by upscale growth of topographically-generated
disturbances downwind of the mountain ranges of Central America. Numerical
simulation by the PI have shown that EW activity is dramatically reduced when
the Central American topography is flattened, but these simulations were crude
as the removal of topography has a variety of dramatic effects on the
meteorology of the region including mean flow, cloudiness and precipitation.
Simulations to be performed here would use a "nudging" technique to constrain
the background flow despite modifications to topography and other factors so
that a more focused study of wave generation by specific forcing mechanisms can
be performed in a realistic setting. The work would use the Weather Research and
Forecasting (WRF) model in a convection-permitting configuration. The work would
also address the modulation of EWs by intraseasonal oscillations of the
background flow. Additional work uses diagnostic techniques including vorticity
and energy budgets to study EW generation and propagation in observational
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has societal relevance due to the key role
of EWs in tropical meteorology and hurricane genesis. If EWs found in the
eastern Pacific originated in the African easterly jet they may be more
predictable than if they are generated locally by Central American topography,
thus the results of this work have potential implications for operational
forecasting. The modulation of EW activity by intraseasonal oscillations is also
of practical interest given the long lead times of intraseasonal oscillations.
In addition, the project provides support and training for a graduate student,
thereby providing for the future workforce in this research area.