* 1735194
* Echo Chambers in Science?  The Impact of Academic Recommender Systems on the Dissemination of Scientific Knowledge
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Jevin West, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Joshua Trapani
* 07/31/2020
* USD 293,372.00

Digitization of the scientific literauture has occurred in two phases: first,
scientific papers began to be digitized, and second, comprehensive search
engines such as Google Scholar, JSTOR and Web of Science emerged that allow
scholars to quickly search for and locate published research. Most scientists
now access the literature through online search engines and digital libraries,
and rare is the scientist who walks to the library and peruses the journal
shelves for new papers. These new algorithmic search engines thus provide
scholars with a new lens into the published scientific literature, and this
project aims to better understand the implications of these technological
changes on the practice of scientific discovery and information dissemination.
The project investigates whether these new tools are increasing access to a
wider range of prior literature and thereby democratizing science, or instead
concentrating scholars' gaze onto an ever smaller set of "star" papers. If the
new tools are truly making the widest range of scientific literature more
accessible, it certainly has implications for the prospects for scientific
discovery, since scientists are able to consider and engage with all relevant
prior work, a critical ingredient for high quality scientific activity. On the
other hand, evidence from other contexts suggests that the availability of
massive amounts of information puts new pressure on searching and filtering
processes. If this occurs in science it could mean that scientists increasingly
rely upon more concentrated subset of papers that appear at the top of search
results, thereby creating an echo chamber in science with unintended effects on
scientific careers and potentially negative downstream impacts on scientific
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses these critical
questions primarily via statistical analyses of comprehensive citation data from
JSTOR and the Web of Science. The research focuses on the extent of citation
concentration within and across disciplines; and the role of journals in an
article-based search environment. Citation patterns have changed dramatically in
the wake of the digital transition, becoming both more concentrated and more
vulnerable to cumulative advantage processes. The population-level analyses are
augmented by observational data describing how scientists actually interact with
information technologies and academic recommender systems in the course of their
scientific practice. This combination of methods links processes at the
individual and population levels over time, and emphasizes the downstream
impacts of information retrieval and citation on scientific innovation and
career trajectories. A critical policy related implication is that online
recommender systems can bias search results and thus the visibility of specific
scientific findings. This is relevant to the next generation of scientists using
these search environments and those who evaluate scientists and their work.