* 1735027
* NRT-IGE: Enhancing Learning and Retention in Graduate Physics
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Christopher Porter, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 08/31/2022
* USD 496,571.00

In recent years, education research has revolutionized undergraduate STEM
education and physics education in particular. However, many of the positive
changes to instructional practices and metrics for success have not been
implemented at the graduate level. With a national economy increasingly
dependent on highly-trained specialists in technical fields, this is a
nationally-relevant problem. Similarly widespread are the problems of high
attrition rates in physics graduate programs (on the order of 50%, nationally)
and persistent underrepresentation of women, African Americans, Hispanics and
other groups in Physics and STEM. These chronic shortcomings in diversity and in
retention highlight the need for improved strategies in STEM education at the
graduate level. One of the significant barriers identified is the traditionally-
taught graduate core physics courses. This National Science Foundation Research
Traineeship (NRT) award in the Innovations of Graduate Education (IGE) Track to
The Ohio State University will seek to develop, adopt, and assess innovative,
research-based instructional best practices in graduate-level physics courses,
especially focusing on factors affecting retention and diversity. In particular,
the project is aimed at ensuring that the developed methods and materials are
widely-applicable and adoptable by engaging multiple sites in the development
process (initially four large Midwestern research universities), and collecting
data on effectiveness at each site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A critical strategy of
the project is to directly engage the graduate core course instructors of each
participating institution. The approach applies and adapts a successful model
for establishing and maintaining faculty learning communities to facilitate the
professional development of instructors and the adoption of research-based
instructional materials and methods. The project will also engage the department
graduate studies committees to facilitate positive change in policies and
practices in order to ensure systemic and lasting change. In a bottom-up process
emerging from the needs of the faculty learning communities, instructional
materials will be developed via a highly effective research-based iterative
model including the identification of student difficulties and construction of
materials to engage students in addressing those difficulties in an inclusive
and welcoming environment. The approach includes feedback to the instructors and
the project researchers via performance on content tests, course assignments,
in-class performance, student surveys (e.g., attitude, belonging, motivation)
and student and faculty surveys and interviews. This program will advance our
knowledge of topic-specific instructional materials and methods to improve
student learning at the graduate level, which is currently virtually non-
existent, and can serve as a model for other STEM graduate
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new,
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
Innovations in Graduate Education Track is dedicated solely to piloting,
testing, and evaluating novel, innovative, and potentially transformative
approaches to graduate education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded
by the Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) program.
AGEP funds research and the development, implementation, and investigation of
models to transform the dissertation phase of doctoral education, postdoctoral
training and/or faculty advancement of historically underrepresented minorities
(URMs) in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) and/or STEM
education research.