* 1735004
* NCS-FO: Collaborative Research: Integrative Foundations for Interactions of Complex Neural and Neuro-Inspired Systems with Realistic Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Terrence Sejnowski, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 481,411.00

This project will integrate the capabilities of deep learning networks into a
biologically inspired architecture for sensorimotor control that can be used to
design more robust platforms for complex engineered systems. Studies of the
flexibility and contextual aspects of sensorimotor planning and control will
extend existing paradigms for human-robot interactions and serve as the
foundation for creating personal assistants that are able to operate in natural
settings. Growing understanding of how these layered architectures are organized
in the brain to produce highly robust, flexible, and efficient behavior will
have many applications to rapidly evolving technologies in complex environments,
including the Internet of Things, autonomous transportation, and sustainable
energy networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nervous system is a layered
architecture, seamlessly integrating high-level planning with fast lower level
sensing, reflex, and action in a way that this project aims to both understand
more deeply and mimic in advanced technology. The central goal is to develop a
theoretical framework for layered architectures that takes into account both
system level functional requirements and hardware constraints. There are both
striking commonalities and significant differences between biology and
technology in using layered architectures for active feedback control. The most
salient and universal hardware constraints are tradeoffs between speed,
accuracy, and costs (to build, operate, and maintain), and successful
architectures cleverly combine diverse components to create systems that are
both fast and accurate, despite being built from parts that are not. Recent
progress has made it possible to integrate realistic features and constraints
for sensorimotor coordination in a coherent and rigorous way using worst-case
L-infinity bounded uncertainty models from robust control, but much remains to
explore to realize its potential in neuroscience and neuro-inspired engineering.
Another application of this framework will be to software defined networking,
which explicitly separates data forwarding and data control, and provides an
interface through which network applications (such as traffic engineering,
congestion control and caching) can programmatically control the network. This
makes it a potential "killer app" for a theory of integrated planning/reflex
layering; research collaborators will be eager to deploy new protocols on
testbeds and at scale.