* 1735911
* Collaborative Research: Mechanisms of resistance and resilience to system-wide loss of a keystone predator in an iconic intertidal community
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Bruce Menge, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 07/31/2021
* USD 699,593.00

Diseases that compromise the health of predators can lead to large, abrupt and
sometimes unexpected changes in the structure of ecosystems. This project will
combine field surveys, manipulative experiments and mathematical models to both
understand and predict the ecosystem-level effects of the unprecedented sea star
wasting disease (SSWD) outbreak that devastated populations of Pisaster
ochraceus, a critical predator, across the West Coast of the United States.
Specifically, the project will determine (1) the ecological and environmental
factors that promote vs. compromise the resilience of intertidal ecosystems to
sea star wasting disease, (2) document the pace and extent of recovery from this
major disturbance across the West Coast of the United States, and (3) identify
hotspots of resilience to sea star wasting disease that may serve as important
conservation targets to preserve these iconic ecosystems. The research will
address important societal needs by cross-training undergraduate and graduate
students in disease ecology, marine biology, mathematical modeling and
biostatistics. Students from underrepresented groups will be recruited broadly
from West Coast states. Each summer, four undergraduate students will be trained
in rocky intertidal field research techniques. SSWD-focused modules will be
developed and used in ecology courses at each institution to emphasize the
importance of quantitative and interdisciplinary training for addressing
important questions in biology. Graduate students will work with the Oregon
Migrant Leadership Institute (OMLI) for migrant workers and their children to
create workshops for students about SSWD. The PIs will continue interacting with
the media and public groups, and will expand outreach activities through The
Nature Conservancy and CoastWatch-sponsored workshops for high school teachers
interested in involving students in sea star monitoring to ensure that the
results of this project are disseminated beyond traditional academic circles.
Finally, a series of model-based interactive web modules will be created as part
of this project to illustrate the ecosystem-level effects of sea star wasting
disease to the broader public. The studies on this model system will lead to a
better understanding of how other ecosystems may resist or be vulnerable to
human activities (e.g., fishing, hunting and habitat destruction) that
asymmetrically influence top predators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diseases that
threaten the health of predators can reduce their top-down influence and thus
lead to significant changes in ecosystem structure. In 2013-15, sea star wasting
disease (SSWD) devastated populations of Pisaster ochraceus, the original
keystone predator, along the west coast of North America in one of the most
extensive marine disease events ever recorded. This project will leverage this
unprecedented outbreak to test and extend keystone predation theory by
documenting and explaining the temporal pace, geographical extent, and
spatiotemporal co-occurrence of ecosystem recovery from SSWD. The disease event
also provides an opportunity to test the resistance and resilience of a well-
studied ecosystem at an unprecedented scale. At each of 14 sites, the
investigators will quantify processes that underlie potential resistance of the
system to loss of sea stars (prey recruitment and colonization, mussel growth,
predation intensity, facilitative interactions among sessile organisms, and the
effect of alternative predators). In the latter experiments, the PIs will
conduct caging exclusion experiments to test the effects of both larger (e.g.,
birds) and smaller (e.g., whelks) alternative predators on prey recolonization
of cleared plots. The investigators will also conduct a novel set of experiments
to manipulate factors affecting facilitation of mussels by barnacles and turf-
forming algae. All these empirical studies will be used to parameterize modeling
efforts that will explore the longer-term and larger-scale implications of these
processes, both for this system and for other ecosystems. Specifically, the PIs
will fit a novel spatially-explicit metacommunity model to the empirical data in
order to determine the relative importance of intraspecific and interspecific
resistance vs. resilience mechanisms for the recovery of intertidal ecosystems
following a historical, coastal-scale SSWD disturbance.