* 1735563
* Student Travel to the Cornell, Maryland, Max Planck Pre-Doctoral Research School
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Samrat Bhattacharjee, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Samee Khan
* 05/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

Far too many talented students are not pursuing graduate school, or a career in
higher education and research. We believe this is because students do not
understand what to expect in graduate school, or what such a career entails. To
address this problem, University of Maryland, in collaboration with faculty at
Cornell University and the Max Planck Society in Germany are starting a series
of research summer schools. The goal of the school is to introduce world-class
research to top quality students, and engage them, one-on-one and in small
groups, with leading researchers in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal seeks funding for approximately 25 students from the United States to
attend the first iteration of the school, which will be held on the premises of
the Max Planck Institute for Software Systems, in Saarbruecken Germany, from
August 8-13th, 2017. Students have applied online, and are evaluated based on
grades, a statement and recommendation letters. Our central thesis is that
short, hands-on experience with leaders from a wide range of interesting areas
of Computer Science will effectively entice many undergraduates to commit to
longer-term Research Experience for Undergraduates (REUs), graduate school, and
ultimately careers in research. To evaluate this, we will track participants'
progress and trajectory, both during and after the research school, using
questionnaires, one-on-one advising sessions, and post-school research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research school is designed around the belief
that exposing students, especially women and minorities, to the breadth and
diversity of Computer Science research, especially early in their careers, will
make them more likely to pursue REUs and, eventually, careers in research. Being
exposed to high quality research and being able to work with leaders in their
fields will make the option of a research career "real", and have a
transformative impact for the positive in the attendee's academic careers.