* 1735729
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Disability Diversity and Inclusion in the Workplace
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Anthony Bebbington, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 06/30/2019
* USD 13,293.00

This doctoral dissertation project will analyze the origins and impacts of large
employers' efforts to promote disability diversity and inclusion ("D&I") in the
workplace, and how such efforts transform the workplace as a place. Disability
D&I initiatives have grown in both the public and private sectors since the
passage of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) in 1990 and even more so
since the ADA Amendments Act (ADAAA) in 2008. The federal government, which
employs about 2.2 million people, has set the goal of having 12% of its
workforce be people with disabilities. The government has also set a 7% goal for
federal contractors, a sector that includes large employers in areas such as
defense, security, finance and accounting, information technology, and
consulting. This study will examine why and how public and private employers
have sought to hire more employees with disabilities and how and in what ways
the greater presence of people with disabilities transforms workplace culture.
Enhanced understanding of disability inclusion at work will provide specific and
actionable information for employers and policy-makers. It will forward both
national prosperity and welfare because the disability employment gap represents
a loss of wealth in terms of untapped talent. The researchers will provide
policy-makers and organizational leaders with specific practices they can apply.

The trends in disability D&I offer an opportunity for investigating how
processes of inclusion and exclusion shape places, especially workplaces. Data
gathered through interviews, observation in the form of job shadowing, and
document research, will address three questions: (1) How does disability
inclusion transform everyday socio-spatial relations, both in advance and
because of D&I initiatives? (2) How does knowledge about disability D&I shape
inclusion practices? (3) How do disability D&I narratives reconfigure ideas
about disability "value?" Data collection will be focused in Washington, D.C., a
significant center for the production and distribution of disability employment
and equal employment policy and the hub for civilian employees of the US federal
government and federal contractors, who are leading disability D&I efforts in
mainstream workplaces. The analysis and findings will advance research in human
geography, related disciplines, and the science of broadening participation,
about the relationship between employment segregation, ideas about value, and
how processes of exclusion and inclusion shape workplace character and use.