* 1735717
* Type I: University of Arkansas I-Corps Commercialization STEP (STEM Training in Entrepreneurship Practices)
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Robert Beitle, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 294,888.00

This project, at the University of Arkansas (UA), creates an I-Corps Site at
this institution that involves participants from three UA
campuses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-
funded entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and
support multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps
Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the
National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Arkansas I-Corps Site, STEP
(STEAM Training in Entrepreneurial Practices), builds on university activities
and programs that accelerate the commercialization of research by faculty and
students. In addition, several UA Research Centers and Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) Sites will involve affiliated faculty and students in STEP,
a 10-week summer program that is divided into two phases. Phase I, with 15
teams, will focus on instruction in lean startup principles and initial customer
discovery interviews. Phase II, with eight teams that receive additional
funding, will further develop the most promising business ideas from Phase I.
The STEP site will include undergraduate and graduate student teams and faculty
from three UA System campuses: the University of Arkansas (UA), the University
of Arkansas for Medical Sciences (UAMS), and the University of Arkansas Little
Rock (UALR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the state of Arkansas has made
progress in the development of high-growth businesses based on university
research outcomes over the past decade, Arkansas continues to be one of the most
economically challenged states in the country. The STEP Site encourages
researchers to expand their horizons beyond the research they are doing in their
labs and consider how the commercialization of their inventions might help
promote economic development in the state. In addition to the broader impact of
economic development, the STEP Site enables the university to continue its
efforts to improve entrepreneurial education for females and underrepresented
populations. The university's successful programs for underrepresented high
school through graduate students provide a base upon which to build these
efforts.