* 1735504
* Operation of a Community Marine-Atmospheric Sampling Facility at Tudor Hill, Bermuda
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Andrew Peters, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/28/2019
* USD 99,336.00

This award would provide a year of continuation funding for the Tudor Hill
Marine Atmospheric Observatory in Bermuda. The lower level of the atmosphere
over the oceans plays important roles in the global cycles of many chemical
elements and this observatory provides a unique facility for the ocean and
atmospheric chemistry research communities. At present, many aspects of
atmospheric composition, atmospheric transport, and atmosphere-ocean exchange
remain poorly understood. This limits our ability to predict and mitigate the
effects of anticipated future environmental change. Central to improving our
understanding of these topics is the ability to observe and sample the marine
boundary layer. In this regard, oceanic island observatories have played a
crucial role. By virtue of its location in the western North Atlantic Ocean,
Bermuda has been a key location for numerous field studies of the marine
troposphere and is well equipped for such research, with the 23-m high
atmospheric sampling tower and site laboratories at Tudor Hill. Routine facility
operations include the collection of continuous meteorological data and weekly
bulk aerosol and rainwater samples, which are archived at the Bermuda Institute
of Ocean Sciences and made freely available to the scientific community.
Additionally, samples and data are collected for a variety of external research
programs funded by NSF, NOAA, NASA and other agencies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific objectives of the project are to: 1) Operate and maintain the
atmospheric sampling facility at Tudor Hill, Bermuda; 2) Continue collection of
continuous meteorological data and weekly bulk-aerosol and rain samples, which
will be archived at BIOS and made freely available to other researchers; and 3)
Collect additional atmospheric samples and data for external investigators, and
provide for the use of the facility by external investigators. The continued
operation and maintenance of the Tudor Hill site facilitates research concerning
the chemistry and physics of the marine troposphere and ocean-atmosphere
exchange processes. In a regional context, the Tudor Hill facility will
complement ongoing time-series research in the Sargasso Sea, including
Hydrostation S and BATS. This project is expected to make significant
educational contributions at a number of levels, including undergraduate
education opportunities through the NSF-funded Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) program, and through other courses taught at BIOS.