* 1736030
* RII Track-2 FEC: G2P in VOM: An Experimental and Analytical Framework for Genome to Phenome Connections in Viruses of Microbes
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2024
* James Van Etten, University of Delaware
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jeanne Small
* 07/31/2024
* USD 6,599,122.00

Non-technical description&lt;br/&gt;The viruses in soils, sediments, and water
environments infect microbes and impact the ecosystems. While there is a high-
level understanding of viral impacts on ecosystems, the details of the viral-
microbe interactions are largely unknown. The ability to predict the biological
and ecological features, or phenome, of any particular virus-microbe system
based on DNA sequence alone is highly limited. This Research Infrastructure
Improvement Track-2 Focused EPSCoR Collaborations (RII Track-2 FEC) award seeks
to advance the ability to predict the phenomic features of the viruses of
microbes (VoMs) from genomic data. A collaborative team of researchers from
Delaware, Rhode Island, Nebraska, and Hawaii will study viruses that infect
marine and freshwater phytoplankton, and viruses that infect a bacterial group
that forms a symbiosis with important legume crops, most notably, soybean.
Collectively, global phytoplankton populations are responsible for creating vast
stores of biomass that support the nutritional needs of larger aquatic
organisms. In this process phytoplankton sustain half of the oxygen within the
atmosphere. Enhanced understanding of genome to phenome links within
phytoplankton viruses will aid in improving models that predict the impacts of
excess carbon and nutrients on ecosystems. Within the food supply chain,
legumes, soybeans in particular, are an extraordinarily important source of
plant protein supporting the nutritional needs of billions of people. Better
understanding of genome to phenome connections for viruses infecting bacterial
symbionts of legumes could eventually lead to new technologies for improving the
productivity of critical agronomic crops such as soybean. The project team
includes faculty, postdocs and students who will engage in collaborative
research and share methodologies, best practices, and results through workshops
and meetings. Four early career faculty will be mentored by six other well-
established faculty investigators. The entire project team will prepare
educational materials and provide summer camp opportunities for middle and
elementary schools students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;This RII Track-2 FEC award is for a collaborative effort
among University of Delaware, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, University of
Hawaii, and Roger Williams University. The planned research seeks to connect
genomic features of viruses of microbes (VoMs) with phenotypic life-history
traits and use these connections to advance scientific understanding of the role
of VoMs in ecosystems. The project team will test several genome to phoneme
hypotheses in VoMs, focusing on phenomic features such as host range, burst
size, latent period and infectivity. An integrated high-throughput approach
including emulsion-droplet microfluidic technologies, next generation
sequencing, and bioinformatics, will be used to study viral-host systems
representative of picophytoplankton, eukaryotic phytoplankton, and diazotrophic
bacteria. The project team will collect samples across environmental gradients
from soybean fields, tropical oceans, and lakes, hypothesized to select for
different VoM phenomic traits. The researchers will build a new bioinformatics
analysis tool known as the Viral Informatics Rulebook for Genome Organization ?
VIRGO and incorporated it into an existing community resource for bioinformatic
annotation of viral metagenomes known as the Viral Informatics Resource fOr
Metagenome Exploration (VIROME). Four early-career faculty members engaged in
this project will be mentored by successful mid and later career faculty. The
team will work together in training postdocs, graduate students and
undergraduate students as well as in communicating the importance of
environmental virology to diverse audiences including K-12 students and the
general public.