* 1736547
* Along-Axis Continuity of Oceanic Detachment Faults
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Ross Parnell-Turner, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2018
* USD 95,378.00

New seafloor is continuously formed at the center of Earth?s deep oceans, where
the tectonic plates spread apart and cause hot magma to rise to the surface.
Where the plates move apart more slowly, as happens over vast tracts of the
Atlantic, Indian and Arctic oceans, deep-seated rocks from Earth?s mantle are
exhumed, dragged up by slip on enormous, long-lived, faults called detachments
and without significant eruption of lava. Creation of new oceanic seafloor by
slip on these recently discovered faults is poorly understood, yet may play a
fundamental role in paving a large part of our planet?s surface. One of the best
ways to understand the behavior of these faults is to study the seismic waves
caused by the small earthquakes that are triggered as the faults slip. This
project examines earthquake data from a segment of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge near
13째N, where detachment faults are prevalent. The data were recorded by
instruments placed on the seabed in 2016 by scientists from the UK, as part of a
wider coordinated international effort to understand oceanic detachment
faulting. This project fosters international collaboration between the USA, UK
and France, and supports an early-career
researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observations of oceanic detachment faulting to
date have mostly been limited to seabed sampling and mapping, leaving many
questions about the structure and processes taking place beneath the seafloor
unanswered. One of the most critical outstanding questions today is whether or
not along-axis adjacent oceanic detachments are connected by a continuous fault
in the sub-surface. An effective way to tackle this question is by studying
naturally occurring seismicity generated as deformation takes place in the
detachment fault system, which allows for direct imaging of fault structures and
surfaces. While several local seismicity surveys have now been conducted at
oceanic detachments, none of them has deployed a seismic network with sufficient
aperture to constrain the along-axis extent of individual detachments. This
project uses data from a 58 ocean bottom seismometer (OBS) deployment on the
Mid-Atlantic Ridge at 13째N that extends ~30 km along the ridge axis and provides
dense spatial coverage over two active detachment faults and the intervening
ridge axis. This network, deployed by UK scientists to record airgun shots from
an active-source seismic experiment, contains tens of thousands of local
microearthquakes that will help determine whether or not the two core complexes
at 13째20'N and 13째30'N are connected by a single fault surface.