* 1736019
* Puerto Rico Center for Environmental Neuroscience (Cycle II)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Mark Miller, University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 08/31/2024
* USD 5,100,000.00

The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST) program
supports the enhancement of research capabilities of minority-serving
institutions through the establishment of centers that effectively integrate
education and research. CREST promotes the development of new knowledge,
enhancements of the research productivity of individual faculty, and an expanded
presence of students historically underrepresented in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National
Science Foundation support, the University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences
Campus will continue development of its Phase II Center for Environmental
Neuroscience. The Phase I Center for Environmental Neuroscience was established
to bring together scientists from the traditionally separate fields of
neuroscience and environmental science, recognizing the fact that the nervous
system serves as the interface between an organism and its environment. Phase II
Center investigators and students will explore the impact of anthropogenic
environmental degradation on nervous systems at the structural, physiological
and behavioral levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Responses of nervous systems to
environmental degradation will be examined in three subprojects partitioned
according to tropical habitats: 1) Marine and Estuaries, 2)Rivers and
Freshwater, and 3) Terrestrial. Three objectives that encompass the subprojects
will identify nervous system responses that will improve risk prediction or
development of resilience strategies to diverse environmental stressors. These
specific aims will 1) assess effects of environmental contaminants on nervous
system structure and function, 2) determine impacts of climatic variation
(acidification, temperature changes) on the molecular and cell biology of
neurons, and 3) investigate the impact of anthropogenic stimuli (light, sound)
on sensory systems and behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Center educational and
career development activities include a newly created course in Environmental
Neuroscience, a Seminar Series, a Responsible Conduct in Research module, and
the Yale Ciencia Academy for Career Development, a year-long on-line program
that provides graduate students underrepresented in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics disciplines with opportunities for mentoring, peer
support and networking. Institutional partnerships will also provide Center
students and faculty with access to training and research programs at
institutions of cutting-edge investigation in neurobiology and environmental
science.