* 1736955
* I-Corps: Fast Deployment Service for Automated Business-to-Client Interactive Messaging
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2017,11/30/2018
* David Akopian, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 11/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to develop a
platform for facilitated deployment of interactive automated messaging services
called chatbots, that can be configured by non-technical personnel. There is a
broad community consensus that the chatbots have become one of the recent major
mobile application trends. Chatbots are computer programs designed to simulate
conversations with human users, especially over various messaging channels
including plain texting and instant messaging over the Internet. There exists a
need in developing platforms to facilitate chatbots deployments for broader use.
The innovation can be useful to any business which has many customers and can
save communication resources by delegating routine conversations to an automated
interactive messaging system. The potential commercial impact of this tool will
be significant for both saving time and money by reducing administrative
burdens.

This I-Corps project will explore commercial feasibility of a flexible generic
chatbot service which can be programmed, operated and managed by non-technical
personnel for fast and inexpensive deployments. By using dedicated menus, the
system operators will program their protocols by adding user-specific variables,
uploading messages and their triggering/scheduling conditions, setting messaging
channels, linking to external data sources and destinations. The proposed system
will automatically integrate all the messages and their triggering conditions in
a conflict-free protocol flow on the background and will allow the operator to
check and observe the protocol execution flow in time by simulation. The proof-
of-concept prototype is already used in two health-promotion projects and the
team members gain valuable experience. This approach provides more flexibility
and conditioned cycling options than existing solutions.