* 1736406
* Modeling Developmental Change: Practical Integration of Advanced Neuroimaging and Statistical Methods
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Michelle Byrne, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Uri Hasson
* 05/31/2018
* USD 19,900.00

Neuroimaging techniques, including structural and functional magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), have allowed researchers to investigate the neural bases of
developmental changes in cognition. In recent years, it has become more common
for researchers to obtain multiple measures of the same individual across
development. These longitudinal MRI datasets require special consideration for
processing and analysis, yet the field as a whole has not standardized best
practices for these datasets, which could be one reason why it is difficult to
replicate results across laboratories and research studies. A two-day workshop
will be open to 60 developmental neuroimaging researchers and will teach best
practices for processing, analyzing, modeling, and interpreting longitudinal
neuroimaging data. This will help researchers conduct robust and consistent
research on how the brain and cognition change across development. Importantly,
this workshop will fund at least nine students or trainees who are planning to,
or are directly working with, longitudinal neuroimaging data, providing strong
practical skills for emerging research scientists in the field of developmental
cognitive neuroscience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is both timely and vital to
hold a workshop for researchers in the field of developmental cognitive
neuroscience to examine differences in longitudinal modeling, statistical
processing and analysis, and interpretation. Recent work has uncovered how
methodological differences may be adversely affecting replicability in the field
of neuroimaging, and there is an increasing drive to validate the processing and
statistical techniques that are employed in neuroimaging research. There has
also been increasing support for standardization of techniques and reporting
criteria, such as the recent Brain Imaging Data Structure (BIDS) protocol for
organizing and describing MRI datasets. The overarching aim of this workshop is
to teach best practice guidelines for processing, analyzing, modeling, and
interpreting longitudinal structural and functional neuroimaging data, which
will inform our knowledge of how the brain and cognition change across
development. It will address additional statistical concerns specific to
longitudinal neuroimaging that also need validation, and consider
standardization of techniques and reporting criteria that will improve the
comparability of findings. The main outcome of this workshop will be that
researchers leave with answers to questions about processing longitudinal
functional and structural MRI data and the correct tools to move forward with
research in developmental cognitive neuroscience. This type of work has the
potential to answer fundamental questions about neural plasticity and sensitive
periods of cognitive development through observing neural changes during
learning. It is also inherently related to the fields of developmental
affective, social, and clinical neuroscience, and therefore has the potential to
translate directly to the prevention and treatment of emerging psychopathology.
This workshop will push the field of developmental cognitive neuroscience
forward to develop robust and precise models that have strong translational
applications for public policy.