* 1736772
* A mechanistic microbial underpinning for the size-reactivity continuum of dissolved organic carbon degradation
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Carol Arnosti, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2022
* USD 660,522.00

Marine dissolved organic matter (DOM) is one of the largest actively-cycling
reservoirs of organic carbon on the planet, and thus a major component of the
global carbon cycle. The high molecular weight (HMW) fraction of DOM is younger
in age and more readily consumed by microbes than lower molecular weight (LMW)
fractions of DOM, but the reasons for this difference in reactivity between HMW
DOM and LMW DOM are unknown. Two factors may account for the greater reactivity
of HMW DOM: (i) targeted uptake of HMW DOM by specific bacteria, a process the
PI and her collaborators at the Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology
(MPI) recently identified in surface ocean waters; and (ii) a greater tendency
of HMW DOM to aggregate and form gels and particles, which can be colonized by
bacteria that are well-equipped to breakdown organic matter. Scientists and
students from the University of North Carolina (UNC) - Chapel Hill will
collaborate with researchers at the MPI for Marine Microbiology (Bremen,
Germany) to investigate this breakdown of HMW DOM by marine microbial
communities. These investigations will include a field expedition in the North
Atlantic, during which HMW DOM degradation rates and patterns will be compared
in different water masses and under differing conditions of organic matter
availability. DOM aggregation potential, and degradation rates of these
aggregates, will also be assessed. Specialized microscopy will be used in order
to pinpoint HMW DOM uptake mechanisms and rates. The work will be complemented
by ongoing studies of specific bacteria that breakdown HMW DOM, their genes, and
their proteins. Graduate as well as undergraduate students will participate as
integral members of the research team in all aspects of the laboratory and field
work; aspects of the project will also be integrated into classes the scientist
teaches at UNC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The existence of a size-reactivity
continuum of DOM - observations and measurements showing that HMW DOM tends to
be younger and more reactive than lower MW DOM ? has been demonstrated in
laboratory and field investigations in different parts of the ocean. A
mechanistic explanation for the greater reactivity of HMW DOM has been lacking,
however. This project will investigate the mechanisms and measure rates of HMW
DOM degradation, focusing on identifying the actors and determining the factors
that contribute to rapid cycling of HMW DOM. Collaborative work at UNC and MPI-
Bremen recently identified a new mechanism of HMW substrate uptake common among
pelagic marine bacteria: these bacteria rapidly bind, partially hydrolyze, and
transport directly across the outer membrane large fragments of HMW substrates
that can then be degraded within the periplasmic space, avoiding production of
LMW DOM in the external environment. This mode of substrate processing has been
termed selfish, since targeted HMW substrate uptake sequesters resources away
from other members of microbial communities. Measurements and models thus must
account for three modes of substrate utilization in the ocean: selfish, sharing
(external hydrolysis, leading to low molecular weight products), and scavenging
(uptake of low molecular weight hydrolysis products without production of
extracellular enzymes). Using field studies as well as mesocosm experiments, the
research team will investigate the circumstances and locations at which
different modes of substrate uptake predominate. A second focal point of the
project is to determine the aggregation potential and microbial degradation of
aggregated HMW DOM. Preliminary studies have demonstrated that particle-
associated microbial communities utilize a broader range of enzymatic
capabilities than their free-living counterparts. These capabilities equip
particle-associated communities to effectively target a broad range of complex
substrates. The project will thus focus on two key aspects of HMW DOM - the
abilities of specialized bacteria to selectively sequester HMW substrates, as
well as the greater potential of HMW substrates to aggregate ? and will quantify
these factors at different locations and depths in the ocean. The project will
thereby provide a mechanistic underpinning for observations of the DOC size-
reactivity continuum, an essential part of developing an overall mechanistic
understanding of organic matter degradation in the ocean.