* 1736738
* Collaborative Research:   The Influence of Arctic - Lower-Latitude Interactions on Weather and Climate Variability: Mechanisms, Predictability, and Prediction
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Young-Oh Kwon, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 08/31/2021
* USD 540,000.00

With the rapidly melting sea-ice, the Arctic is becoming increasingly important
not only scientifically but also socioeconomically and geopolitically. Early
efforts indicate that there is potential to predict Arctic variability on
timescales ranging from subseasonal to decadal. However, skillful operational
predictions of the Arctic weather and climate require major advances in our
understanding of linkages in climate and weather extremes between the Arctic and
lower-latitudes, and subsequently, how best to represent relevant mechanisms in
prediction systems. While the changes in the lower-latitude ocean and atmosphere
inevitably influence the Arctic, the interaction is truly two-way, in that
changes in the Arctic also impact the lower-latitude climate and weather, in
particular midlatitude extreme weather events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To improve
our fundamental dynamical understanding, modeling capabilities, and prediction
skill, using a combination of available observations and state-of-the-art
climate models, the team proposes to investigate tropical and mid-latitude
oceanic and atmospheric drivers of regional Arctic changes. They will also
investigate the role of the Arctic on the Northern Hemisphere climate
variability and weather extremes. The team will participate in the European
Union (EU)-led international multi-model inter-comparison study, the Blue-Action
Project under the EU Horizon 2020 Programme. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A deeper
understanding of Arctic-lower-latitude linkages, and our capacity for predicting
Arctic and Northern Hemisphere variability is relevant to a wide variety of end-
user applications, such as weather forecasting, fisheries management, commercial
shipping, commercial insurance, and naval operations. Thus, this project has
substantial broader impacts. The project team will also actively perform
outreach activities to disseminate findings and to educate public through
webpages, public lectures, K-12 school visits, teacher trainings, and Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) programs. A postdoctoral scientist will also
be trained under this project.