* 1736103
* EXP: Improving Student Help-Giving with Ubiquitous Collaboration Support Technology
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Erin Walker, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 03/31/2019
* USD 575,223.00

Students benefit from helping their peers: Help-givers improve their knowledge
of the domain as a result of trying to explain it to others, and they become
more confident in their abilities to solve problems. However, students need
guidance to be successful at giving help. This research explores how students
give help to their peers as they move between learning activities. It also
explores the development of personalized learning technologies to provide
students with individualized support that improves their help-giving skills
across activities. Traditional personalized learning technologies have been
"single-serving," in that they are built for a particular activity and do not
leverage a student's other experiences with the domain. This single-serving
approach misses the opportunity to gain a holistic perspective of a student's
ability and adaptively track a student's growth in learning. This project will
develop a new technology, called Ubiquitous Collaboration Support (UbiCoS), that
can adaptively support the same student in giving help across different learning
tools. UbiCoS is applied to peer help across three 8th grade mathematics
activities. The first is a discussion forum integrated with a digital textbook
where students answer questions posed by their classmates. The second is an
online Q&amp;A forum where students go to answer questions posted by other
students around the world. The third is a teachable agent system where students
explain mathematics concepts to a virtual agent. Enhanced understanding of how
technology can facilitate help-giving interactions could improve how peer help
activities are designed and supported in middle school mathematics classrooms,
which would directly impact domain learning, help-giving skills, and motivation.
This project explores ways to broaden interest in STEM by fostering help-giving
discourse in middle school experiences. The proposal has the potential to
directly impact over 300 students engaged in the evaluation and iterative
development of UbiCoS and create digital tools that engage learners that are
traditionally underrepresented in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
designs and incorporates knowledge about the individual student's pattern of
help-giving actions across activities into standard components of personalized
collaboration support including automatic interpretation of student interaction,
expert and student models, and a support module. UbiCoS will be iteratively
developed and evaluated in three phases. The first engages students in workshops
to aid in the design of the help-giving support. The second phase conducts
design studies to improve understanding of the relationship between the timing
and content of adaptive support, student help-giving behaviors, and cognitive
and motivational processes. Finally, the third phase consists of a controlled
study to evaluate the impact of the support on student outcomes. The results of
these user studies will advance understanding of an instructional framework
describing the ways adaptive help-giving support should account for cognitive,
motivational, and classroom factors as they relate to a student's prior
experiences. This research establishes UbiCoS as a new genre of educational
technology that can support collaboration in a holistic manner, across different
learning activities.