* 1736984
* Origin of highly heterogeneous Strontium Isotopic Ratio in melt inclusions from oceanic hotspot lavas
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2017,09/30/2021
* Matthew Jackson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 09/30/2021
* USD 334,130.00

Understanding volcanic processes associated with plumes of mantle material,
called hotspots, like those that form the Hawaiian and Samoan Islands or
Iceland, is critical for understanding both how the Earth works and how we can
best manage resources and hazards on these islands. Hotspot-derived island
chains are generated by buoyant plumes of hot rock that rise from the lower
mantle and partially melt in the upper mantle. A portion of this melt is erupted
as lava on Earth's surface. Because these hotspot-derived lavas are melts of
plume material, ultimately derived from the deepest portion of the mantle, their
isotopic compositions provide critical information about the compositional
makeup of the deep Earth, which is otherwise inaccessible. Studies examining the
composition of oceanic lavas have traditionally focused on analyses of entire
rocks, for which several kilograms have to be powdered and homogenized before
any analyses can be done. The powder is then analyzed for its isotopic
composition. Another way to get this information is to use tiny blebs of melt,
called melt inclusions, that are trapped in the lavas. These inclusions,
however, have been found to exhibit highly heterogeneous isotopic compositions
that are significantly different from the bulk lava. The origin of this extreme
variability in melt inclusions is not well understood. This research targets
individual olivine-hosed melt inclusions from Samoan lavas. These inclusions
will be comprehensively analyzed using novel, state-of-the-art isotopic and
geochemical analytical techniques and will also be analyzed for strontium and
neodymium isotopes. This geochemical information, all collected on the same
inclusion, will shed light on both the origin of Samoan lavas as well as help to
unravel the complex geochemical signature carried by melt inclusions, thus,
enabling better interpretation of the message they carry. Broader impacts of the
work include international collaboration with Dutch scientists at the Virje
University-Amsterdam, training and mentoring of undergraduates from groups and
minorities underrepresented in the sciences, graduate student support and
training, and the transfer of new technology and geochemical methodology to a
newly established geochemical facility in the USA at the University of
California, Santa Barbara.

Whole rock geochemical analyses of ocean island basalts have long been
considered windows into the chemical composition of the mantle. However, blebs
of trapped melt in magmatic phenocrysts, called melt inclusions, complicate this
picture because melt inclusions from a single lava can exhibit highly
heterogeneous 87Sr/86Sr ratios that span much of the variability observed in
oceanic lavas globally. Previous work identified extreme 87Sr/86Sr variability
in olivine-hosted melt inclusions from lavas collected at the Samoan, Hawaiian,
and Icelandic hotspots. However, the origin of this variability remains a source
of debate. Hypotheses range from it being the result of mixing pristine magmas
from isotopically diverse mantle sources to the result of crustal assimilation.
This research takes melt inclusions from the Island of Samoa and geochemically
analyzes their major, trace element, and volatile (S, Cl and F) concentrations.
The isotopes of strontium and neodymium of individual melt inclusions will also
be analyzed to provide insight into the origin of the melts and their meaning.
The new data examines three hypotheses for the origin of 87Sr/86Sr variability
in olivine-hosted melt inclusions: variability is the result of (1) the mixing
of pristine mantle-derived melts, (2) the assimilation of shallow altered
oceanic crust, and (3) the assimilation of deep gabbroic oceanic crust.
Implications of the work have significant value to interpretation of melt
inclusions and what they can and cannot tell us about their source, magmatic
processes, and the mantle.