* 1736389
* Impact of breaker type on wave dissipation on a natural beach
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Andrew Jessup, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 293,734.00

Wave forcing is the largest energy flux into the surf zone, the shallow
nearshore region where surface gravity waves are influenced by the presence of
the seafloor, become unstable, and break. The dissipation of wave energy here
results in important nearshore processes, including circulation, mixing,
sediment transport, and storm surge. An important goal of the nearshore science
community is to understand and predict the time and space variability of wave
breaking in the surf zone with the aim of deriving and modeling wave forcing
over broad areas and with adequate resolution to represent the time and space
scales that occur. However, wave breaking is a nonlinear, episodic event that is
difficult to capture in a bulk model. The action and forces resulting from wave
breaking cause and influence a broad range of processes at the ocean margin
including erosion at the shoreline, strong and often dangerous currents, storm
surge and coastal flooding, damage to coastal structures, and maritime
navigation. Details of wave breaking are still poorly understood although they
are parameterized broadly in modeling. Thus, this work will advance
understanding of the details of breaking, and results and data from this effort
will be used for direct model improvement and testing. This project will fund a
graduate student whose dissertation will be focused on analysis and publication
of the wave breaking data and it will develop presentations and activities
showcasing wave research to the public during the annual outreach activities
organized by the University of Washington and the Pacific Science Center.

The project will analyze existing remote sensing data collected in the surf
zone at the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) Field Research Facility (FRF)
at Duck, NC. Observations included thermal (infrared, IR), visual, and lidar
remote sensing of the ocean waves propagating toward the shore. These data
captured information covering a wide range of wave conditions. The aim of the
data analysis is to analyze infrared imagery and lidar profiles of the waves to
characterize their motion, the way waves break, and parameterize wave energy
loss during the breaking process (wave dissipation). The identified need for
improving nearshore models is to account for dissipation due to variable wave
breaking type in the surf zone (i.e. spilling versus plunging breakers), how
wave geometry and parameterizations of the wave physics compare with
observations, and how those differences affect our ability to use remote sensing
to estimate wave forcing remotely. Existing wave roller and bore-type models
commonly used to estimate wave breaking dissipation assume steady state
conditions that are violated at the break point where breaking waves form and
plunging waves can occur. The inability of these parameterizations to account
for the extra dissipation by plunging waves will bias modeling and efforts to
remotely measure wave dissipation and wave forcing. Here, a new infrared-based
remote sensing technique will be utilized, that has shown skill to remotely
characterize individual breaking waves within the surf zone, but has not been
tested near the breakpoint. Extension and modification of the method to account
for breaking wave type will provide definitive insight into wave breaking, and
provide a transformative observational tool that could be used observe breaking
waves remotely.