* 1736718
* SCC-Planning: A Data-Driven Framework for Smart Decision-Making in Small and Shrinking Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Eric Rozier, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

Many American small towns and rural communities have been in decline since the
1980s. In the Midwest, most communities have experienced this through shrinking
populations, an exodus of younger people, job losses, and aging infrastructure.
Evidence shows that these trends have continued over several decades and are
unlikely to be reversed. Yet the research on small and rural communities has
focused primarily on documenting and observing aspects of decline or promoting
uncertain growth strategies, rather than understanding how communities can
protect quality of life and community infrastructure while they shrink. This
project aims to fill this gap by developing a new shrink-smart concept for small
communities that utilizes data-driven tools to assist them in actively planning
for shrinkage. The objective of the planning phase is a pilot study to test the
feasibility and reliability of such tools in Iowa. The pilot study will use data
from broadly available sources, such as social media, census, state, and
municipal databases, for comparison with traditional metrics including unique
baseline data from longitudinal polling in Iowa. This pilot study has three
goals: 1) to demonstrate the feasibility of applying the shrink-smart concept to
rural communities, 2) to assess the feasibility of measuring smart shrinkage
through data-driven analysis, and 3) to test visualization methods for data
analysis and communication to stakeholders.

The project's central hypothesis is that data-driven techniques will identify
proxy metrics for indicators of smart shrinkage by using broadly available data
sources to estimate the results of qualitative measures such as longitudinal
polling. These proxies will replace traditional methods of collecting quality-
of-life data, which are time-consuming, expensive and incomplete over large
geographic areas. In the planning phase, we will establish criteria for types of
smart shrinkage and select six-eight representative communities in Iowa for in-
depth analysis. The research will be transformative for the study of small and
shrinking communities because of its powerful integrated methodology that
combines quantitative data-driven analysis with qualitative understanding of
smart shrinkage that is verified through community engagement, spatial analysis,
and on-the-ground data collection. This integrated methodology creates a new
framework to help community stakeholders understand how and why some small and
rural communities are able to protect their quality of life even as they lose
population. This approach will also provide new opportunities for communities
across the United States to make smart decisions that are likely to mitigate the
negative effects of shrinkage before signs of decline appear. In addressing
small and rural communities, this project brings attention to underrepresented
cases in the research literature. This knowledge will be disseminated to
stakeholders and the public through multiple venues in Iowa and beyond,
including through Iowa State University Extension and Outreach. All of the
extensible data pipelines and visualization techniques will be licensed through
open source protocols.