* 1736493
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Impact of the emerging engineering education research and innovation community
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Nadia Kellam, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 08/31/2019
* USD 75,000.00

There is currently little understanding of how to assess and document the impact
of discipline-based research on education practice. The goal of this project is
to establish such a process and begin to document the impact of the engineering
education research and innovation (EER&amp;I) community. It specifically
addresses two questions: 1) What is the local and broad impact of selected
EER&amp;I programs? 2) What are the best ways to characterize and document the
impact of these EER&amp;I programs? Over the last 20 years significant progress
has been made in better understanding how to improve engineering education, much
of which has been funded by NSF. However, incorporation of research results into
practice has not kept pace with the research enterprise, largely because there
is little understanding of how to measure that impact. This proposal aims to
address this gap; doing so would lead to significant change in the practice of
engineering education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of this project
is to develop and test a process for documenting the impact of engineering
education research. This process will be framed around the business canvas model
from the NSF I-Corps L program. The work will proceed through three primary
activities: document the emerging network of EER&amp;I faculty and identify
examples of impact; conduct a summit for EER&amp;I leaders and change experts to
develop a process for documenting impact; and pilot the process at the three
collaborating institutions. The process will then be tested at additional
institutions, including those that do not have engineering education research
activities. The results of the project will be summarized in a report and
presented at the ASEE Annual Conference. By developing a process for documenting
and assessing impact, research results can be more effectively transferred into
practices to improve the professional formation of engineers.