* 1736189
* EXP: Collaborative Research: Smart Spaces for Making: Networked Physical Tools to Support Process Documentation and Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Marti Louw, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2022
* USD 464,678.00

This exploratory learning research and design project will study how to use
emerging technologies to help document practices in maker-based learning
experiences. Despite its established potential for consolidating learning and
sense-making, project documentation is often overlooked, not prioritized or seen
as burdensome and therefore not integrated into the learning experiences. The
project team seeks to understand and address with practice partners the barriers
to documentation by systematically exploring how to physically embed and
incorporate smart tools and documentation practices into learning environments,
specifically creative hands-on learning spaces, like makerspaces. The goal is to
understand how to scaffold learners to become more aware, reflective and
attentive to their progress towards learning outcomes by embedding supportive
tools physically in space as the actions unfold. Making and maker-based learning
experiences offer tremendous opportunities to more fully engage diverse learners
in STEM education and build a workforce prepared for innovation. Documentation
of these learning experiences, both as an authentic practice that professionals
engage in as well as an assessment practice for instruction, is often not
supported. The project will create open source documentation for solutions and
develop supporting case studies, web resources and guides to facilitate easy
uptake and adoption of promising approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
will make significant research contributions in three ways: (1) develop and
iteratively test a suite of embedded "smart" tools designed to scaffold, manage
and trace process documentation practices; (2) study the integration of these
tools in formal and informal activities and programs settings and characterize
their influence on instruction and the assessment of learning outcomes; (3)
establish a set of rubrics based on learner data streams to aid instruction and
mark learner progress. Improving documentation practices and the assessment of
learning outcomes will advance making as a core STEM educational activity.
Through a better understanding of why and how to place networked documentation
tools sensitive to space, time and context cues, the threshold for enactment and
scaffolded usage can be lowered in a broader range of settings. Ultimately, this
exploratory project will not only develop an integrated set of situated
documentation tools, but also help us develop hypotheses for how documentation
as a mediating process productively supports learning.