* 1736864
* Collaborative Research: Self-Calibrating pH Sensors for Autonomous Collection of Climate Quality Data
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Yuichiro Takeshita, Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2022
* USD 107,817.00

Autonomous pH sensors are becoming increasingly common in Ocean Acidification
and Carbon Cycle studies. However, the value of experimental results and
conclusions from these studies hinges directly on the reliability of pH data
collected. Drawing on terminology from the field of meteorology, marine chemists
and biologists categorize pH measurement accuracy as "Weather Quality" or
"Climate Quality," corresponding to a level of roughly 0.02 or 0.003 pH units,
respectively. While necessary in order to detect climate scale changes in pH,
achievement of "Climate Quality" pH data from sensors remains elusive. The
researchers propose to develop a robust, low maintenance, user friendly system
that will allow climate quality data to be routinely collected from pH sensors
on research vessels and oceanographic moorings. In essence, this project
involves developing an automated self-calibrating pH sensor package that can be
deployed by researchers that may not hold the expertise to achieve a climate
quality dataset. Field tests will generate data in support of ongoing research
programs involving shipboard underway measurements (e.g. CalCOFI) as well as
autonomous in situ measurements at coastal sites including a local lagoon (Agua
Hedionda, Carlsbad, CA) and a remote coral reef (Palmyra Atoll). The addition of
climate quality pH data in these studies will broaden our understanding of long-
term climate scale effects on, for example, oyster shellfisheries and coral
reefs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on previous efforts to outline Best Practices
and Quality Control protocols for in situ pH sensor data, a central theme has
emerged: independent validation of autonomous pH sensor measurements is required
in order to generate climate quality datasets. Historically, this has been
accomplished through painstaking work involving repeat bottle samples in the
field. Sustaining a bottle sampling program is expensive and beyond the
capabilities of many research labs that wish to measure high-frequency pH in the
field. Even the most thorough field programs haven't managed to fully eliminate
spatiotemporal mismatch between sensor and bottle samples, leading to
significant uncertainty in the calibration of the sensor. Directly addressing
this challenge, the objective of this work is to improve the quality of future
Durafet pH sensor datasets via a built-in self-calibration function.
Specifically, the project will integrate on-board, standardized Tris buffers in
artificial seawater for periodic validation of pH sensor performance. As a
natural result, addition of this capability will improve data quality and
substantially reduce the efforts required by operators during a field
deployment, as they will no longer be required to collect and analyze bottle
samples for pH validation. Similar protocols have been successfully adapted for
climate quality pCO2 measurement.