* 1736196
* HBCU-RISE: Bridging Quantitative Science with Biological Research: Jumpstarting Computational Systems Biology Research at PVAMU
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Lijun Qian, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Sonal Dekhane
* 02/28/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Research Infrastructure for
Science and Engineering (HBCU-RISE) activity within the Centers of Research
Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST) program supports the development of
research capabilities at HBCUs that offer doctoral degrees in science and
engineering disciplines. HBCU-RISE projects have a direct connection to the
long-term plans of the host department(s) and the institutional mission, and
plans for expanding institutional research capacity as well as increasing the
production of doctoral students in science and engineering. With support from
the National Science Foundation, Prairie View A&amp;M University (PVAMU) aims to
provide innovative solutions to more effective and efficient drug development by
bridging quantitative research with biomedical science. The project aims to 1)
jumpstart computational biology research to stimulate students' interest and
enhance the PhD program in Electrical Engineering, 2) improve student enrollment
and retention, and 3) attract more minority students to pursue graduate study,
especially doctoral degrees. This project is aligned with the mission of the
institution and the goals of the Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE)
Department. The proposed activities will support the ECE department in building
a strong research program in computational biology, thus achieving the goals of
enhancing the PhD program in the ECE department and broadening participation in
computational biology at PVAMU. The proposed project will greatly improve
African American involvement in cutting edge research that is extremely valuable
to the nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to study and
analyze the dynamic evolution of drug/cell interactions using biomedical big
data, including both public domain data and dynamic time series data from
systematic drug perturbations experiments. Innovative image processing, machine
learning, dynamic modeling and control techniques are proposed to help
understand the genetic regulation of cancer cells and the mechanism of action of
molecularly targeted agents on gene regulation. Specifically, combining the
information from robust image feature extraction using advanced image processing
techniques (Thrust 1) with candidate drug targets and the identification of drug
treatments identified using a novel network-based computational tool, Evaluation
of Differential DependencY (EDDY; Thrust 2). Dynamic modeling and analysis of
drug response in critical biological pathways will be carried out in Thrust 3.
Equipped with the knowledge extracted from biomedical big data obtained in
Thrust 2 and a predictive preclinical model that reveal how biological
regulatory networks react when perturbed from time series data in Thrust 3,
novel therapeutic interventions will be designed in Thrust 4 using advanced
control theory. Findings from this study will provide innovative solutions to
more effective and efficient drug development by bridging quantitative research
with biomedical science. This project will be conducted in collaboration with
the TEES-AgriLife Center for Bioinformatics and Genomics Systems Engineering
(CBGSE) at Texas A&amp;M University and the Translational Genomic Research
Institute (TGen). The knowledge gained from this project will be disseminated
broadly to a community of scientists and engineers.