* 1736557
* Groundwater sources of "new" N for benthic microalgal production in the South Atlantic Bight
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2022
* James Pinckney, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 993,190.00

Continental shelves are highly productive, with both ecological and economic
importance. Benthic microalgae (BMA) are key primary producers in these
location. As much as 6x the water column biomass of primary producers is
compressed into a layer only a few mm thick on the sediment surface. The
source(s) of fixed nitrogen (N) supporting such highly concentrated BMA biomass
is currently unknown. Recent studies of sub-seafloor groundwater flow at the
University of South Carolina have demonstrated that upwelling saline groundwater
likely supplies high concentrations of nutrients in the ridge-swale habitats in
the South Atlantic Bight (SAB). The investigators suggest that groundwater input
of fixed N into surficial sediments is the primary source of N supporting BMA
biomass and production in the mid-shelf region of the SAB. The purpose of this
project is to determine the primary source of fixed N supporting BMA biomass in
the surface sediments of the shallow shelf waters (&lt;30 m), using the SAB as a
field area. A secondary objective is to apply novel and innovative methods to
directly quantify groundwater inputs of N into surficial sediments. Research
results will fully document the spatio-temporal distributions of BMA and
phytoplankton biomass and community structure in the mid-shelf region of the SAB
and relate the observed patterns to groundwater inputs of fixed N sources as
well as hydrographic and climatic conditions. This research will provide full
support and tuition for 2 graduate students, summer support for undergraduate
assistants, and involve upper level undergraduates as lab interns. The study
team will also work with the Baruch Institute and other partners to develop an
"Ocean Schoolyard" program to meet the needs of teachers, students, and
community audiences. The project will also provide partial support for Girls Go
for I.T., a coding summer camp designed to attract middle-school-aged girls to
careers in I.T. and STEM fields&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives of
the study are to (1) quantify spatial and temporal variations in N fluxes
associated with hydrodynamic exchange and upward groundwater flow (2) document
spatial and temporal variations in BMA biomass and (3) measure the delta15N of
fixed nitrogen sources (well water, porewater and water column ammonium and
nitrate; sediments), the BMA, and phytoplankton. The sampling area will be
restricted to the 10 - 30 m isobath region of the SAB off the coast of
Charleston, SC. Samples will be collected at both the existing groundwater well
field and other regions of the shelf. At each of the groundwater wells in the
well field, SCUBA divers will collect fluids from the wells to determine well
water inorganic nutrient concentrations (nitrate + nitrite, ammonium,
orthophosphate, silicon) and the delta 15N of well water ammonium and nitrate
(when present). In nearby sediments, samples will be collected for BMA biomass
and community composition, surface porewater inorganic nutrients (nitrate +
nitrite, ammonium, orthophosphate, silicon), C and N of sediments, sediment
grain size analysis, and delta 15N of BMA, ammonium, nitrate (when present), and
sediments. Line transects, consisting of 5 sampling locations along a 50 m
transect, will be conducted in each of the 4 depth strata. At 10 m intervals
along each transect, divers will collect samples the same as above for the well
field. Water column samples will be collected for HPLC measurements of
phytoplankton biomass and community composition, inorganic nutrient
concentrations (nitrate + nitrite, ammonium, orthophosphate, silicon), seston
CHN, delta 15N of phytoplankton, and the delta 15N of ammonium and nitrate. The
researchers will use heat as a tracer to map the depth of hydrodynamic exchange
and monitor the rate of vertical groundwater flow. Results from that analysis
will also allow them to then simulate transport of a conservative tracer that
can be compared to observed nutrient concentrations to BMA abundance and
community composition.