* 1736303
* The 2017 NIMBioS Undergraduate Research Conference at the Interface of Biology and Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Louis Gross, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 19,590.00

The National Institute for Mathematical and Biological Synthesis (NIMBioS) will
host its ninth annual Undergraduate Research Conference (URC) at the Interface
of Mathematics and Biology, Nov. 10-11, 2017, in Knoxville, Tennessee. Since
2009, the conference has showcased the wide array of undergraduate research in
mathematical biology, has provided students a chance to practice their
scientific presentation skills in front of a supportive audience of peers, and
has given students a venue to network with others having similar interests. In
addition, two invited lectures by inspiring leaders in research at the interface
of mathematics and biology will teach students about current research in this
area. About 100 participants will attend the conference, many from traditionally
under-represented groups in mathematics and biology. Since the conference
emphasizes networking and reaching as many students as possible, the conference
format allows the possibility of all student participants to have the valuable
experience of presenting their choice of a research talk or poster to peers. The
event strengthens exchanges between the mathematical sciences and life science
disciplines, as many of the projects are presented by student teams of math and
life science majors. It is not uncommon to hear from life science students
attending the conference that their eyes have been further opened to the
usefulness of mathematics for making exciting progress in biological questions,
and for mathematics students to be inspired by encountering new applications for
their mathematical tools of which they were previously
unaware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NIMBioS URC's primary objective is to provide
opportunities for undergraduates from across the country to share their research
at the interface of biology and mathematics to peers and faculty mentors.
Between 50 and 70 contributed student talks and posters will be featured.
Student abstracts will be gathered into a program book and published on the
NIMBioS conference website. Students present their own work that uses
mathematical, statistical and computational approaches to address challenging
questions in the life sciences in areas of molecular biology, biochemistry,
epidemiology, immunology, ecology, and more. Participants' work comes from
summer or academic year research experiences supported by agencies such as the
NSF, the National Institutes of Health, the National Security Administration or
through their home institutions, allowing for excellent cross-pollination of
ideas from different programs. These young researchers will receive helpful
feedback and have their eyes opened to the variety of applications for
mathematical tools in biology as well as the opportunities biological problems
provide for exciting advances in mathematics. Sharing information about recent
research and forming new connections may result in significant progress in
undergraduate mathematical biology research programs, enriching the research
programs of faculty mentors. The conference's secondary goals are to provide
students with career and graduate school information and opportunities to
network. Each conference hosts a panel discussion on career opportunities, a
graduate school showcase, and ample networking opportunities through shared
meals, frequent breaks, and an organized networking game. The conference
provides a valuable opportunity for students to develop their identities as
researchers, and the interest in this conference has continued as there are many
more qualified applicants applying for travel support each year than there are
funds available.