* 1736026
* RII Track-2 FEC: Genomic Logic Underlying Adaptive Morphological Divergence
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2024
* Michelle Borrero, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jeanne Small
* 07/31/2024
* USD 4,200,000.00

Non-technical description&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement
Track-2 Focused EPSCoR Collaboration (RII Track-2 FEC) is a joint project
between the University of Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras and Mississippi State
University that addresses a fundamental question in biology: How do changes in
DNA result in changes in phenotype? The study leverages morphological diversity
in butterfly populations and cutting-edge DNA sequencing methods to explore how
genetic changes impact wing pattern development. The goals are to understand
what type of genomic changes and molecular mechanisms underlie biological
diversity and prepare a diverse group of skilled researchers, innovators, and
educators. Educational activities include modernizing undergraduate biology
laboratory courses, student exchanges between PR and MS, genome to phenome
workshops and other professional development workshops for early career faculty
and K-12 teachers, and research experience opportunities for K-12 teachers and
students. The team members will develop a bilingual (English and Spanish)
curriculum for use in secondary schools focused on genomics and gene expression
and regulation and explain concepts of natural diversity, adaptation, and
evolution that aligns with Next Generation Science Standards and jurisdictional
Department of Education Science Standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative program between the University of
Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras and Mississippi State University aims to characterize
the genomic changes and molecular mechanisms responsible for the evolution of
morphological diversity. Butterfly wing color patterns are utilized as a model
system to build an integrative understanding of genotype-to-phenotype
relationships by addressing the following questions: 1) What are the DNA changes
associated with wing pattern divergence? 2) What is the gene regulatory network
underlying divergent color pattern development? and 3), What do these changes
tell us about the nature of morphological diversification? Through DNA
sequencing, chromatin profiling, and genome editing this study offers an in-
depth cause-effect analysis of the genetic changes that drive morphological
divergence in neotropical, Heliconius butterflies. This study bridges the gap
between population genetics, epigenetics, gene regulation, and pattern
development to disentangle the genomic logic of developmental evolution and
better understand the origin of morphological diversity. Three early career
faculty participating in this project will be mentored by senior faculty and
participate in research and teaching workshops. The project team members will
work collaboratively to develop educational materials and training activities
that span pre-college, undergraduate, and post-graduate levels of science
education in Puerto Rico and Mississippi.