* 1736093
* CREST Center for Innovation Research and Education in Environmental Nanotechnology
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2024
* Luis Fonseca, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 09/30/2024
* USD 5,118,600.00

The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST) program
supports the enhancement of research capabilities of minority-serving
institutions through the establishment of centers that effectively integrate
education and research. CREST promotes the development of new knowledge,
enhancements of the research productivity of individual faculty, and an expanded
presence of students historically underrepresented in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
National Science Foundation support, the University of Puerto Rico - Rio Piedras
will establish the Center for Innovation, Research, and Education in
Environmental Nanotechnology. The Center is a strategic effort that involves
collaborations with universities, national laboratories and industry to utilize
nanomaterials research to address environmental pollution, a topic of local and
national importance, while developing the future STEM
workforce&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Center will conduct interdisciplinary
research in three areas. (1) The Nanomaterials for Water and Soil Remediation
subproject will yield innovative approaches, research and education in the
development of nanomaterials for water purification, soil remediation and
resource recovery. In particular, these efforts will develop reactive membranes
for water purification, heavy metal remediation, and microbial reactors. (2)
Sensors for Environmental Monitoring research will develop nanomaterials that
enable new, robust and stable devices for physical and chemical sensing of
contaminants of environmental concern. The main goal is to develop devices that
remain operational under environmental conditions with minimal power
consumption. (3) Nanomaterials for Energy Conversion research will focus on
energy storage and conversion, with special interest in the development of
advanced materials for the recovery of energy from small molecules that are
typically encountered in the environment such as: ammonia and urea. Emphasis
will be placed on the discovery of nanomaterials for the enhanced operation of
ammonia alkaline fuel cells and urea microbial fuel
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education and training in environmental
nanotechnology will support the professional development of undergraduate and
graduate students, K-12 teachers, and university faculty. A citizen-based
research initiative will be implemented to enable communities to make informed
decisions and establish appropriate public policies related to environmental
conservation practices and the use of environmental nanotechnology. The Center
also addresses the national need to develop a diverse and well-prepared STEM
workforce.