* 1736656
* Investigating the contribution of carotenoid degradation products to refractory dissolved organic matter (DOM)
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Lihini Aluwihare, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2021
* USD 695,127.00

This research project will identify biological sources and chemical structures
that are responsible for the long-term storage of carbon in the ocean. Each
year, microscopic marine plants remove about as much carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere as do land plants. Respiration returns much of this carbon to the
ocean as carbon dioxide, but some is locked in the remnants of living organisms.
These remaining compounds are modified by pathways that involve bacteria,
sunlight, chemical reactions, and other processes that lead to storage of carbon
for thousands to millions of years. Some compounds eventually contribute to the
petroleum reservoir. Building on previous results, this project will study the
reactions and oceanic lifetime of a particular set of biochemicals, called
carotenoids, as a possible organic carbon storage pathway. Carotenoids are
abundant in very many marine organisms, increasing the likelihood that they are
part of this long-term carbon storage and petroleum formation. These compounds
also have unique chemical properties that make them subject to specific chemical
reactions. For this reason, they have been marketed as powerful antioxidants.
Therefore, scientific outcomes from this research on carotenoid chemistry will
not only inform ocean carbon cycles but could also benefit studies of their
properties as antioxidants. The project will determine the lifetime of
carotenoids and their degradation products in seawater to provide new insights
into pathways that transfer carbon from the atmosphere through biota and into
long-term storage reservoirs. Graduate students and underrepresented
undergraduate students will be engaged in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous work has identified specific chemical
backbones of compounds that are broadly distributed within the marine dissolved
organic matter (DOM) reservoir. A high-resolution analytical approach that
combines nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy with comprehensive gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) has detected DOM compounds with unique
structures closely related to carotenoids. Photochemical reactions of a
representative carotenoid in laboratory experiments has further linked compounds
detected in seawater to carotenoid degradation products (CDP). These preliminary
studies show promise that the work funded here will be able to identify specific
CDP structures and establish the quantitative significance, lifetimes, and
timescales of CDP accumulation in seawater. The project will combine laboratory
experiments, high resolution analyses, and chemical synthesis methods to
determine the chemical composition of CDP and their abundance in seawater. The
novel analytical methods developed through this research will be relevant for
other carotenoid-focused studies in petroleum formation, soil chemistry, as well
as food chemistry. Ramped pyrolysis oxidation (PyrOx) coupled to radiocarbon
measurements will be used to determine the radiocarbon content of CDP-enriched
DOM and seek to estimate the accumulation timescale of these dissolved molecules
in the environment, and it is hypothesized that deeper, older ocean water will
contain a relatively higher proportion of radiocarbon-depleted CDP. Collecting
samples from different depths in the North Pacific Ocean where CDP-enriched DOM
will be isolated following established sample processing methods will provide
insights and new information on the mechanisms that control the amount and
timescale of carbon redistribution among Earth?s various reservoirs.