* 1736235
* EXP: Social Science Education through Virtual Reality Simulation of an Archaeological Research Site
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Steven Lavalle, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/2020
* USD 525,985.00

This project will develop an immersive, interactive, room-scale virtual reality
(VR) archaeological site that will achieve two overarching classroom objectives:
(1) teach the physical methods of archaeological excavation by providing the
setting and tools for a student to actively engage in field work; and (2) teach
archaeological concepts using a scientific approach to problem solving by
couching them within a scientist's context. While the specific problem domain is
archaeology, this research will provide learning methodology and technology that
is widely applicable to other disciplines and subject areas, resulting in the
widespread development of VR curricula that promote scientific thinking and
problem-solving skills. Archaeology has an inherent physical component and deals
largely with three-dimensional objects, making it challenging to present in a
traditional classroom or on traditional computer screens, tablets, or
smartphones. Having excavation experience is critical, but field opportunities
are available to few students for financial and logistical reasons. These
challenges are well met by the unique capabilities of virtual reality (VR),
computer technology that creates a simulated three-dimensional world, thereby
transforming data analysis into a sensory and cognitive experience. The
technological results of the research will provide a learning experience that
can engage underserved populations who are interested in archaeology and who
have previously been unable to participate in similar activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide empirical foundations for
immersive, VR-based learning, an approach that is well-suited to various
educational settings and scientific subjects, identifying specific features that
are associated with student motivation and positive learning outcomes. Using
evaluations and iterative refinement of the virtual environment and activities,
this research aims to (1) optimize the interaction of the learner with the VR
technology; and (2) evaluate learning outcomes to gauge the effectiveness of VR
learning within this specific test case. This exploratory project will leverage
the ongoing revolution in consumer electronics as a low-cost platform for social
science education, beginning with a prototype for a virtual archaeological
excavation, that will be broadly applicable across disciplines and subject
areas. At the same time, research will assess the efficacy of this technology
and its integration into a larger archaeology curriculum. Given the widespread
interest in archaeology and cultural heritage, the results of this research are
adaptable and applicable to learners of all ages in formal and informal
educational settings like museums, science centers, and cultural heritage sites.