* 1736136
* CREST Center for Next Generation Multifunctional Composites (NextGen Composites Phase II)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Samuel Ibekwe, Southern University
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 08/31/2024
* USD 5,199,991.00

Center for Next Generation Multifunctional Composites&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST) program
supports the enhancement of research capabilities of minority-serving
institutions through the establishment of centers that effectively integrate
education and research. CREST promotes the development of new knowledge,
enhancements of the research productivity of individual faculty, and an expanded
presence of students historically underrepresented in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With CREST
program support, Southern University and A&amp;M College in Baton Rouge will
continue development of its Next Generation Multifunctional Composites Center in
collaboration with Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge Community College and
industrial partners. This work will have a significant impact on the design and
synthesis of polymer based materials for biological and technical applications
The increased use of composites in applications, such as automotive, naval,
aerospace, energy generation, and transportation vehicles, where light weight,
damage tolerance, and multifunctionality are major factors, highlights the need
for materials research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center will promote
advancements in polymer matrix composite materials synthesis and
characterization, modeling and simulation, and manufacturing for structural and
environmental applications. Center research is divided into three subprojects.
Subproject I will contribute to the understanding of 1) Design, synthesis, and
characterization of high stiffness shape memory thermoset polymer with dynamic
covalent bond exchange network for intrinsic crack healing; 2) Modeling and
manufacturing of polymeric artificial muscles made of chemically cross-linked
two-way shape memory polymers; and 3) Healing efficiency evaluation of composite
panels. In Subproject 2, knowledge of a new and highly energy efficient method
for large scale synthesis of carbon nanotubes will be created. The new synthesis
method can be used for mass production of carbon nanotubes at much lower
production cost than production by prevailing methods such as chemical vapor
deposition. In Subproject 3, the focus is on creating knowledge via
computational material design for the study of additive manufacturing of smart
conductive polymer nanocomposites with multi-scale
porosity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of cutting edge interdisciplinary
research based on next generation composites and educational activities through
this Center will provide students traditionally underrepresented in the STEM
disciplines with meaningful research experiences at a readily accessible
advanced research facility and a pathway to Ph.D. programs. The Center will
provide education and research integration and exposure to students from K-16 to
the doctoral level, and to the general public, including persons with
disabilities. Overall, each year the Center will directly support 3 postdoctoral
fellows, 3 Ph.D. students, 9 Master's students, and 18 undergraduate students.