* 1736596
* SCC-RCN:MOHERE: Mobility, Health, and Resilience in SCC: Building Capacities and Expanding Impact
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Scott Allard, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

The advent of smart and connected technologies is enabling new opportunities for
innovation, improved services, enhanced quality of life, and economic growth for
inhabitants of urban, suburban, and rural regions. This proposal builds a
research coordination network (RCN) with a focus in the areas of mobility,
health, and community resilience. This RCN will bring together diverse set of
researchers spanning social and technical disciplines to explore new research
ideas in these domains and how they may improve quality of life and spur
economic growth. The project includes a set of structured workshops and analysis
activities that are inter-disciplinary in character and will lead to the
discovery of new ideas and research concepts that can have major societal
impacts. The RCN includes an organizing committee led by leaders in Computer
Science, Engineering, and Social Science research from multiple institutions and
Community stakeholders who will plan and conduct annual workshops that will
build and expand a strong Smart &amp; Connected Communities (SCC) vision
encompassing these domains and their impact on communities. The proposal will
also leverage research from SCC initiatives being conducted in Taiwan, Japan,
and India. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Collaboration Network (RCN) will
take an integrative approach to community engagement and research capacity
building via a sequence of inter-dependent agenda-building workshops involving
experts in social, behavior, economic, and learning sciences, design, built
environments, computer science, and engineering, in partnership with local and
municipal community leaders and practitioners. This effort will focus on
Mobility, Health and Well-Being, and Resilience of Interdependent
Infrastructures as primary areas for capacity building. Partnering with
communities, we will identify how at-risk populations including the homeless,
recently incarcerated, adolescents, and First Nations tribes are directly
impacted by mobility through public transportation, health as shaped by access
to services, food, and housing, and community capacity for infrastructural
resilience. Capacity building efforts will include education, outreach, and
workforce development modules, and form the basis of permanent, multi-
disciplinary research conferences for the emerging SCC community.