* 1736875
* Collaborative Research: U.S. GEOTRACES PMT: Dissolved trace metal distributions and size partitioning
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2021
* Claire Till, Humboldt State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 10/31/2021
* USD 116,478.00

The goal of the international GEOTRACES program is to understand the
distributions of trace chemical elements and their isotopes in the oceans. Many
trace metals, which are by definition present in very low amounts, are essential
for life and thus considered nutrients for phytoplankton growth. Other elements
can be useful for tracing other ocean processes, and some (such as lead) are
important because they are pollutants. The primary goal of this project is to
measure the concentrations of iron, manganese, zinc, copper, cadmium, nickel,
lead, and scandium dissolved in seawater along a line of full-depth ocean
stations extending south from Alaska to Tahiti in the Pacific Ocean. Specialized
sampling and filtration techniques will also enable these investigators and
their colleagues to determine the distribution of these metals on very small
particles. A graduate student and several undergraduate students will take part
in the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. GEOTRACES Pacific Meridional
Transect, planned for the fall of 2018, aims to systematically and thoroughly
determine the distribution of trace elements and isotopes on a cruise transect
that spans zonal bands of sedimentary, atmospheric, and hydrothermal metal
supplies; intersects several zonal biological production and oxygenation
regimes; traverses the complex equatorial upwelling system; and encompasses the
oldest known deep waters in the ocean. The primary goal of this proposal is to
determine the concentrations of dissolved (&lt;0.2 micron-filtered)
micronutrient metals Fe, Mn, Zn, Cu, Cd, and Ni, as well as tracers Pb and Sc,
on every water column and surface sample collected, using two well-established
multi-element analytical methods that will be intercalibrated internally to
maximize data quality. Many of these are "key elements" required for analysis on
GEOTRACES cruises. Ultrafiltration will also be completed on all samples to
determine the "truly soluble" (&lt;0.003 micron) concentrations of these
elements and to calculate, by difference, the colloidal (0.003-0.2 micron)
fraction. The overarching goal of the proposed research is to understand the
ocean fluxes and processes that control the distributions of micronutrient trace
metals, which themselves modulate primary production and oceanic carbon dioxide
uptake, in the Pacific Ocean. The proposed research will allow for an estimate
of the meridional influence of each of these metal source fluxes and processes
in the Pacific, which is poorly constrained to date due to the mostly zonal
Pacific cruise transects in the past. Colloidal distributions are specifically
targeted in order to derive additional information on the reactivity (with
respect to both scavenging and bioavailability) of distinct dissolved metal
pools, as well as to provide a basic constraint on metal physicochemical
speciation, which is poorly defined for many of the eight metals.