* 1736192
* RII Track-2 FEC: Comparative Genomics and Phenomics Approach to Discover Genes Underlying Heat Stress Resilience in Cereals
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Argelia Lorence, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Cooperative Agreement
* Eric Lindquist
* 07/31/2023
* USD 5,983,737.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure
Improvement (RII) Track-2 Focused EPSCoR Collaborations (RII Track-2 FEC) award
is a joint project among the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Arkansas State
University, and Kansas State University. The project will create the
foundational knowledge needed to improve wheat and rice yields under stressful
environments. Trends at the global-, regional-, and farm-level point to an
increase in minimum night temperatures that is significantly higher than the
rate of increase in maximum day temperatures. Increases in night temperatures
significantly decrease the grain yield and quality of major crops such as rice
and wheat, which together provide over 50% of the caloric intake for humans
worldwide. To ensure global food security, there is an urgent need to improve
crop resilience to high night temperature stress-induced yield and quality
losses. This project will build upon complementary expertise and infrastructure
in Nebraska, Kansas, and Arkansas to develop novel research infrastructure and
make discoveries that ultimately lead to development of higher yielding and
resilient cultivars for the U.S. farmers. This program will create opportunities
to collaborate with key industry partners to ensure that promising discoveries
are translated into applications with economic benefit for farmers. Planned
workforce development activities will focus on mentoring six early career
faculty members, training of postdocs and graduate and undergraduate students,
and broadening the participation of underrepresented minorities and underserved
rural population in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to elucidate the
physiological and genetic basis of high night temperature resiliency of rice and
wheat, translate these discoveries into genetic and phenotypic markers for
public and private breeding programs, and develop a broad continuum for STEM
education. To this end, the investigators are taking a multidisciplinary
approach involving plant physiologists, quantitative geneticists, computational
biologists, biochemists, engineers, informaticians, and precision agronomists.
This program is building genome to phenome linkages using automated image-based
phenomics approaches in combination with transcriptomics and metabolomics
applied to wheat and rice diversity panels. Gene and pathways discovered from
this approach will be functionally tested for their role in improving the
temperature resilience in rice and wheat. The planned approach integrates across
greenhouse and field scales; captures complex interactions between the
environment and genome during grain development at high spatiotemporal
resolution; and couples genomics and phenomics outcomes within a quantitative,
model-based framework. This research will make the integrated dataset more
accessible to biologists through a visualization platform. Six early career
faculty will be mentored for professional progress and interactions with
international phenomic communities. An Interdisciplinary graduate course will be
developed for students in plant sciences, agricultural engineering,
computational biology, biochemistry, statistics, and computer sciences. On-line
offerings of this course will ensure student participation from all three
participating universities.