* 1736930
* Collaborative Research: Submesoscale Dynamics over the Continental Shelf: Drivers and Implications for Across-Shelf Exchange
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Anthony Kirincich, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 795,707.00

This project studies the mechanisms by which small scale (2-10km) coastal
oceanic flows, over the continental shelf can stir the water masses and
contribute to the transport material between the coast and the open ocean. A
unique array of high frequency (HF) radar systems will be deployed to measure
surface currents at high spatial resolution. These measurements will be able to
resolve eddies with sizes ranging from 2 ? 20 km that are present over the New
England Shelf (NES). The shelf area to be covered extends 30 to 80 km offshore,
with water depths of 30 to 70 m. These surface current measurements will be
augmented by simultaneous underwater measurement using a submerged
instrumentation, while autonomous surface vehicles and drifters will be used to
measure mid-shelf velocity structure, fine-scale horizontal gradients, and
drifter trajectories. The analysis of the data collected will increase our
understanding of exchange of material between the coast and the open ocean over
a broad continental shelf. This exchange has implications for biogeochemistry,
shelf productivity, fisheries, transport of pollutants, as well as for
determining heat and freshwater budgets; this is a crucial step in diagnosing
shelf-wide ecosystem variability, improving its predictability and thus
contributing to better discriminating between anthropogenic and natural
ecosystem changes. The proposed HF radar measurements will feed into the
National High Frequency Radar (HFR) Network operated by NOAA and the data will
be available for data assimilation into coastal ocean models as well as
trajectory parameterizations that support search and rescue, and pollution
responses. The project will contribute to education by providing the research
opportunities for summer student fellows at the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution and enable undergraduate students from the US Coast Gard Academy, an
undergraduate teaching-focused institution, to participate in the field work and
incorporate research activities into their senior projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By measuring the surface velocity fields at about 2 km
resolution over 1,200 square kilometers of the New England Shelf (NES) through
an entire annual cycle the project will characterize the dynamical variability
and seasonality of the eddy field. This work would identify processes and
parameters that lead to submesoscale current variability and the across-shelf
exchange of water masses and properties. The study hypothesizes that eddy
variability is driven by baroclinic instability, but is intrinsically linked
with wind and bottom stress, which generate spatially and temporally varying
Ekman currents and shear-induced mixing that can oppose or reinforce frontal
circulations. The observational results will be used to identify how eddy
dynamics are modulated by the seasonal cycle of lateral and vertical buoyancy
gradients within the NES. The role of submesoscale dynamics in across-shelf
exchange will be assessed using tracers and particles to calculate dispersion
and eddy fluxes both within the observed surface velocities, while drifters will
be used to gain a direct measure in the field. All estimates will be synthesized
with our dynamical characterization of the eddies to gain an understanding of
the processes leading to across-shelf transport in different seasons and their
importance relative to larger-scale exchange mechanisms.