* 1736595
* Submesoscale Instabilities and Turbulence Across Oceans: Connecting Theory and Observations
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Jennifer MacKinnon, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2021
* USD 258,254.00

Ocean flows at relatively large scales, typically more than tens of miles, are
mostly confined to horizontal plane due to the rotation of the Earth. At the
smaller submesoscale, this constraint is much reduced, allowing more vigorous
vertical motion, which plays a crucial role in mediating upper ocean heat
content and air-sea exchange. Improving the representation of these processes in
numerical models is therefore important for accurate forecasts of a wide range
of directly societally relevant phenomena, from ENSO to tropical monsoons to the
rate of Arctic sea ice melt. Due to their intrinsic short lateral scales (order
of km) and fast time scales (order of inertial period or faster), submesoscale
flows have been difficult to observe directly in the ocean. Numerical and
analytical studies, on the other hand, have made substantial progress in
describing the dynamics of idealized submesoscale flows. Criteria have been
developed for the onset of different submesoscale instabilities.
Parametrizations have been made to account for these instabilities in global
ocean models where they are not resolved. Yet little of the knowledge gained
from these studies has been confirmed by or compared with observations, which
makes it difficult to move forward with confidence. This project will address
this gap by combining development and application of a comprehensive linear
stability model with analysis of several substantial oceanographic datasets
already in hand. This project largely written by and will fund an early career
scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The model, developed by the early career
scientist, is novel in that it is forced by observed profiles of density and
velocity, unlike many idealized mean states that have been used in the past.
Preliminary work demonstrates its capacity to reproduce a vast range of types of
submesoscale instabilities, from mixed layer baroclinic instability to symmetric
instability to Langmuir circulation, and everything in between. Unlike linear
stability models before, it can smoothly transition from one instability class
to another; i.e. it produces a broad spectrum of instabilities from a single
mean flow state input. The model will be forced by and then compared with
amassed datasets from several recent oceanographic expeditions. Two of the data-
sets have shown strong evidence of submesoscale activity, both with anecdotal
examples and systematic statistics. Model skill will be developed and tested
using profiles from several of these examples. In turn, it is anticipated that
the model results will help illuminate the nature of the dynamical instabilities
present in the observations; because the model is initialized with real gradient
profiles and allows a fully complex superposition of a wide range of
instabilities, it is uniquely suited for detangling complex observations in a
broadband ocean. Comparison of model predictions with available observations
that span multiple ocean basins and multiple seasons will help develop
understanding of broad patterns of submesoscale variability, the sorts of
patterns that can be used to validate new global parametrization development.