* 1736799
* A Benthic Underwater Microscope with Pulse Amplitude Modulated Imaging Capability (BUMP)
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Dimitri Deheyn, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 656,827.00

The health and long-term dynamics of coastal ecosystems such as kelp forests,
mangroves, sea grass beds, and especially coral reefs, are significantly driven
by processes that occur on scales of a millimeter or less. Many inhabitants of
these ecosystems are primary producers, allowing transformation of sunlight
energy into molecular energy, which is what flows through food chains and drives
ecosystems climax. The energy transformation takes place in particulate units
(from chloroplasts to unicellular algae, depending on the context) and the
performance of each of these units is dictated by their direct surrounding
physical-chemical conditions. Hence, assessing the performance of each of these
units is critical to better understand adaptation and productivity in the
ecosystem, while also being a good proxy for the organisms overall health and
ability to photosynthesize. These fundamental microscopic processes are of
interest to scientists across diverse disciplines such as physiology,
photobiology, ecology, and organisms' interactions. Despite the importance of
small-scale processes, the availability of tools to study them at the
appropriate scales has been severely lacking. As one way of assessing
physiological processes, Pulse Amplitude Modulated (PAM) technology is an
important method that has been implemented in both the lab and the underwater
environment. The resultant data allows inference of photosynthetic rates,
providing a measure of photosynthetic activity. Such systems have been
implemented for bulk measurements underwater but never at the resolution needed
to monitor individual microscopic organisms. In this project, the underwater
BUMP microscope (Benthic Underwater Microscope with Pulse amplitude modulated
imaging) will be created that will measure these processes at the microscopic
level in their natural environment. The system will enhance the capacity to
better understand benthic marine processes by enabling in situ measurement of
microscopic photosynthetic organisms as well as their physiological status
without disturbing or removing them from their natural environment. The results
provided by this imaging system will thereby promote new discoveries to better
understand factors that structure marine communities
globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve this goal, the BUMP will incorporate a
number of features of an existing system for subsea microscopic imaging while,
at the same time, adding the capability to observe dynamic fluorescent changes
that have been induced with incident modulated light. The system will use a long
working distance (45 mm in water) lens with a resolving power of 1.5 micro-
meters over a 1.5 mm x 1.5 mm field of view. An inclined ring illuminator
consisting of 12 high power broadband LEDs with focusing optics will provide
photosystem saturation pulses, actinic light, as well as illumination for
reflectance images. The system will provide sufficient illumination for short
exposures of 100 microseconds or less. The design includes multiple optical
paths allowing for dual-mode imaging with 2 cameras and two illumination
sources. Taken together with an IPAD in an underwater housing for controlling
the system, a fully functional Pulse Amplitude Modulated imaging system at the
microscopic level will be built and tested in both the lab and then moved to the
field for diver operation in various environments such as kelp forests and coral
reefs.