* 1736749
* Development of a large-aperture coherent hydrophone array, data processing and analysis software system for instantaneous wide-area passive acoustic monitoring of marine mammals
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Purnima Makris, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2022
* USD 979,417.00

This project aims to develop and provide high-resolution coherent hydrophone
array hardware technology for compliance based marine mammal monitoring in
support of seismic survey operations on UNOLs research vessels. A large-aperture
densely-sampled hydrophone array system can provide significant enhancement in
marine mammal vocalization detection by increasing signal-to-noise ratio via
coherent beamforming which eliminates noise outside of the signal beam. Whale
vocalizations not detected using a single hydrophone or sparse array can be
extracted out of the noise floor by coherent beamforming with the large aperture
hydrophone array system. The coherent beamforming also provides high-resolution
estimates of whale vocalization bearings which are required for finding the
range of the whale from the array and localizing the marine mammal in geographic
space. In addition to the array hardware, the project also aims to develop a
real-time array signal data acquisition, processing and analysis software to
provide real-time detection, bearing-estimation, localization and tracking, and
classification of marine mammal vocalizations received on the coherent
hydrophone array hardware system. The hardware and software systems together
make up the passive ocean acoustic waveguide remote sensing (POAWRS)
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;POAWRS is a transformative approach for ocean
sensing, since it is capable of monitoring sound sources over instantaneous wide
areas spanning 100 km or more in diameter. In addition to marine mammal
vocalizations, the other sound sources detected by POAWRS include biology such
as sounds from fish and crustaceans; geophysical processes such as hurricanes
and submarine volcanoes; and man-made activities such as ships and other ocean
vehicles, seismic airgun and sparker for earthquake plate tectonic studies and
oil exploration, as well as offshore piling. The instantaneous continental-shelf
scale environmental monitoring capability and temporal-spatial dynamics of sound
sources revealed by POAWRS makes it an important technology that could become an
indispensable tool in field operations, such as large-scale marine ecological
studies, fisheries stock assessments and management, compliance-based marine
mammal monitoring mandated by the Marine Mammal Protection Act in seismic
surveys and naval sonar surveillance operations, as well as in studies of the
effects of man-made sound on marine ecosystems. When combined with an active
acoustic or seismic source, such as on the RV Langseth, the proposed
instrumentation can be extended for large-scale imaging of objects and features
in geophysical, fisheries, ecological and archeological surveys. The project
provides an opportunity for training and development work to a diverse team that
includes both women and under-represented minorities. The principal investigator
has and will continue to host and provide opportunities for K-12 students,
undergraduates and teachers to learn and contribute to ocean exploration and
discovery through Northeastern University's STEM Education Center, Research
Experience for Teachers (RET), Young Scholars Program (YSP) and various
undergraduate research opportunity programs. They have and will continue to
visit elementary, middle and high schools to provide demonstrations and hands-on
training in ocean discovery and sensing through ocean sounds.