* 1736413
* The Economic and Social Impacts of New Infrastructural Development in Rural Areas
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Lisa Cliggett, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 35,751.00

Road construction offers new economic and social opportunities for people, and
opens, or improves, access to new places. In the U.S. and around the world,
rural people often aggressively lobby local and federal governments for new or
improved roads, especially in rural areas with high poverty due to limited
economic opportunities, poor access to education and other social services, and
where infrastructure improvements are rare. In advocating for road construction
and improvement, local people imagine first and foremost, improved economic
opportunities, whether due to ease of transportation to jobs, transporting goods
out for sale, the arrival of new jobs, or through opportunities for new
entrepreneurial activity in conjunction with the new road. People living near a
new road may also anticipate easier communication and visiting with extended
family and distant friends or colleagues, and improved access to health care,
schools and other social services. However, people do not always anticipate some
of the problems that new roads can bring, such as increased crime and drug
activity due to easier access and fast escape from communities, or increases in
outsider purchase of land and property that may drive up taxes for local people.
In some cases, new roads can lead to shared local resources that people value
(such as ocean, lake, forest or pasture access) becoming privatized, which
consequently negatively impacts local people's ability to make a living. Through
an intensive study of communities living near a new road built in 2016 in an
impoverished rural community, Dr. Cliggett, an anthropologist at the University
of Kentucky, will investigate how new roads can best benefit local people and
identify ways to avoid the negative aspects of this kind of infrastructure
development. Project findings will also be presented to non-academic audiences,
improving efforts to communicate science to the public. The project would train
graduate students in methods of scientifically-grounded and empirical data
collection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted in rural Zambia
where a recent World Bank funded project facilitated the construction of a new
road along the Kariba Lake shoreline (part of the Zambezi River valley), in a
remote region, difficult to access and known for its poverty. Dr. Cliggett and
her research team, which includes US students, will investigate the variety of
impacts from the road in two communities at opposite ends this new
transportation corridor. It is selected because it is an ideal site for
examining long-term change through infrastructural development. These two
communities were previously part of one large village with dense family ties and
interdependent rural livelihoods, but were separated in 1958 when the Kariba Dam
was built on the Zambezi river. Despite the physical distance of the two
villages (approximately 130 miles), the communities remain socially connected
through kinship and local political organizations. The new road allows direct
transportation routes (approximately 4 hours) between these two communities for
the first time since 1958. Consequently, the new road is likely to facilitate a
resurgence of social networks, family reintegration and political activity, in
addition to new economic opportunities. The research team will survey women, men
and local political leaders in the two communities about how their economic
activities have changed since the road was built, changes in their social
connections with relatives and friends living at opposite ends of the road, and
the impacts of outsiders gaining access to lakeshore and other lands near the
road. In addition to survey interviews, the research team will use digital
mapping tools to identify places of economic activity and places where land is
being purchased by outsiders. The research team will use baseline information
from a long-term research project (Gwembe Tonga Research Project, started in
1958) in these communities to assess how local economies, social networks, and
privatization of land have changed since the road was built. This research will
allow Dr. Cliggett and her research team to make policy recommendations that can
enhance the benefits of this kind of new infrastructure, while minimizing the
negative impacts associated with new roads or other similar infrastructure.