* 1736510
* Next generation submersible flow cytometry for plankton studies: Extended dynamic range and orthogonal imaging
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Robert Olson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2023
* USD 790,189.00

Microbes account for most of the primary productivity and biomass in the ocean,
and their community structure determines in large part that of higher trophic
levels. A fundamental understanding of the factors that regulate community
structure requires detailed and sustained observations of the microscopic
organisms. This project will fill an important gap by enhancing instrumentation
for automated in situ monitoring of marine plankton. The research will
contribute new observational technologies that are likely to have broad impact,
not only within the ocean research community, but also for local, state, and
federal resource managers. In light of on-going environmental change and related
projections of increased human impact on coastal zones, there are many new
challenges for marine ecosystem-based management and mitigation of human health
risks, such as those associated with harmful algal blooms. Strategies informed
by scientific understanding and observations are critical and there is growing
recognition of the value of detailed biological data sets. Such data sets, as
will be enabled by this project, will provide society the information needed to
sustain natural ecosystems that humans rely upon for food, water, energy, and
climate regulation. The project includes multilevel education and outreach
efforts. Research experiences for undergraduates will help promote diversity in
ocean science. K-12 teachers, drawn from communities with high diversity and
proportion of low income households, will engage in professional development
activities designed to promote science literacy in middle and high school
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will produce the next generation
of automated submersible flow cytometers with expanded capabilities for
observing microscopic plankton. The work will build directly on their previous
experience developing two in situ flow cytometric instruments: one that measures
individual-cell light scattering and fluorescence properties (targeting the tiny
cyanobacteria common in coastal waters and the smallest eukaryotic phytoplankton
cells), and a second instrument that captures images of larger cells, which
allows automated image analysis to determine taxonomic affiliation. Two
objectives involve enhancing the imaging instrument design: (1) combining the
functions of the two current instruments, so that a single instrument can study
nearly the entire phytoplankton community; and (2) increasing the power of
image-based automated characterization by capturing two images (front and side
views) of the larger cells. Both approaches will take advantage of acoustic
focusing, a technique by which cells are positioned in flow, to process water
samples faster than would otherwise be possible. A third objective is to
evaluate the new instruments' capabilities through field tests in Woods Hole
Harbor and then to acquire high-resolution spatial-temporal observations on the
Northeast US Shelf through cruises-of-opportunity and deployments at the
Martha's Vineyard Coastal Observatory.