* 1736436
* 2017 Photosynthetic Plasticity: From Environment to Synthetic Systems, July 16-21, 2017; Newry, Maine
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2018
* Arthur Grossman, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 04/30/2018
* USD 10,000.00

Over the millennia, animals have developed various methods to ingest
photosynthetically-fixed carbon as a nutritive source. In addition, much of the
biomass generated through photosynthetic processes was buried within the Earth's
crust and converted into fossil fuels (oils), which today powers most of our
engines, supports a multitude of human activities and provides materials needed
for the manufacture of nearly all products used by humans. In an environment in
which resources, including food and energy, are becoming limited, it is
imperative that we understand photosynthesis so that we can increase crop
yields, produce new and better biofuels, and develop a variety of valuable
bioproducts. A deep understanding of photosynthesis will help establish both
food and fuel security and accommodate the future needs of man. The
Photosynthesis Gordon Research Conference will include researchers with a range
of expertise and promote the development of transformative ideas and novel
projects. To increase the reach of this conference we are coupling it with a
Gordon Research Seminar, which is comprised almost exclusively of students and
postdoctoral fellows (about 80 students and postdoctoral fellows); these young
researchers will serve as leaders in the field for future generations. Currently
16 out of the 42 confirmed speakers/discussion leaders/organizers are women and
over 1/3 of the invited speakers are junior faculty (Assistant Professors,
junior staff scientists, postdoctorals and equivalents) selected on the basis of
their recent novel (often groundbreaking) results and their abilities to
effectively communicate that information and build interactive
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oxygenic photosynthesis emerged as a dominant
process on the planet ~2.5 BYA, shaping the atmosphere through O2 production and
CO2 sequestration. It captures the energy of sunlight to oxidize H2O and
generate chemical bond energy and reducing equivalents that can be used to fix
CO2 into sugars, starches and oils. Furthermore, it is one of the most dominant
processes on our planet, providing food and fuel that supports nearly all living
systems. There are still many mysteries concerning the structure of
photosynthetic complexes, specific catalytic activities critical for
photosynthetic function, the biogenesis of chloroplasts, and the many abiotic
and biotic factors that impact photosynthetic efficiency. Photosynthesis is also
broad in its conceptual foundations and draws upon knowledge from numerous
disciplines ranging from quantum mechanics to ecosystem biology; it strongly
benefits from integration among disciplines. Photosynthesis is also unique as it
involves events that occur in the femtosecond to day/year time domains, and is
continually tailored over evolutionary time to function in different
environments ranging from near boiling hot spring waters to the frigid
conditions of the arctic tundra. This Gordon Research Conference will explore
the dynamic nature of photosynthesis, mechanisms by which it has accommodated
markedly different environmental conditions, and potential ways in which it can
be used to support man's activities. It will include researchers with a range of
expertise, fostering discussions that stimulate the emergence of transformative
ideas and novel projects that dissolve borders between disciplines to create
informed and unique research on photosynthetic energy conversions.