* 1736051
* Catalyzing Scientific Inquiry and Engineering through Wearable Intersubjective Sensation Devices
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Michael Eisenberg, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 07/31/2023
* USD 776,458.00

This project will investigate how to improve young people's science skills, and
to increase their perceptions of science as a pro-social field, through the
design and enactment of a new science education approach that emphasizes
curiosity about and investigation of animal perception and behavior. Project
researchers will investigate how middle schoolers' curiosities about, empathy
with, and desire to care for domestic animals can motivate scientific inquiry
and engineering design. To support this learning, the research team will develop
new wearable augmented reality technologies that enhance human perception by
permitting access to the sensory experiences of different animal species.
Students will customize these technologies based upon their scientific
investigations, as well as use them as tools within subsequent investigative
cycles. This project will connect science education to students' everyday
interactions with domestic animals, potentially broadening participation in
science and engineering to students who identify as being fond of animals but do
not yet see themselves as scientists. The participants in this research will
primarily be students in rural schools, who are underserved by current STEM
resources. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research team will create wearable and
home-installable technologies that enable youth and their families to
investigate animal behavior and biology, either by collecting data about animal
activity, or by enabling participants to sense the world as their domestic
animals do. For instance, dog owners could conduct experiments to determine the
frequency ranges of their dogs' hearing, use their findings to customize
wearable earmuffs that enable themselves to hear only those ranges, and then
wear those earmuffs in order to understand -- and empathize with -- how their
behavior may be shaped by those sensory experiences. Scientific inquiry will
also be central to design challenges, such as to design and build objects that
maximally engage domestic animals (e.g., ease of learning, duration of
engagement) and then use scientific data collection and analysis methods to
measure how well different designs work, using evaluation outcomes to
iteratively improve upon them. The intellectual merit of this work will be to
explore the potential of the new, to-be-created genre of wearables and augmented
reality technologies for intersubjective sensation, to motivate, contextualize,
and facilitate students' science and engineering education. This work will
deepen knowledge of how personally-relevant subject matter can motivate science
and engineering learning, as well as generate foundational empirical findings
about how care and empathy can be connected to science education. The broader
impacts of this work will be both local and national. Locally, over 60 youth
will learn about science and engineering through participation in project
activities. At least 4 teachers will participate as well, and by doing so, learn
about new teaching methods that could enhance their students' learning.
Nationally, the impact will be to develop documentation, both in academic
publications and in a free curriculum, that illustrates methods and their
potential impacts on student learning and motivation. &lt;br/&gt;