* 1736679
* Accomplishment Based Renewal: An experimental study of phase separation and mineral fluid equilibria on iron and hydrogen transport in mid-ocean ridge hydrothermal systems
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* William Seyfried, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 430,988.00

Hydrothermal circulation at mid-ocean ridges constitutes the largest geothermal
system on Earth. Venting of spectacular plumes of hot, metal-bearing, fluid into
seawater from sulfide structures on the seafloor along the volcanically active
global mid-ocean ridge system is the end result of heat and chemical transfer
between the ocean crust and the overlying ocean. As a result, the composition of
seafloor hydrothermal vent fluids places a major control on ocean chemistry, as
it has throughout Earth history. Seafloor hydrothermal fluids also provide
dissolved gases and other chemicals to sustain microbial ecosystems that provide
clues to the origin of life on Earth. The discovery of submarine hydrothermal
venting and their accompanying microbial communities that do not require
sunlight or organic matter created by photosynthesis to live, remains one of the
most significant discoveries in modern science. The mechanisms, however, by
which seawater is transformed to compositionally distinct hydrothermal vent
fluids are uncertain, owing to the extreme temperatures and pressures of these
processes. This research uses novel laboratory reactor and in-situ sensor
systems to carry out first-of-a-kind experiments at the temperatures and
pressures of seafloor hydrothermal venting to determine the effect of oxidation-
reduction reactions and pH on mineral solubility at temperatures and pressure
not previously studied. Goals of the work are to provide fundamental geochemical
thermodynamic and kinetic parameters involving iron and hydrogen in water-rock
interaction at high temperatures and pressures. The broader impacts of the work
to research and science education include (1) Involvement of undergraduate
science majors; (2) graduate student training in experimental and theoretical
studies of mineral-fluid reaction which enhances their career opportunities; (3)
development of new models to predict more accurately the links between the
physical and chemical processes in natural multi-component hydrothermal systems;
(4) physical infrastructure enhancement with the development of new equipment
and techniques to conduct experiments and collect data in the area of phase
separation of H2O; and, (5) public outreach in cooperation with K-12 programs at
the Bell Museum of Natural History at the University of Minnesota. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research will acquire data to advance knowledge of mineral-fluid
reactions that control the chemical evolution of mid-ocean ridge hydrothermal
fluids. The experiments specifically address changes in dissolved Fe and H2 in
fluids coexisting with mineral buffers at temperatures and pressures sufficient
to cause phase separation in the NaCl-H2O system. The research will examine the
possibility that fixing dissolved Fe and H2 in mineral-buffered reactions
increases the solubility of these components in both fluid phases. This strategy
contrasts sharply with previous fluid-only phase separation experiments where
the inventory of dissolved Fe was limited. High Fe/Cl and Fe/Mn ratios and high
dissolved H2 and H2S concentrations in vapor-rich vent fluids at mid-ocean
ridges, especially in the aftermath of magmatic activity, implicate mineral
buffering. Thus, the results of this experimental work will provide quantitative
rigor to the presently qualitative observations of the temporal evolution of
hydrothermal vent fluids at subseafloor temperatures approaching 500Â°C. These
high temperature fluids have some of the highest dissolved Fe and H2
concentrations yet reported; but, in the absence of the experimental data, are
difficult to interpret unambiguously in terms of subseafloor redox and pH
controlling reactions. Scientific implications of the research will enable the
development of theoretically-based predictive approaches for modeling aqueous
speciation and mineral solubility in the low density and two-phase regions in
the NaCl-H2O system. These conditions also apply to many continental
hydrothermal systems. These terrestrial systems have immense scientific,
economic, and practical significance and have critical importance to the Earth's
thermal budget and geochemical cycles.