* 1736659
* US GEOTRACES Pacific Meridional Transect: Determination of the air-sea exchange of inorganic and methylated mercury in the anthropogenically-impacted and remote Pacific Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Robert Mason, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2020
* USD 285,106.00

Human activity has greatly increased the amount of mercury (Hg) in the
environment, and particularly in the surface ocean. Most of the Hg enters the
ocean from the atmosphere as a gas, on particles, or in precipitation. Complex
physical and chemical processes at the interface between the ocean and
atmosphere control the amount of Hg that is retained and therefore that can
ultimately accumulate in seafood. Methylmercury (MeHg) is a chemical form of Hg
that is commonly retained in organisms and impacts the health and development of
humans and wildlife. This research will assess concentrations of Hg together
with its "methyl" forms in the atmosphere and surface ocean at sea from Alaska
to Tahiti. The spatial extent of the cruise will allow comparison of the air-sea
exchange and concentrations of mercury in both the North Pacific where human
emissions are large and in remote regions with minimal human impact. The
researchers will use established techniques and develop new methods to examine
the fate and transport of mercury within the surface ocean. These findings will
contribute key Hg data to the GEOTRACES program and thus enhance its overall
impact as part of an extensive marine trace element study. Findings will have
potential to inform public policy and global environmental treaties related to
Hg, thus providing data to evaluate human risk from Hg in present and future
climate scenarios. Educational impact will include support for a graduate
student and their dissertation using the field data, as well as several
undergraduates that will gain high level, hands-on research experience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will take advantage of recent analytical
advances that enable high resolution determination of the concentrations and
forms of inorganic Hg in the surface ocean and atmosphere. The analytical
approach will also be expanded to include measurements of methylated Hg
compounds, including MeHg and dimethylmercury. These measurements, and ancillary
data collected during the GEOTRACES Pacific Meridional Transect cruise, will
allow assessment of both atmospheric input and in situ oceanic loss for the
dominant forms of inorganic and methylated Hg. Exchange will also be evaluated
in the context of the suite of environmental variables collected by
collaborators during the cruise. The resulting data will help assess the long-
term impact of anthropogenic inputs of Hg to the atmosphere and ocean, and the
factors that influence the loss of Hg from the ocean by gas evasion. The studies
will build on previous results obtained as part of the GEOTRACES program and
other NSF-funded studies, adding novel measurements and building an enhanced
understanding of the sources and sinks of Hg to the open ocean.