* 1736043
* WORKSHOP: The IEEE VR 2017 Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2018
* Toni Pence, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2018
* USD 15,540.00

This is funding to support participation by approximately 7 promising graduate
students from educational institutions in the United States, along with about 5
senior members of the academic and industrial research communities as mentors,
in a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) to be held in conjunction with the IEEE
Virtual Reality (VR) 2017 conference that will take place March 18-22 in Los
Angeles, CA, and which is collocated since 2006 with the IEEE Symposium on 3D
User Interfaces (3DUI). Virtual reality is a multidisciplinary field involving
human-centered computer simulations that seek to imitate or augment real world
senses (usually sight, sound, and touch) and experiences. VR research includes
the development and assessment of methods and systems, and facilitating and
understanding user perceptions, beliefs, and behaviors. First organized by the
IEEE Computer Society in 1993 and held annually since 1995, IEEE Virtual Reality
is the premier international conference and exhibition in this field and
includes technical paper presentations, workshops, tutorials, research
demonstrations, and exhibits from industry. More information about the
conference may be found online at http://www.ieeevr.org/2017. The goal of the
Doctoral Consortium is to provide a unique venue for interactive, supportive,
and prestigious mentoring for mid-level graduate students in virtual reality, to
afford these students a valuable opportunity to get independent perspectives on
their research from senior individuals with a wide collective breadth and depth
of knowledge, and to build a cohort of young researchers within the VR
community. Special efforts have been made by the organizers to achieve diversity
among the students across institutions, and to recruit participants from groups
traditionally underrepresented in the field of computer science, including
women, persons of color, and people with disabilities.

This year's IEEE VR Doctoral Consortium builds on the successful format of the
previous such events, which were also supported by NSF. The main activities of
the DC will take place on Saturday, March 18, in parallel with the first day of
IEEE 3DUI. The workshop will include morning and afternoon sessions in which
each student presents his/her work to the other student participants and a panel
of senior VR researchers, with sufficient time set aside after each talk for
discussion and constructive feedback that addresses the strengths of the work,
challenges and issues that may arise, and implications of the results. A group
working lunch attended by all the students and mentors will be particularly
valuable for unifying the individual goals and projects presented within the
group as part of a "big picture" envisioning of the future of the field over the
next 10-20 years. The VR conference will begin the evening of Sunday, March 19,
with a welcome reception, where DC participants will network with what they have
learned during the full day event. The DC attendees will also participate in a
poster session, which will give them more opportunities to network and discuss
their research. Additional smaller activities, including a lunch with key
leaders in the 3DUI and VR research communities, will take place at scattered
times over the rest of the week; in particular, small groups of 2-3 students
will meet for mentoring lunches and/or other networking events with senior
members of the VR/3DUI community. The IEEE VR/3DUI conference planners will
generously provide as much financial support as possible to the DC through the
main conference's budget, including meeting space, audio-visual rental, and food
and beverage during breaks for free. In addition, the IEEE VR/3DUI conference
will pay for a welcoming dinner and the working lunch for the students and
mentoring committee, which will provide critical opportunities for students to
learn from mentors and VIP leaders in the field.