* 1736288
* Signature exometabolomes of Caribbean corals and influences on reef picoplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Amy Apprill, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 09/30/2021
* USD 719,440.00

Coral reefs are some of the most diverse and productive ecosystems in the ocean.
Globally, reefs have declined in stony (reef-building) coral abundance due to
environmental variations, and in the Caribbean this decline has coincided with
an increase in octocoral (soft coral) abundance. This phase shift occurring on
Caribbean reefs may be impacting the interactions between the sea floor and
water column and particularly between corals and picoplankton. Picoplankton are
the microorganisms in the water column that utilize organic matter released from
corals to support their growth. These coral-picoplankton interactions are
relatively unstudied, but could have major implications for reef ecology and
coral health. This project will take place in the U.S. territory of the Virgin
Islands (USVI) and will produce the first detailed knowledge about the chemical
diversity and composition of organic matter released from diverse stony coral
and octocoral species. This project will advance our understanding of coral reef
microbial ecology by allowing us to understand how different coral metabolites
impact picoplankton growth and dynamics over time. The results from this project
will be made publically accessible in a freely available online magazine, and
USVI minority middle and high school students will be exposed to a lesson about
chemical-biological interactions on coral reefs through established summer
camps. This project will also contribute to the training of USVI minority
undergraduates as well as a graduate student. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coral
exometabolomes, which are the sum of metabolic products of the coral together
with its microbiome, are thought to structure picoplankton communities in a
species-specific manner. However, a detailed understanding of coral
exometabolomes, and their influences on reef picoplankton, has not yet been
obtained. This project will utilize controlled aquaria-based experiments with
stony corals and octocorals, foundational species of Caribbean reef ecosystems,
to examine how the exometabolomes of diverse coral species differentially
influence the reef picoplankton community. Specifically, this project will
capitalize on recent developments in mass spectrometry-based metabolomics to
define the signature exometabolomes of ecologically important and diverse stony
corals and octocorals. Secondly, this project will determine how the
exometabolomes of these corals vary with factors linked to coral taxonomy as
well as the coral-associated microbiome (Symbiodinium algae, bacteria and
archaea. With this new understanding of coral exometabolomes, the project will
then apply a stable isotope probe labeling approach to the coral exometabolome
and will examine if and how (through changes in growth and activity) the
seawater picoplankton community incorporates coral exometabolomes from different
coral species over time. This project will advance our ability to evaluate the
role that coral exometabolomes play in contributing to benthic-picoplankton
interactions on changing Caribbean reefs.