* 1736165
* Mapping variability in the thermo-mechanical structure of the North American Plate and upper mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Benjamin Holtzman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 08/31/2019
* USD 181,525.00

EarthScope provides an unprecedented view into the Earth, enabling the emergence
of new interpretations and questions concerning the physics of the Earth's
interior. In addition to the purely basic research questions of earth structure,
dynamics and evolution, understanding the thermal and mechanical structure is
central to understanding societally relevant problems such as the Earth's
response to melting ice sheets and rising sea levels, the volcanic potential
beneath Yellowstone, and the regional origin of the geothermal gradient for high
temperature geothermal energy production. The tectonic plate, or lithosphere,
beneath Central and Eastern North America is tectonically stable, but Western
North America has a complex recent history (60 million years) of magmatism and
deformation, and a correspondingly thin and varied lithosphere structure. The
PIs are developing computational methods for interpreting the thermo-mechanical
structure (the temperature and the strength) of the upper mantle based on
seismic data from the USArray. The core of the method is the systematic
calculation of mechanical properties across a vast range of time scale, from
seismic wave propagation (seconds) to mantle convection (millions of years) and
everything in between. These properties depend on temperature, stress and other
thermodynamic "state" variables. When we identify models that are consistent
with observations at one time scale, those models constrain physical properties
at other time scales. This particular project focuses on how heat from the
mantle can corrode the tectonic plates from their underside, influencing where
volcanoes and earthquakes occur closer to the surface. The broader impacts of
this project fall into three categories: (1) the benefits of development of a
unique, very flexible and integrative community code and its uptake by the
seismology community; (2) advancement of three early career scientists; and (3)
new development of visualization of EarthScope data products for the
"SeismoDome" program in the Hayden Planetarium, school curricula and the general
public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to advance the
quantitative interpretation of seismic measurements to constrain the thermo-
mechanical structure of the shallow upper mantle beneath North America. In
particular, the PIs are exploring the possibility that thermal-chemical
corrosion occurs by melt infiltration into the plate. Central to this project,
the Very Broadband Rheology (VBR) Calculator comprises computational methods
intended to form practical and transparent bridges between petrology,
seismology, mineral/rock physics and geodynamics. This project expands upon the
VBR Calculator for calculation of frequency dependent mechanical properties
across the broad range of time scales of geophysical interest, from seismic wave
propagation to glacial isostatic adjustment to tectonic plate motions. By using
a single approach at multiple locations around the continental US, we enable a
direct comparative analysis of 1-D models of regional averages of measurements
derived from the seismic wave field, with an emphasis on velocity, attenuation,
and receiver functions. Initial results show that there are single forward
models that can fit the average Vs "Stable North American" (SNA) lithosphere and
asthenosphere. However, the "Tectonic North America" (TNA) velocity profile
cannot be fit by a single, simple, steady-state thermal profile, indicating a
more complex thermal history that has not reached a steady state. In the
proposed research, new 1D open-system two phase flow models with heat advection
by melt migration are being developed and added to the VBR library. These models
characterize this kind of disequilibrium much further, producing lithospheric
corrosion rates with reduced but realistic physics. The open system model
results is being used to predict receiver function amplitude and width, enabling
the seismic measurements to provide more detailed constraints on the thermal-
mechanical structure in each setting.