* 1736996
* Collaborative Research:  US GEOTRACES PMT: Pb and Cr isotopes
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Edward Boyle, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2022
* USD 474,825.00

Most of the lead (Pb) in the ocean has been put there by human activities. These
activities include high temperature industrial processes such as smelting, coal
combustion, and incineration, as well as leaded gasoline consumption during the
middle portion of the 20th century. Lead from these sources moves as fine
particles around the world by the atmosphere?s winds and eventually deposits on
the surface ocean where it dissolves. Fortunately, it is possible to determine
the different origins of these Pb sources (e.g. U.S., European, and Asian
inputs) from its isotopic composition (isotopes are atoms of the same element
with different numbers of neutrons in the nucleus). Lead has been shown to have
different isotope ratios because the Pb has been extracted from mineral deposits
from different geological periods. This project aims to determine how much of
this Pb has moved into the deep North Pacific by ocean circulation or by
attaching to sinking particles. This will be done by collecting seawater samples
from the surface to the bottom of the ocean at about 30 stations between Tahiti
and Alaska and analyzing these for their Pb concentration and Pb isotope ratios.
This project will also determine variations in the chromium (Cr) isotope
composition of Pacific seawater that are created when the lighter isotopes of Cr
are selectively removed from the ocean in extremely low oxygen zones in the
eastern tropical Pacific Ocean. This tool can help understand the ongoing
evolution of decreasing oxygen in the ocean and past changes in the oxygen in
the ocean established from geological archives such as
sediments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The first measurements of anthropogenic Pb in
the ocean resulted in a profile in the North Pacific Ocean by Schaule and
Patterson in 1981, and since then several labs have sparsely and erratically
measured other profiles showing that the Pb in the Pacific Ocean is responding
to regional changes in Pb fluxes - from the phasing out of leaded gasoline
(mainly in Japan, Canada, Mexico, and the United States) to increasing amounts
of coal combustion (mainly in China). The concentration of Pb decreased near
Hawaii by a factor of two between 1981 and the present, and the 206Pb/207Pb
isotopic composition of Pb decreased from ~1.20 (mainly U.S. Pb) to 1.165
(mainly Chinese coal Pb). The U.S. GEOTRACES Pacific Meridional Transect cruise
will give us an unprecedented opportunity to obtain a detailed view of the
penetration of anthropogenic Pb into the deep Pacific Ocean which can be used to
determine the pathways that dissolved and particulate Pb take in arriving in the
deep sea. This project will also determine the stable isotope composition of Cr,
an element whose redox state is determined by the oxygen (O2) concentration in
the ocean. In oxygen deficient zones (ODZs) where [O2] &lt; 2 Âµmol/kg, Cr is
reduced from chromate CrO4-2 (hexavalent chromium) to Cr3+ ion (trivalent
chromium). The isotopically lighter atoms of Cr are preferentially reduced, and
the reduced Cr3+ ion is "particle-reactive" (attaches to sinking particles) and
removed from the water column. That leaves the residual Cr isotopically heavier,
so we can detect this process by measurements of 53Cr/52Cr. This process occurs
in conjunction with nitrogen reduction (denitrification) and can be used to
trace the consequences as ODZ waters mix out into the oxic ocean.