* 1736590
* The Mendocino Fracture Zone:   A natural laboratory to study aging of the lithosphere and asthenosphere
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* David Sandwell, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 08/31/2020
* USD 292,796.00

The Mendocino Fracture Zone (FZ) off the west coast of North America is a fault
system with a large difference in seafloor age (about 27 My) from north to south
across the FZ. Because seafloor cools as it ages, there is an associated
temperature difference (300 degrees at 60 km depth) that is well understood from
cooling models. It is known from laboratory studies of mantle rocks that
electrical conductivity and seismic velocity both depend on temperature, but
there are uncertainties associated with these laboratory predictions because it
is difficult to predict, and then replicate, conditions in Earth's mantle
beneath the crust. One significant uncertainty is the role of water, which
decreases the strength of rocks and increases electrical conduction. By
measuring electrical conductivity and seismic velocity across the Mendocino FZ,
this project will effectively calibrate the combined effect of temperature and
age, while keeping other factors, such as mantle chemistry, largely constant.
Since seismic and electrical methods are widely used to study the geology of
Earth's interior, these results will be broadly useful to the Earth science
community. This project will also provide important constraints on the nature of
the lithosphere-asthenosphere boundary (LAB) at the base of the oceanic tectonic
plate. While the oceanic ridges, ocean trenches, and transform faults that form
the lateral boundaries of the tectonic plates are well studied, the largest
plate boundary of all, the LAB, is poorly understood. This project aims to
assess the extent of partial melting as a function of temperature difference,
and also determine any depth dependence of the LAB with age. The ship time for
this project is provided by the University of California ship funds program, and
through this project will provide seagoing experience for 16 graduate students.
The data will be used as the basis for the PhD thesis of a female graduate
student.

The project plans to deploy 21 ocean-bottom electromagnetic (OBEM) recorders
fitted with seismic sensors (hydrophones and differential pressure gauges)
during a transit of the R.V. Roger Revelle from Newport, Oregon, to San Diego,
California. The instruments will occupy a 200 km long north-south line and will
be left to record for several months before being recovered on another cruise
out of San Diego. Magnetotelluric response functions will be estimated from the
time series data, and inverted for electrical conductivity across the FZ.
Earthquake arrival times will be picked from the seismic recordings to estimate
travel time differences north and south of the Mendocino FZ. Acoustic chirp data
will be used to correct for the effect of variations in sediment thickness on
arrival times. The lithosphere and asthenosphere across the fracture zone were
presumably formed from compositionally similar mantle upwelling, so any
differences in the conductivity and seismic velocity across the fracture zone
can be attributed to differences in temperature and partial melt. Sediment
thickness and underway data collected across the Mendocino and Pioneer FZs will
be used to refine models of flexure due to differential thermal subsidence and
estimate the strength of the FZ by comparing the data with models of partially
locked faults.