* 1736736
* Predicting the global location of heat tolerant corals: Palau patch reefs as a general model
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Stephen Palumbi, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 09/30/2022
* USD 505,443.00

When coral reefs heat up just a few degrees above normal summer temperatures, a
reaction called coral bleaching can occur in which single celled plants living
inside coral cells are expelled. The coral turns from its normal tan color to
bleached white, and because it is deprived of the normal food supply from its
plant partner, most of these corals die. Yet, some corals naturally can survive
high temperatures that cause others in the same species to bleach. Identifying
where these heat tolerant corals are common would provide a general tool for
protecting and restoring heat tolerant reefs. The investigators will conduct
experiments on 30 patch reefs in Palau of very different sizes in two lagoons,
record local temperatures for 400 corals, and test coral heat tolerance using a
newly designed coral stress tank. Because large patch reefs generally heat up
during daytime low tides, The investigators hypothesize that they are commonly
home to heat resistant corals. They will also move heat tolerant corals to
cooler locations to test the stability of heat resistance among corals. The
stress tank technologies can be widely used in remote settings, and will provide
a set of generalizable, practical tools for communities and managers to find and
protect heat tolerant corals in reefs around the world. The work will advance
undergraduate STEM education in California and Palau. A partnership with the
Palau Community College will facilitate the engagement of Pacific Island
communities and students. Students will receive interdisciplinary training in
field research, genomics and bioinformatics and learn practical skills that will
enable them to collect and interpret stress tank and temperature data. Broader
outreach efforts will include the production and dissemination of a series of
microdocumentaries and blog posts designed to bring the concept of a world-wide
search for heat tolerant corals to a global
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous coral reef research has demonstrated
that periodic high water temperatures can induce high heat tolerance in reef
building corals through a combination of acclimation and selection at many
genetic loci. Key questions include whether these kinds of heat tolerant
habitats are common or rare, and whether their locations can be predicted by
identifying coral reefs where daily temperature spikes regularly occur at low
tide. This project will examine heat tolerance of 400 corals in the Acropora
hyacinthus species complex across 30 patch reefs in Palau that experience
variable temperature and flow profiles. This study will utilize a variety of
methods to characterize spatial and temporal patterns of heat tolerance
including: (1) the development of low-cost, portable heat stress tanks to
quickly and affordably assess in situ conditions, (2) genomic assays of
physiological condition to identify the genes and gene expression mechanisms
that are responsible for heat tolerance, (3) high resolution temperature mapping
to trace the role of temperature variation in producing stable, high temperature
tolerance in reef building corals, and (4) reciprocal transplant experiments to
evaluate whether heat resistant corals retain heat resistance when moved to
cooler locations. This research will expand the geographic map of habitats with
known heat tolerance, and expedite the ability to locate coral populations that
may be most resistant to future ocean warming.