* 1736995
* Collaborative Research: Using Osmium-Lead isotope variations in mid-ocean ridge and abyssal peridotite sulfides to understand fundamental properties of Earth's mantle
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* John Lassiter, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Johnson
* 07/31/2022
* USD 328,262.00

Fundamental knowledge of how the Earth works and how and why continents move
across its surface over time is critical for our understanding of seafloor
volcanism. This movement is driven by forces deep in the Earth and are
transmitted to the crust by movement and convection in the mantle. Chemical and
isotopic variations in volcanic rocks, generated along Earth's mid-ocean ridge
system provide insights into the composition and evolution of Earth's mantle.
Abyssal peridotites, direct samples of the mantle, are occasionally exposed
though tectonic processes along the mid-ocean ridge. These rocks are a
complement to the composition of Earth's mantle provided by mid-ocean ridge
lavas. Recent studies have revealed discrepancies in the picture of mantle
composition and evolution painted by these two different types of rocks. The
discrepancy likely results from the failure of current models to account for
complexities in the processes by which melts are generated and extracted from
the mantle. This research tests the hypothesis that the differences between
these two independent sources of information can be explained by the
preferential melting of chemically distinct veins in the mantle and the chemical
interaction of these enriched melts with the surrounding mantle material during
the ascent of the magma to the surface. Isotopic analysis of small sulfide
inclusions in both abyssal peridotites and in the lavas erupted at mid-ocean
ridges can help test this "marble cake mantle" hypothesis. Results of the
research will enhance our understanding of how oceanic crust, which covers
nearly Â¾ of the Earth's surface, forms. The project will also support the
education and training of two graduate students from two Texas universities, one
of which is a minority-serving institution and the other is the first Tier-1
university to be designated as Hispanic-serving. Collaboration between students
and investigators at the two institutions will complement ongoing efforts to
expand outreach in science to underserved communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research examines Osmium (Os) and Lead (Pb) isotope variations in sulfides from
abyssal peridotites and mid-ocean-ridge basalts. Os-isotopes in magmatic
sulfides, while slightly more radiogenic than average abyssal peridotites,
overlap with values in peridotite-derived sulfides. Grain-scale Os- and Pb-
isotope heterogeneity documented in many peridotites are postulated to reflect
either the long-term isolation and evolution of phases with variable
parent/daughter ratios or the recent metasomatism by isotopically-enriched
melts. This research tests the latter hypothesis and implicates
eclogite/pyroxenite melt generation as the ultimate source of radiogenic Os- and
Pb-isotope signatures in both interstitial and magmatic sulfides. This work
examines Os- and Pb-isotopes in interstitial and included sulfides from
exceptionally fresh abyssal peridotites from the Gakkel Ridge, an ultra-slow
mid-ocean ridge spreading center that exposes significant amounts of virtually
unaltered mantle rock. X-ray CT imaging will be used to examine the size,
spacing, and textural relationships of sulfides and other phases prior to
sulfide extraction and analysis. These data will be integrated with sulfide Os-
Pb analyses from Gakkel and other North Atlantic mid-ocean ridge basalts
spanning a wide range in composition. Specific questions being addressed
include: (1) do grain-scale Os- and Pb-isotope variations in peridotite
interstitial and included sulfides reflect "internal isochrones" and long-term
preservation of heterogeneities in isolated, Os- and Pb-rich phases or do they
represent recent metasomatic overprinting from eclogite- or pyroxenite-derived
melts percolating through the mantle; (2) do Os- and Pb-isotopes in sulfides
from mid-ocean ridge basalts correlate with other petrologic or geochemical
signals potentially related to pyroxenite melting (e.g., Nickel-in-olivine,
Na/Ti, or other long-lived radiogenic tracers); (3) do areas of low melt
productivity preferentially sample mafic components during melt generation; and
(4) are there systematic differences in the Os-isotope signatures of sulfides
from Gakkel Ridge basalts versus basalts from faster spreading ridge segments
with higher melt productivity. A primary goal of this work is to use Os- and Pb-
isotope variations in magmatic and mantle sulfides to constrain the role of
lithologic heterogeneity and reactive melt transport in the generation of both
mid-ocean ridge basalts and abyssal peridotites. The integration of Os- and Pb-
isotope data from both sulfides from the basalts and those from abyssal
peridotites with other geochemical and petrologic data from the same samples
will allow the role that lithologic heterogeneity plays in mid-ocean ridge
basalt generation to be determined in addition to better gauging the role of
recent and ancient mantle melting and melt/rock reaction in generating chemical
and isotopic variability in abyssal peridotites. Results of the work will
dramatically improve our ability to use mid-ocean ridge basalt chemistry to
infer the complex depletion and refertilization history of Earth's convecting
upper mantle.