* 1736078
* Collaborative Research: Systematic Comparisons of Regular and Slow Earthquakes in Central and Southern California
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Guoqing Lin, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 08/31/2020
* USD 139,571.00

Nontechnical &lt;br/&gt;This project aims to understand different behaviors of
regular and slow earthquakes in Central and Southern California. The recent
discovery of slow earthquakes broadens our view on how active faults relieve
tectonic stresses. By applying various techniques to extensive seismic data
collected by EarthScope and other permanent networks, the Principal
Investigators (PIs) are creating better images of detailed fault zone structures
within and below the depth where regular earthquakes occur. The PIs also hope to
better understand how fault zone properties control different fault slip
behaviors (regular vs slow). The project will improve our estimation of when and
where large earthquakes occur and help to evaluate future seismic hazards.
Because slow deformation may occur before large earthquakes, better tracking
slow earthquakes could also help to better understand the processes relevant to
how earthquakes initiate and interact. The PIs are developing new tutorials on
triggering and detection of regular and slow earthquakes from seismic data. In
addition, they are developing products to visualize and hear seismic data
relevant this project. All these activities help to attract next generation
scientists into the seismological field, and train them with state-of-the-art
tools so that they can succeed in their future careers. This project also
supports training of two graduate students and an international collaboration
with Japanese researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
&lt;br/&gt;The newly discovered deep tectonic tremor and accompanying slow-slip
events have changed our view on how accumulated tectonic stresses are released
through fault movement below the seismogenic zone. Deep tremor has been clearly
observed along the Parkfield-Cholame section of the San Andreas Fault (SAF) in
Central California since around the time when the Earthscope project started
more than 15 years ago. However, except a few cases, tremor has not been
ubiquitously found along the San Jacinto Fault (SJF) and other major faults in
Southern California. Although progress has been made to further understand the
physical mechanisms for tremor and regular earthquakes, many fundamental
questions remain open. These include: 1. What are the primary factors that
control different tremor and microearthquake behaviors in Central and Southern
California? 2. How do tremor and low-frequency earthquakes (LFEs) differ from
regular earthquakes? 3. What are in situ fault zone properties at depth where
regular and slow earthquakes occur? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To answer these
questions, the PIs are conducting a systematic analysis of regular and slow
earthquakes in Central and Southern California using state-of-the-art techniques
and available dataset in these regions. Specifically, the PIs are performing the
following research tasks: 1. Detect and relocate microearthquakes along the
Parkfield section of the SAF and along the SJF in Southern California; 2. Better
detect and locate tremor and LFEs along the SJF in Southern California and
compare their behaviors with those in Central California; 3. Quantify the
triggerability of microearthquakes and tremor/LFEs in these regions; and 4.
Delineate internal fault zone structures using Vp/Vs ratios and other imaging
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goal is to obtain highly accurate
locations of microearthquakes and LFEs in both regions, and use them to study
their responses to external stress perturbations, and obtain in situ fault zone
properties that control different behaviors of regular and slow earthquakes in
Central and Southern California. In addition, the PIs are continuing their
development of online tutorials on earthquake triggering and detection, and
visualization and sonification products related to Earthscope. These activities
help to educate general audience with frontier earthquake science, attract next
generation scientists into the seismological field, and train them with state-
of-the-art tools so that they can succeed in their future careers. This project
also supports training of two graduate students and an international
collaboration with Japanese researchers.