* 1736102
* RAPID:   Investigating  changes to  metal oxide nanoparticle stability in a contaminated stream during the initial period of remediation
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2018
* James Ranville, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 03/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

There are known impacts to streams in the United States as a result of pollution
from abandoned mines. Even after the impact of the acidic mine effluents are
removed by treatment, the streambeds themselves will continue to release metals
that are toxic to aquatic species. The metal-containing sediments must be
naturally removed in order for the stream to recover and allow both restoration
of aquatic life and beneficial use by society. The sediments consist primarily
of very small nanoparticles of iron oxide that can contain As, Cd, Cu, Pb, and
Zn. These small particles, which have stuck to the streambed, may be more
quickly removed if they become more stable in water due to changes in the
chemistry of their surfaces. A treatment plant that removes the metals and acid
from the mine effluents has just begun operation. The treatment process also
alters the composition of the stream water in such a way that the particles may
become more stable in water and, thus, removed more quickly. This study will
provide data that will lead to better estimates of how quickly other streams
will recover if similar mine waste treatment is performed.

Incidental nanoparticulate iron oxides (NP-FeOx) are formed in streams receiving
acidic mine waters. NP-FeOx is capable of transporting contaminant metals such
as Cu, Zn, and As. In early 2017 a lime treatment plant will go online in the
North Fork of Clear Creek (NFCC), which will dramatically alter the water
chemistry of the stream. The colloidal stability of NP-FeOX is dependent on
solution composition (ionic strength, divalent cations, pH, DOC) and is thus
likely to be affected. The project goal is to understand how the removal of
metals will be influenced by changes in the stability of the NP-FeOx. In order
to determine the immediate impact of the water treatment plant (WTP) on NP-FeOx
stability in the water column, the dispersion of existing NP-FeOx contained in
the streambed will be studied using spICP-MS, DLS, zeta potential, and ICP-OES.
It is expected that preexisting NP-FeOX will disperse from the creek bed into
the water during early WTP operation, which may result in a temporary increase
in toxic metal concentrations. This will be of long-term benefit, as this
process may accelerate the restoration of the streambed. This is the first time
that nanoparticle stability under variable water chemistry conditions has been
examined in an actual stream setting. Additionally, the manipulation of pH and
hardness in laboratory experiments will allow us to understand the effects of
isolated water chemistry variables on particle dispersion in an AMD system. A
summer field session aimed at local high school students and college seniors at
the Colorado School of Mines will participate in a field session at the study
site. In addition, a partnership with the Upper Clear Creek Watershed Foundation
will be forged to involve community volunteers on the proposed project.