* 1736150
* RII Track-2 FEC-Genome to fitness: An Analysis of the Stress Response in Peromyscus
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2024
* Wendy Hood, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jeanne Small
* 07/31/2024
* USD 4,298,499.00

Non-technical description &lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement
Track-2 Focused EPSCoR Collaborations (RII Track-2 FEC) award explores how
genetic differences determine the response of individual animals to various
stress-inducing stimuli. At the level of a cell or an individual organism,
stress-inducing stimuli can involve a number of factors such as oxygen
deficiency, poor diet, or exposure to toxic chemicals. The stress responses vary
among cells and tissue types and how these responses impact the animal?s
functions and survival is not well understood. This project applies a
combination of genomic analyses coupled with stress tests at cellular and
organismal levels to understand the fitness of mammals using North American deer
mouse as a model. The project is a collaborative effort that will be led by the
University of South Carolina with faculty and students from Claflin University,
an Historically Black College and University (HBCU) in South Carolina, and
Auburn University in Alabama participating in the research, education, and
outreach activities. A new Rodent Performance Testing Laboratory will be
established at Auburn University and two early career faculty will be hired to
augment and strengthen the resources for collaborations. Senior faculty members
will provide strong mentorship for junior researchers for career advancement and
will work together in training a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate
students and postdocs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project involving University of South
Carolina, Claflin University, and Auburn University aims to dissect the genomic
basis of stress response in mammals. The overarching goals of this study is to
identify the genes and epigenes responsible for variation in endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress and the resulting unfolded protein response (UPR) and to
characterize the physiological and fitness ramification of these differences in
out-bred North American deer mouse (Peromyscus maniculatus). Specifically, the
planned research will: (1) identify and validate Quantitative Trait Loci
correlated with UPR response in P. maniculatus; (2) establish cultures of
primary fibroblasts from P. maniculatus and to perform analysis of the UPR in
culture; (3) monitor the response of P. maniculatus in different
environmentally-relevant diets; (4) associate genomic signatures and variation
in the UPR profile of fibroblasts to variation in animal survival and
reproductive performance under semi-natural conditions. The tools,
methodologies, and reagents developed and optimized during this work will be
made readily available to other researchers. The project will augment available
resources by establishing a new Rodent Performance Testing Laboratory at Auburn
University and by hiring two early career faculty with expertise in stress
biology, evolution and genomics. Strong emphasis on mentoring of early career
faculty and postdocs, development of new graduate courses, and recruitment of
graduate and undergraduate students with particular emphasis on recruiting
students from ethnic and other underrepresented minority groups in STEM are
included in this project.