* 1736173
* Bioenergy Center
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Abolghasem Shahbazi, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 05/31/2024
* USD 4,999,997.00

CREST Bioenergy Center&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Centers of Research Excellence
in Science and Technology (CREST) program supports the enhancement of research
capabilities of minority-serving institutions through the establishment of
centers that effectively integrate education and research. CREST promotes the
development of new knowledge, enhancements of the research productivity of
individual faculty, and an expanded presence of students historically
underrepresented in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With CREST program support, North Carolina
Agricultural &amp; Technical State University will further develop its Bioenergy
Center into a sustainable national interdisciplinary center for transformative
bioenergy research and technology development, and for the professional
development of underrepresented minority students and faculty. Partner
institutions include the State University of New York at Stony Brook, Louisiana
Tech University, Guildford/Alamance Technical Community Colleges, industry and
National Laboratories. Center research will advance bioenergy science and
contribute to bioenergy technology commercialization. Center research will also
accelerate the transition to lower net-carbon energy systems with their
environmental and public health benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center
articulates three research thrusts: (1) Biomass Gasification and Syngas
Upgrading via Chemical Looping Technology; (2) Nanocatalyst for Fisher-Tropsch
Synthesis using CO2-rich Syngas and H2 production from Bioderived Liquids; and
(3) Electrocatalysts and Membranes Development for Fuel Cell Technology. The aim
of the research thrusts is to gain fundamental understanding of the
thermochemical conversion of biomass to bioenergy and biofuel. The Center will
enhance STEM research and education at North Carolina Agricultural &amp;
Technical State University, produce new knowledge, strengthen the research
competitiveness of faculty and promote interdisciplinary collaborations within
North Carolina Agricultural &amp; Technical State University and with partner
institutions. Center activities will enhance the research and development
enterprise and infrastructure at North Carolina Agricultural &amp; Technical
State University, making it nationally competitive in the field of bioenergy.
Students, traditionally underrepresented in the STEM disciplines, will be
provided with meaningful research experiences at a readily accessible advanced
research facility. Center activities will emphasize the recruitment of community
college students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.