* 1736990
* Standard:  Development, validation, and application of an assessment tool for RCR training.
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Mack Shelley, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 08/31/2023
* USD 523,363.00

This project will develop the ISART, the Iowa State Assessment of RCR Training,
a validated assessment tool that can be used to measure the effectiveness of
Responsible Conduct of Scientific Research (RCR) training methods. This project
will use that tool to evaluate the effectiveness of online and in-person courses
provided by colleges and universities nationally and globally. This assessment
tool will enable users to compare and evaluate multiple and diverse alternative
RCR training methods. Results from this assessment, will be used to specifically
identify strengths and weaknesses of current RCR training methods in multiple
contexts. The goal is to develop an instrument that will improve the quality of
RCR training wherever it takes place, and ultimately to promote the ethical and
responsible conduct of scientific research in all disciplines. This project will
benefit students, scientific community, policy makers and
administrators.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The development of the ISART will provide
valuable assessment of RCR training to the community it serves. The ISART will
be a validated and reliable concept inventory designed to measure expert-like
thinking in the area of RCR. Researchers will first frame a precise
specification of the instrument and the domain to be evaluated, and will then
determine format, test procedures, and the characteristics of the target
populations as part of the reliability parameters. Open-ended questions will be
developed to measure progress in the nine core areas of interest for RCR
training. These questions will be used to probe student understanding and
misconceptions in the nine core areas. Commonly held misconceptions will be used
as distractors when designing multiple choice concept inventory questions. Tests
will be administered and data assessed over the course of several years to study
both student knowledge acquisition and student retention of knowledge.
Publication and dissemination of the ISART and the results of its application
will provide the RCR training community with an appropriate, practical, and
powerful tool to assess the effectiveness of their particular ethics training
methods. The project will include both tool-development and a comparative study
examining the impact of in-class vs. online modes of RCR education. This
research has the potential to transform the course of graduate RCR education in
STEM fields throughout the US and internationally.