* 1736046
* A seismic synthesis model for the Eastern North American Continent and its integration with the Western Atlantic upper mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Frederik Simons, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 08/31/2022
* USD 444,154.00

We synthesize over a decade of EarthScope research by investigating the seismic
structure of the eastern North American continent to arrive at an understanding
of the processes at work in a geodynamic context. We complete the analysis of
EarthScope seismic data most recently recorded on the eastern seaboard. In this
area of the United States, where a continental passive margin meets oceanic
crust, the upper-mantle structure remains complex and in need of robust seismic
imaging in order to integrate our understanding of it within a tectonic,
structural, geochemical and geodynamic framework. We pair up the structure of
the edge of the continent with the mantle regime that underlies the Atlantic,
which is host to active mantle dynamics, where the mantle moves down as well as
up, and which shows a hint of an as yet incompletely imaged mantle plume.
Tightly linked with our effort to image and interpret the seismic structure of
the Eastern North American continent, we develop an education plan that brings a
taste of EarthScope to Princeton University. Undergraduates will conduct
research on the science-quality data continuously acquired by a new campus
observatory composed of two seismometers, a weather station and a permanent
geodetic beacon. Project "GuyotPhysics"provides educational input, real-world
excitement and hands-on experience to a variety of undergraduate and graduate
classes, beginning with first-year college students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We
exploit the quality of the completed EarthScope seismic data set to maximize our
ability to extract mantle discontinuity structure from receiver functions,
interrogate these results in the interpretative light of new findings from
mineral physics, and combine those with the latest developments in lithospheric
tomographic imaging to characterize the eastern portion of the North American
continent in terms of seismic wavespeed. We integrate our results with existing
models by quantitatively comparing a variety of lithosphere and mantle models to
one another, by determining a suitable wavespeed model to serve as the reference
within which we embed our receiver-function images, and from which we carry out
a last round of tomographic inversions. We develop double-difference data
products from EarthScope as a basis for the closure of our tomographic
inversion. Inversions carried out in the form of three-dimensional full-waveform
elastic adjoint-state tomographic imaging experiments show how our double-
difference technique will be able to unearth a meaningful quantity of new
structural information from previously imaged regions, while being able to
determine the as yet unknown structure in the previously understudied eastern
section, starting from the barest and most featureless initial models. Our final
synthesis will capture the North American upper mantle without terminating
abruptly at the coast. The images will harmonize with models for the oceanic
mantle below the western Atlantic.