* 1736326
* AMPS: Rank Minimization Algorithms for Wide-Area Phasor Measurement Data Processing
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* John Mitchell, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 249,720.00

The current Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems typically
provide measurements every 2-4 seconds, offering only a steady state view into
power system behavior. Thanks to the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of
2009, more than two thousand phasor measurement units (PMUs) have now been
installed and provide terabytes of data daily, offering dynamic visibility into
power system operating conditions and energy demand. PMUs can directly measure
bus voltage phasors and line current phasors at sampling rates of 30 or 60
samples per second. The problems to addressed in this project are (i) data
quality issues in the use of PMU data to improve wide-area situational awareness
and prevent blackouts, and (ii) cyber data security, to detect and prevent
sophisticated attacks. Through developing real-time PMU data recovery methods,
it is envisioned that this project will improve the data quality of PMU
measurements and serve as a first step towards building a PMU-based monitoring
system. The system can enhance system visibility from PMU data, resulting in a
lower-cost solution to meet energy demand and improve grid reliability. The PIs
expect to leverage the resources at RPI and thier connections to industry to
integrate the developed technology into practice. This project connects big data
analysis with general dynamical systems, and the developed methods can be
applied to other applications such as monitoring of communication networks and
video processing. Further, it is envisaged that the research in this project can
be integrated into the existing outreach activities to high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematically, the problems addressed in this
project involve minimizing the rank of a matrix. Problems of this type are often
addressed using convex optimization approximations. The PIs propose instead to
use nonconvex approaches, which better capture the structure of the problem and
may therefore lead to better solutions. The PIs recently investigated a
nonconvex approach to minimizing the rank of a symmetric positive semidefinite
matrix. The PIs propose a method to extend this approach to more general rank
minimization problems over complex matrices. The PIs will also develop related
alternating direction methods for the problems of interest. To facilitate
testing and adoption from utilities and ISOs, the PIs intend to implement thier
methods on an open-source data concentrator platform. It is envisioned that the
analysis of the methods to be developed will show that they can be successfully
applied to a broad range of problems in compressed sensing, low-rank matrix
theory, and low-rank tensor analysis.