* 1736906
* US GEOTRACES PMT: Shipboard determination of key dissolved trace elements
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Mariko Hatta, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2023
* USD 438,766.00

This project will provide shipboard measurements of the dissolved trace elements
aluminum (Al), iron (Fe), and manganese (Mn) during an Alaska to Tahiti cruise
that will sail as part of the US GEOTRACES Pacific Meridional Transect (PMT).
The PMT expedition is part of the international GEOTRACES program designed to
improve understanding of global ocean biogeochemical cycles. The growth of
microscopic oceanic plants in surface waters depends on the availability of
certain trace elements (particularly dissolved Fe). In addition, the
distribution of this and other trace elements record current and past chemical
and biological processes in the ocean. The PMT cruise track includes multiple
unique oceanic conditions and thus the results of the work will provide
important insight into diverse global ocean processes. For broader scientific
impact, results will be incorporated into models that address the current and
future role of the ocean in global processes. Assessing the distribution of
trace elements in the Clarion-Clipperton Fracture Zone, along the cruise track,
will also provide an important baseline for this region where seabed mining of
manganese nodules is planned. Educational outreach will take place with a mid-
cruise stop in Hilo, Hawaii to engage local students with visits to the ship.
Direct exposure to a working oceanographic research vessel together with a post-
cruise follow up visit will provide students with a unique opportunity to
discuss the findings from the expedition directly with the scientists engaged in
the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop the data sets required for new
understanding of the relative importance of trace element input processes in
establishing oceanic chemical distributions, seawater samples from the entire
water column will be collected using a custom designed sampling package at 41
locations during the 62-day cruise. The northern part of the cruise track
originates in a region where very low concentrations of dissolved Fe in surface
waters limit plant growth. Further to the south, increased atmospheric
deposition of mineral dust blown from the continents will be traced by measuring
the dissolved Al concentration in surface waters. The addition of this dust also
adds dissolved Fe. Potential additional inputs of Fe from coastal regions will
be identified by coincident increases in dissolved Mn concentrations. The
project will compare and correlate variations in Al, Fe, and Mn to quantify and
identify distinct addition processes along the cruise track. By using shipboard
flow injection analysis to provide near real-time measurements for these trace
elements, the potential exists to modify sampling strategies for maximum
scientific return. The shipboard results will also help identify any sampling
contamination problems that are a constant risk when collecting these low-level
trace elements. Altogether, the shipboard analysis of these essential elements
is an essential activity to ensure success of the GEOTRACES PMT.