* 1736293
* I-Corps: Wearable Health Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Chelsea Monty, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 09/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to improve
overall health through on-body biomedical monitoring. Although this study
focuses on a wearable textile material for use specifically in cutaneous sensing
applications, these same materials will have broader implications for public
health since they can be used for a variety of sensing or device applications.
The materials developed in this work could be functionalized for the detection
of a wide variety of biomarkers and such innovations could profoundly impact our
ability to diagnosis, treat, and prevent diseases, from analysis of common
diabetic neurological complications to the diagnosis of cystic fibrosis (CF).
These materials could also be used in smart clothing to allow for biomonitoring
in advanced prosthetic limb applications, bedridden patients, or athlete
performance tracking. Development of a wearable sensing material capable of
determining physiological parameters at the surface of skin could also make
construction of health monitoring sensor arrays relatively easy and
inexpensive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on innovative,
textile-based sensing materials capable of continuous monitoring of biomarkers
in sweat, which could have significant impact on the field of biomedical
monitoring. These sensing materials would be better than current sensors as they
could provide continuous information about a person's health based on a
molecular level analysis of sweat biomarkers in a flexible, lightweight device
that could be worn in any application without discomfort. This technology can
provide reliable, real-time monitoring of dehydration (sodium ions), muscle
fatigue (lactic acid), and temperature in cutaneous sweat. These sensors are
made of functionalized carbon nanotube nanocomposites with an electrospun
polymer base. One sensor, using a polypyrrole functionalization, has been
demonstrated to measure temperature in a physiologically relevant range (25-45
degrees Celsius). Selective nanocomposite materials functionalized with
calixarene can selectively measure sodium ions in synthetic sweat, without ionic
interference; while, nanocomposite materials functionalized with lactate oxidase
have been demonstrated to selectively measure lactic acid without glucose
interference. The data collected from the developed sensor could lead to better
understanding of health and disease processes, leading to better treatments and
health outcomes for all patients.