* 1736932
* Collaborative Research:  The impact of symbiont-larval interactions on species distributions across southwestern Pacific hydrothermal vents
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Roxanne Beinart, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 885,927.00

Symbiosis with microbes is ubiquitous and critical to fundamental biological
functions such as development and nutrition. Thus, the success of a host animal
may depend on its ability to find and associate with its microbial partner(s).
While some hosts directly transmit their symbionts from parent to offspring in
order to guarantee this, acquisition of microbial symbionts from the environment
is vital for the survival of many obligately-symbiotic animals. An understanding
of the free-living symbiont population and how the host acquires those symbionts
is fundamental to our comprehension of ecological processes in all ecosystems,
yet almost nothing is known about either. Hydrothermal vent ecosystems provide
important opportunities to investigate the role of microbial symbionts in host-,
community-, and ecosystem-level ecology, since these ecosystems are dominated by
animals whose survival is clearly linked to the acquisition of one or a few
specific symbionts. This project begins to fill a gap in our understanding of
the factors driving community structure at hydrothermal vents by addressing the
potential for free-living symbiont populations to affect host animal
establishment, while also expanding our general knowledge regarding the impact
of host-associated microbes on fundamental ecological processes that apply
across ecosystems. The results of this project will be shared via educational
videos and live-broadcasts to the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of
Natural History and University-run museums. The investigators will also design
and implement an educational program about symbiosis and hydrothermal vent
biology suitable for middle and high school classes. Finally, the investigators
will train a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate students in both
research and the development of science educational programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on two sister genera of snails,
Alviniconcha and Ifremeria, which predominate at vents in the southwestern
Pacific. At vents in the Lau Basin (Tonga), three species of Alviniconcha and
one species of Ifremeria coexist. These four species all host distinct lineages
of chemoautotrophic proteobacteria in their gill tissue as adults that provide
the bulk of their nutrition. Previous work in this region showed a structured
snail species distribution that corresponds to the concentrations of key
chemical substrates for symbiont chemoautotrophic metabolism, suggesting that
snail species are sorting into geochemical habitats based on symbiont
physiology. It is not clear if this sorting is occurring among established
snail-bacteria symbioses, or whether environmental effects on the availability
of specific symbionts are influencing the recruitment of host species, since
arriving and developing snail larvae must obtain their symbionts from the
environment. This study aims to 1) assess the larval supply and population
structure of symbiotic vent snails via collections of larval, juvenile, and
adult snails, 2) investigate the developmental timing of symbiont acquisition
through microscopy and marker gene sequencing of gametes, larvae, and juveniles,
and 3) use metagenomic sequencing to quantify the availability of free-living
symbionts in the environment to arriving larvae. Altogether, this series of
interlinked efforts will allow for an improved understanding of free-living
bacterial symbiont populations, the timing of symbiont acquisition, and host
snail life history, as well as how these things interact to shape vent
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.