* 1736248
* Collaborative Research: Seismic Imaging of the Denali fault zone, Central Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Amir Allam, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 07/31/2020
* USD 207,083.00

The Denali Fault in Central Alaska is one of the longest in the world and it has
been critical to the formation of North America since the time of dinosaurs. The
fault is an important source of hazard - it caused a magnitude 7.9 earthquake in
2002 - but only a handful of geophysical studies have examined its structure. We
know very little about how the fault is shaped and behaves within the Earth's
crust, and we do not know how the rocks change along the length of the fault. We
use new 3D imaging techniques to see the structure of the fault 2-50 kilometers
below the surface, which help us to determine the geologic history of Alaska. To
add further detail to our imaging, we are placing hundreds of coffee-can sized
seismometers in two separate locations to measure the shaking from earthquakes
both locally and from across the planet. This allows much more accurate
estimates of earthquake hazards for the region's residents and millions of
annual visitors. On a larger scale, it shows us how faults work at the edges of
continents, and whether this fault forms the true edge of the North American
geologic plate. Our use of inexpensive, portable instruments and our techniques
to decode specific earthquake wave types are likely to change the way people
study fault zones around the world in the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: We are imaging the Denali
fault at regional scale using joint tomographic inversion of body and surface
waves, and to locally image the damage zone of the 2002 magnitude 7.9 Denali
earthquake. This work is motivated by several unanswered questions specifically
about the Denali fault as well as general fault properties. Does the fault have
a signature in the Moho or upper mantle? Are there persistent contrasts in
across-fault velocity in the crust? What is the relative tectonic importance of
the different fault strands? Are there unique damage zone patterns that result
from supershear ruptures? Where are the preferred nucleation sites for large
earthquakes, and what are the patterns of shaking that can be expected?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, only a handful of geophysical studies have
examined the Denali fault in isolated sections as part of regional-scale linear
transects across central Alaska. Multiple tomographic studies have successfully
imaged the structure of the subduction zone and underlying Yakutat plate beneath
the region, but they have not achieved sufficient horizontal resolution to image
the crustal and upper mantle structure of the Denali fault. There is little
constraint on the fault zone structure at depth and the along-strike variation
of deformation patterns. To resolve the regional-scale structure of the Denali
fault, we are tomographically imaging the fault from the surface to 70km depth
using newly-developed joint inversion techniques combining ambient noise
Rayleigh wave phase velocities and body wave double-difference measurements
which achieve kilometer-scale resolution in both Vp and Vs. In the process, we
are also building improved catalogs of arrival times for P, S, and fault zone
head waves. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the local scale, no seismological study has
been conducted to examine the fault damage zone and principal slip surface
structure. At other major strike-slip faults, linear or two-dimensional arrays
of seismometers with spacing less than 100m have successfully detected fault
zone head waves that propagate along (semi-)vertical interfaces with contrasting
velocities and fault zone trapped waves confined inside fault-related low-
velocity zones consisting of damaged rocks. These two seismic phases, unique to
fault zones, can be exploited to provide constraint on fault structure relevant
to the mechanics of earthquake rupture. Leveraging the recent development of
low-cost highly-portable three-component seismometers, we are deploying hundreds
of instruments in dense fault-straddling arrays for one month each at two
locations along the Denali fault. The density and richness of the first dataset,
which we've already recorded, are unique not just to the Denali fault zone, but
to all major strike-slip faults worldwide. Our preliminary analysis, including
trapped wave detection and high-frequency ambient noise cross-correlation,
contains critical information about the damage zone structure in a section of
the fault that recently slipped in a supershear rupture. These data demonstrate
the feasibility of further analysis including ambient noise tomography, trapped
wave normal modes, and fault zone head wave detection.