* 1736028
* Oscillatory phase dynamics coordinate cognitive neural networks
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Bradley Voytek, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 490,977.00

One of the most fundamental questions in neuroscience is how the 86 billion
neurons in the&lt;br/&gt;human brain can coordinate their activity to give rise
to our amazing cognitive abilities. With&lt;br/&gt;support from the National
Science Foundation, Dr. Voytek and his research team at UC San&lt;br/&gt;Diego
will examine the role that rhythmic fluctuations in the brain's electrical
activity, namely neural&lt;br/&gt;oscillations or 'brain waves', play in shaping
how the brain processes information and how&lt;br/&gt;groups of neurons
communicate with one another. Using a sophisticated blend of
human&lt;br/&gt;electrophysiology and innovative brain-state-dependent stimulus
presentation, these projects&lt;br/&gt;will test how neural oscillations route
the flow of information influence the brain's activity and,&lt;br/&gt;therefore,
impact learning and memory. The results of these projects have broad
implications&lt;br/&gt;ranging from age-related cognitive decline to cognitive
enhancement. Additionally, this award&lt;br/&gt;will provide the resources for
building open source methods and tutorials for analyzing complex,&lt;br/&gt;non-
linear neural data, as well as support Dr. Voytek's extensive work in
science&lt;br/&gt;communication and outreach. These open science, science
communication, and diversity&lt;br/&gt;outreach initiatives will be distributed
freely online with code and other materials and, ultimately,&lt;br/&gt;may be
expanded into a Summer School focused on training students how to analyze
oscillatory&lt;br/&gt;neural data and how to communicate their research to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These projects will extend our understanding of
oscillatory phase as a neural communication&lt;br/&gt;mechanism. This is
critical, as oscillations have been implicated in healthy cognitive
functioning&lt;br/&gt;by allowing for efficient information transmission, top-
down attentional control, cognitive control,&lt;br/&gt;and working memory
maintenance, among many other functions. By extension,
dysfunctional&lt;br/&gt;phase dynamics may underlie a variety of cognitive
disruptions such as those seen in normal&lt;br/&gt;aging, as well as in
psychiatric and neurological disease. These projects will
significantly&lt;br/&gt;advance our understanding of network phase dynamics in
human cognition specifically, and as&lt;br/&gt;a general a computational
mechanism in general. This award will also support the development&lt;br/&gt;of
a suite of computational tools, open source methods, and code for analyzing
oscillatory&lt;br/&gt;phase networks and their computational capacity.
Additionally, it will support continued&lt;br/&gt;development of a system for
real-time, phase-triggered stimulus presentation, which will
open&lt;br/&gt;entirely new avenues of cognitive research.