* 1736280
* Trace Element Organic Speciation along the US GEOTRACES Pacific Meridional Transect
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Daniel Repeta, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 12/31/2021
* USD 639,828.00

In many areas of the ocean microbes live in an environment that has very little
of the nutrients they need to grow and thrive. In particular, nutrients with
nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), and iron (Fe), needed for the synthesis of
proteins and nucleic acids, are in short supply. Iron is supplied to the ocean
by dust blowing off the continents, and in areas remote from land, microbial
life is limited by the very low concentrations of iron dissolved in seawater. To
extract iron from their surroundings, some microbes synthesize and release
organic compounds called siderophores into their environment. Siderophores are
specifically designed to bind iron and transport it back into the cell. But only
recently have we had the technology to measure siderophores in seawater, and we
do not know where or when they are used, or which microbes are making and using
them. The study proposed here is designed to address all of these questions. We
will measure siderophores in the Pacific Ocean along a track from Alaska to
Tahiti. The distribution of siderophores will be compared with data from other
measurements (nutrients, cell numbers, genomics) to understand how microbes are
able to live in very low iron environments, and how they can use organic
compounds to extract metals from seawater. The study will also allow us test and
improve the technology of measuring iron and other metals (mercury, copper, and
cadmium, for example) bonded to organic compounds in other environmental
samples, such as ground-waters, lakes and rivers, which is important for
monitoring the toxicity of metal contaminants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nearly all iron dissolved in the ocean is
complexed by strong organic ligands of unknown composition. The effect of ligand
composition on microbial iron acquisition is poorly understood, but amendment
experiments using model ligands show they can facilitate or impede iron uptake
depending on their identity. Here we propose to measure the molecular speciation
of a suite of bioactive trace element (iron, copper, cobalt, nickel, and zinc)
ligands (TE-Ls) in particulate and dissolved organic matter across the US
GEOTRACES Pacific Meridional Transect (PMT). We will use high pressure liquid
chromatography coupled to inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry to detect
and quantify TE-Ls, and companion electrospray ionization mass spectra to
identify and characterize organic ligands. The PMT will cross five different
biogeochemical provinces: shelf/slope, subarctic high nutrient/low chlorophyll
(HNLC), North Pacific oligotrophic gyre, equatorial HNLC, and South Pacific
oligotrophic gyre. The cruise track further intersects at least three different
subsurface features, the subarctic and equatorial particle veils, oxygen
deficient waters, and mid depth hydrothermal plumes. We expect the unique
physical, chemical, and biological properties that characterize these regimes
and features will lead to very different TE-L distributions across and down the
water column. TE-L molecular speciation measurements will enable us to better
integrate datasets of trace element distribution with metagenomic datasets of
nutrient-driven changes in microbial metabolism across some of the Earth?s major
biomes.