* 1736652
* Collaborative Research: US GEOTRACES PMT: Investigating geochemical tracers of the Pacific nitrogen cycle and budget
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Daniel Sigman, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 12/31/2022
* USD 361,380.00

Nitrate is an important nutrient that marine plants and algae need for growth.
It is abundant in deep ocean waters, but scarce in most sunlit surface waters.
The purpose of this project is to better understand what controls the
availability of nitrate in the deep ocean and its delivery to surface waters.
Researchers from Stanford University, Princeton University, and Brown University
will analyze the stable isotopes of seawater nitrate collected between Alaska
and Tahiti in the Pacific Ocean. The data will provide information about the
supply of nitrate to a large section of the Pacific Ocean and allow informed
decisions on past and future changes in marine photosynthesis. This
collaborative project will be carried under the GEOTRACES program, an
international effort to understand the distribution of elements in the global
ocean. This study will include undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
researchers at all three academic instititutions. The investigators will develop
a 1-day workshop for the Teachers as Scholars program, for middle and high
school teachers at Princeton University. The workshop will focus on accessing
and visualizing ocean data sets and other content available on the internet for
project-based learning in the classroom. Investigators will also participate in
teacher workshops offered each summer at Stanford University. Data from this
project will be made available to the public through the Biological and Chemical
Oceanography-Data Management Office (www.bco-dmo.org). The data will also be
compiled in GEOTRACES data products that will be freely
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The isotopic composition of nitrate in the ocean
interior records biogeochemical and physical processes on the time scales of
years, decades, centuries, and millennia, with the shallow subsurface and deep
ocean recording shorter and longer time scales, respectively. These are
meaningful time scales in the efforts to (1) understand the feedbacks that
structure the biogeochemistry of N in the ocean, ocean productivity, and the
global carbon cycle, (2) reconstruct past changes in ocean biogeochemistry and
carbon cycling, and (3) perhaps predict future changes. This proposal seeks to
analyze the nitrate isotopes during the upcoming US GEOTRACES Pacific Meridional
Transect (GP15) between Alaska and Tahiti. Nitrate isotopes provide critical
constraints on the ocean N cycle and budget, especially in the Pacific Ocean
where a variety of processes affect the distribution of nitrate and its supply
to surface waters. This largely meridional section of nitrate isotope data will
be broadly useful as part of the growing nitrate isotope dataset for the global
ocean and for comparison to the many complementary geochemical data sets that
will be generated as part of this GEOTRACES effort. In addition, nitrate
isotopes in aerosols will be measured to support interpretations of nitrate
isotopes in surface waters along the section. The proposed measurements will
contribute to the investigation of three overarching questions: 1) What are the
similarities and differences in N biogeochemistry among the different nutrient-
rich regions in the Pacific basin: the Southern Ocean, equatorial Pacific, and
subarctic North Pacific, and how do they affect nitrate supply to low-latitude
surface waters? 2) What sources of nitrogen fuel export production in surface
waters across the Pacific? 3) What are the roles in surface and subsurface
processes in the distribution of nitrate isotopes in the ocean interior?