* 1736066
* I-Corps: Meibomian Gland Dysfunction Treatment Apparatus
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2018
* Daniel Mooradian, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 02/28/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide a
superior methos for the treatment for dry eye syndrome. Dry eye affects tens of
millions of people in the United States alone. The symptoms of dry eye are vast
and varied however even mild symptoms are detrimental to one's quality of life.
Meibomian Gland Dysfunction (MGD) is the most common contributor to dry eye, and
the current treatment options are either ineffective, inconvenient, or extremely
expensive. The technology developed here is a device that supplies superior
effectiveness and convenience over current treatment options. The introduction
of a device with these superior aspects has an opportunity to deter the
progression of dry eye syndrome and thus decrease the cost to both patients and
the healthcare market as a whole. The goal of developing a convenient and
effective MGD treatment option creates an opportunity to be a leader in the $3
billion dry eye market and relieve the dry eye symptoms experienced by
millions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will focus on developing a
thorough consumer and stake holder comprehension in order to explore the
utilization of a novel dry eye treatment device. Meibomian Gland Dysfunction
(MGD) has only recently been identified as the leading cause of dry eye symptoms
and thus current treatment options are limited. The technology developed here
utilizes a reusable design in a unique way that promotes natural Meibomian gland
expression and improved customer convenience. This solution has potential to
gain traction with clinicians through mimicking effective office procedures and
supporting known anatomical functions.