* 1736621
* Collaborative Research:  Heat flow mapping and quantification at ASHES hydrothermal vent field using an observatory imaging sonar
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Leonid Germanovich, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 15,845.00

The movement of heat from inside the Earth into the ocean is a key factor
influencing ocean dynamics, chemical exchange, and life in the oceans. However,
until now, it has not been possible to monitor, in real time and over long
periods of time, the fluids venting from seafloor hydrothermal vents even though
these fluids carry a significant amount of internal geothermal heat from deep in
the ocean crust to the seafloor. This project overcomes this problem by
installing newly tested instrumentation, a Cabled Observatory Vent Imaging Sonar
system, capable of long term monitoring of hydrothermal vent fluid fluxes, on
the National Science Foundation's recently completed Ocean Observing
Initiative's cabled observatory at the ASHES hydrothermal field in the caldera
of Axial Volcano on the Juan de Fuca Ridge. This sonar system is designed for
imaging hydrothermal discharge and the measuring heat transferred by that
discharge into the ocean from the subseafloor. One goal of the work is to
continue improving the system and developing it into a reliable tool for long-
term repeated quantification of hydrothermal activity (fluid flow and heat
transport) using acoustic sensing. The resulting heat transport measurements
will enable investigation of the connections between the volcanic system, which
supplies heat to the surrounding rock; subsurface fluid flow processes; and the
biological systems that depend on the reduced chemical species that emanate from
the hydrothermal system as a result of the leaching of metals and other
compounds from water-rock interaction in the subsurface. This second deployment
of the cabled sonar system will test its ability to measure and couple discharge
rates and heat transport. Broader impacts of the work include increasing
infrastructure for science and applications that extend to monitoring and
measuring the discharge rates of methane at methane seeps and/or oil at oil-well
head blowouts such as Deep Water Horizon. The work will also result in the
training of undergraduates and the integration of education and research.
Results will also be disseminated to the public via lectures and media outlets.

One of the most important field measurements needed for the study of coupled
geo-bio-hydrothermal systems is heat flux. This is a fundamental property of
seafloor hydrothermal systems. It connects its driving force (i.e., sub-seafloor
heat sources such as volcanic magma or serpentinization) to the systems it
impacts, such as the flux of chemicals into the ocean. It also exerts controls
on the subsurface and surface biosphere. Previous attempts to adequately measure
seafloor hydrothermal heat flux have been unable to measure it with the combined
spatial/temporal coverage and resolution necessary to resolve the dynamics of
venting. The installation of the recently developed and tested sonar system that
will be installed on the National Science Foundation's recently commissioned
Ocean Observatory Initiative cabled array at the ASHES hydrothermal vent field
on the Juan de Fuca Ridge will enable the monitoring and quantification of
hydrothermal discharge and the heat transferred by it from rocks below the
seafloor to the ocean. The sonar system is able to make synoptic measurements
across a significant areal extent of the vent field and can collect and transmit
data for periods of up to several years. This greatly reduces the need for
extrapolation in the data. In addition to the monitoring, this research will
exploit an innovative method for inversion of acoustic data to estimate the heat
flux of diffuse-flow around the vents using a newly developed acoustic method.
Deployment of the instrument will be for 4 years. It will be combined with
ground-truth measurements to establish the accuracy of the acoustic results in
terms of flow rates for focused and diffuse flow and for temperature/heat flux.
The resulting time series for heat flux from focused and diffuse sources has a
broad range of applicability. In particular, heat flux values and variations
have implications for the dynamics of hydrothermal venting at ASHES and its
connections with seismicity, magma supply, crustal cooling, and basalt-water
interactions. It also exerts influence on heat and chemical changes in the
ocean, energy and nutritive supplies to seafloor ecosystems; and the extent and
nature of the subsurface biosphere.