* 1736209
* CREST Center for Security and Privacy Enhanced Cloud Computing (C-SPECC)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* John Prevost, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 08/31/2024
* USD 5,000,000.00

The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST) program
supports the enhancement of research capabilities of minority-serving
institutions through the establishment of centers that effectively integrate
education and research. CREST promotes the development of new knowledge,
enhancements of the research productivity of individual faculty, and an expanded
presence of students historically underrepresented in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center's
research topic is of national importance and complexity as security and privacy
are two main factors limiting the acceptance of Cloud Computing technology. The
Center also addresses the national need to fulfill the shortage of a well-
prepared cyber security workforce. The Center encompasses the University of
Texas at San Antonio Colleges of Science, Engineering, Business and Education.
It will partner with a San Antonio headquartered cloud service provider,
Northside Independent School District, and the National Institute of Standards
and Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Texas at San Antonio will
establish a multi-disciplinary Center for Security and Privacy Enhanced Cloud
Computing dedicated to integrated education and research at the intersection of
cloud computing and cyber security. Center goals are: (i) to become nationally
recognized for excellence in research, innovation and education in security and
privacy enhanced cloud computing, (ii) to increase the participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM professions, especially high technology
computing, and (iii) to pursue innovative research-based educational strategies
for grades 8-12, undergraduate and graduate students in this field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center articulates three research thrusts: Protection,
Detection and Policy. The Protection sub-project will develop access control,
private computing and protected computing technologies for cloud computing. The
Detection sub-project will focus on system and host monitoring techniques to
detect anomalous activity in a cloud along with digital forensic techniques for
cloud-based systems. The Policy sub-project will research policy specification,
composition and verification techniques for secure cloud computing.