* 1736563
* Markov chain Monte Carlo inversion of Rock Deformation Data: Applications to the Dynamics of Oceanic Mantle
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2017,01/31/2020
* Jun Korenaga, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 01/31/2020
* USD 161,232.00

The dynamics of Earth's mantle are responsible for all kinds of geological
activities including earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, continental drift, and
even the long-term carbon cycle that regulates the surface temperature. The most
important parameter of mantle dynamics is viscosity, which dictates how fast
rocks can deform, but viscosity is also among the least understood properties of
Earth materials. Rock deformation experiments provide important constraints on
viscosity, but laboratory conditions are vastly different from mantle
conditions; the rate of deformation for the mantle is 10 orders of magnitude
slower than that for the laboratory experiments. By combining recent progress in
the analysis of experimental data with a new kind of geodynamical modeling, the
proposed project will build a theoretical framework that effectively bridges
rock deformation experiments and geophysical observations and allows an improved
understanding of mantle viscosity. Owing to its relatively simple tectonic
setting, the dynamics of the oceanic mantle will serve as an ideal test bed for
this multidisciplinary project. The project supports the training of a graduate
student and provides topics for undergraduate students conducting senior
research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The deformation of silicate rocks
depends on a number of factors, including temperature, pressure, stress, grain
size, water content, melt fraction, and oxygen fugacity. Incorporating such
factors into geophysical modeling has become increasingly more common in recent
years. At the same time, there have been two important threads of development in
experimental rock mechanics, both of which can directly impact such efforts to
incorporate the knowledge of rock mechanics into geophysical modeling. First,
the rheology of olivine aggregates, which is usually thought to control the
dynamics of the upper mantle, has long been considered to be governed mostly by
the combination of diffusion creep and dislocation creep, but recent
experimental studies suggest that grain boundary sliding may play a more
important role than previously thought. Second, we have seen the development of
a new statistical framework, using Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling,
that helps us to tackle the full complexity of estimating flow laws from
deformation data. The improved command of MCMC inversion puts us into a unique
position to conduct a new kind of geophysical modeling for the dynamics of
suboceanic mantle by taking advantage of recent progress in both experimental
rock mechanics and observational seismology. This project has three major
objectives: (1) construct candidate flow-law models for olivine aggregates based
on published experimental data; (2) conduct probabilistic modeling for the
dynamics of suboceanic mantle; and (3) identify key flow-law uncertainties and
design possible experimental setups that can resolve such uncertainties. The
approach based on probabilistic modeling has potential to bring a better
understanding of not only the dynamics of suboceanic mantle but also the
rheology of olivine aggregates.