* 1736708
* A Stochastic Approach to Representing Unresolved Mesoscales in Ocean Circulation Models
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* William Kleiber, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 577,715.00

Ocean models are indispensable tools for understanding, estimating, and
predicting ocean dynamics. A key challenge in the construction of accurate ocean
models is the fact that computational resources preclude direct resolution of
all physical scales; depending on their intended use, the next generation of
global ocean models will have horizontal spatial resolutions from 1 degree to
1/10 degree. Models at the coarser end of this range, which support longer-term
ensemble forecasting (e.g. climate prediction) and reanalysis applications, are
unable to represent the scale of the most energetic dynamics, the mesoscale,
over large regions of the globe. Mesoscale eddies (on order 100 km) play a
leading role in the transport of heat and biogeochemical tracers, and the
parameterization of their effects in global ocean models has a long history.
High-resolution models support shorter-term forecasting and studies of ocean
dynamical processes, but they are too expensive for long-term or large-ensemble
applications. An emerging paradigm in modeling the effects of unresolved scales
in ocean (and atmosphere) models is based on the observation that unresolved
small-scale dynamics interact with resolvable dynamics in a non-deterministic
way; the net tracer transports associated with these unresolved scales are
stochastic, and require stochastic models. The construction of accurate,
stochastic models of real physical fields is a young field of research, as is
the field of stochastic parameterization into computational ocean models. This
project will significantly extend both these fields by bringing to bear
sophisticated statistical models and systematic Bayesian optimization to ocean
modeling. The project will also provide training for a post-doctoral fellow at
the intersection of physical oceanography and applied mathematics. It will
strengthen collaborations between university-based researchers and scientists at
the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) through the Community Earth
System Model (CESM) Ocean Model Working Group (OMWG). A stochastic model of the
global mesoscale eddy field will be developed. A stochastic parameterization of
mesoscale eddies will be implemented and tested in the 1-degree version of the
ocean component of the CESM version 3.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
develop a framework for stochastic parameterization of tracer transports in the
coarse- resolution ocean model setting used for long-term or large ensemble
applications. Unlike other approaches that model the transport directly, the
stochastic approach models the eddy velocity and tracer anomaly fields directly,
and uses them to construct realistic tracer fluxes. This idea has recently begun
to be developed in the context of eddy-permitting ocean models to model
'backscatter' that energizes the partially resolved mesoscale eddies, but only
in the past year or two has it begun to be developed in the coarse-model case,
which is significantly different than the eddy-permitting case. It is
particularly important to develop realistic stochastic parameterizations for
coarse models though, because the ensemble-simulation scenarios for which these
coarse models are increasingly used require realistic patterns of eddy-driven
large-scale variability. The uncertainty associated with mesoscale eddy
transports absolutely must be included in the models via realistic stochastic
parameterizations for the conclusions of these studies to be accurate. A benefit
of this approach is that the eddy fields are easier to model and observe than
the transport; the approach also results in realistic non-Gaussian tracer flux
distributions. The approach works within the Gent-McWilliams (GM) framework and
results in a stochastic parameterization of the eddy bolus velocity. The project
has two main components: (i) the development of a stochastic model of the eddy
field, and (ii) the implementation, thorough testing, and validation of the
associated stochastic parameterization in an IPCC-class global climate model.
Both components will involve close collaboration with scientists in the
Community Earth System Model (CESM) Ocean Model Working Group (OMWG) at NCAR.