* 1736319
* GEOTRACES Pacific Meridional Transect: Measurement of Beryllium-7 as a Tracer of Upper Ocean Processes
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* David Kadko, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2022
* USD 410,338.00

The goal of the international GEOTRACES program is to understand the
distributions of trace chemical elements and their isotopes in the oceans. One
of the stated goals in the GEOTRACES Science Plan is to "create a unique
opportunity for exploration and discovery by determining the distributions of
novel trace elements and isotopes (TEIs) that have received little attention to
date." This is a proposal to make measurements of one such species, the
radioactive isotope beryllium-7 which will provide important biogeochemical rate
information pertinent to the TEIs that will be measured during the 2018 U.S.
GEOTRACES Pacific Meridional transect from Tahiti to Alaska. Many processes in
the ocean cannot be directly observed and as such, tracers are used to provide
important constraints on their rates and pathways. Beryllium-7 is a tracer that,
because of its half-life (53.3 days), allows the study of processes which occur
over time scales and depth scales that are otherwise difficult to obtain but
which are critically important to studies of biological production, nutrient
regeneration, and atmospheric deposition, to name a few. Advances in sampling
and analytical techniques, coupled with a better understanding of the behavior
of Be-7 in ocean biogeochemical cycles, present an opportunity to fully utilize
this tracer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work has three main
components:&lt;br/&gt;1) Measurements of Be-7 in the surface waters and in the
lower atmosphere along the cruise track will provide estimates of the
atmospheric input of relevant TEIs. The atmospheric input into the global ocean
is an important budgetary component of numerous chemical species, yet is very
difficult to constrain. The data generated in this work will be available to
allow ground-truthing of models of aerosol deposition and atmospheric input of
trace elements.&lt;br/&gt;2) Water column measurements of Be-7 provide a tracer
of physical processes, such as mixing and upwelling, which redistribute
biologically active species. Given quantitative knowledge of the circulation,
mixing and ventilation of the water masses within which TEIs reside allows an
assessment of the time- and space-integrated in situ biogeochemical behavior of
these elements.&lt;br/&gt;3) The rate of oxygen utilization within the upper
thermocline will be determined by water column measurements of Be-7 coupled with
collected hydrographic data and observed oxygen distributions. The seasonal
timescale afforded by Be-7 is ideal for estimating OUR within the shallow water
just beneath the euphotic zone, where the most significant C remineralization is
occurring. The project will support undergraduate student researchers at Florida
International University, a leading minority serving institution. Lead
investigator Kadko will participate in the Nippon Foundation - Partnership for
Observation of the Global Oceans Center of Excellence (NF-POGO CofE), a unique
platform which aims to provide world class training programs for students from
emerging countries. Kadko will be offering an advanced topic course in chemical
oceanography to these students during a stay at the Alfred Wegener Institute of
Polar Studies. This outreach effort is consistent with the capacity building and
educational goals of GEOTRACES as well as promoting international collaboration.