* 1736686
* IODP Expedition 363 Objective Research: Evolution of the Indo-Pacific warm pool and deep Pacific circulation during major global climate transitions since the latest Miocene
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Ana Ravelo, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Daniel McCorkle
* 08/31/2021
* USD 319,601.00

Because of the enormous capacity of the world?s oceans to absorb, store, and
release heat and carbon, it is critically important to study the role of the
oceans in global climate change and in the global carbon cycle. The Indo-Pacific
warm pool (IPWP) is the largest mass of very warm surface ocean temperatures
(&amp;#8805;28&amp;#730;C) of the world?s oceans and the biggest source of
energy and moisture to the atmosphere; as such, it is intimately linked to
atmospheric circulation, rainfall patterns, and global climate. Beneath the
surface ocean is the deep Pacific, which is the largest basin of the world?s
ocean with enormous capacity to store carbon and heat. Thus, it plays a critical
role in the carbon cycle, in heat transport, and in global climate change.
Although it is clear from studies of modern conditions that the IPWP and the
deep Pacific are crucial components of the climate system, there is a lot that
is not understood about how these regions respond to, and participate in, long
term global climate change especially in a warming world. To probe these topics,
this project is focused on past geological epochs when global climate was
dramatically different than today. This project will involve a post-doctoral
scholar and at least ten undergraduates at UCSC, thereby providing critical
training and mentoring for an early career scientist and for undergraduates
seeking training in STEM fields. There will be special attention placed on
undergraduates being involved in original research and in recruiting a diverse
team of researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the
early Pliocene warm period and the transition to the cold Ice Age climate of the
Pleistocene. This time interval (6 ? 0 million years ago) provides valuable
tests of our understanding of the behavior of the climate during warm periods
and during major long-term climate transitions. To this end, from Oct. 6 to Dec.
8, 2016, the International Ocean Discovery Program Expedition 363 (IODP Exp 363)
recovered ~7 km of sediment from nine sites in the IPWP region. As part of an
international collaborative effort with other IODP Exp 363 shipboard scientists,
this project will achieve two of the primary objectives of IODP Exp 363. First,
to test the null hypothesis that the IPWP was stable even while there were major
changes in global climate, planktonic foraminifera surface and subsurface Mg/Ca-
temperature estimates covering the last 6 myrs at several IPWP sites (U1482/3
and U1488) will be generated. Comparison between these sites, and comparison to
other temperature proxy measurements will be critical for evaluating proxy
biases, the role of the thermocline, and the influence of the Indo-Pacific
Throughflow, on the evolution of the IPWP. Second, to test the idea that there
was North Pacific deep water formation in the latest Miocene and warm Pliocene
period, benthic foraminifera isotope records at two West Pacific sites (U1488
and U1489) will be generated. Comparison to published benthic isotope data from
elsewhere in the Pacific, and to modeling simulations, will put these new
measurements into a global context. These data will also be critical to the
development of high-resolution age models, providing a key framework for other
researchers working on the cores. Overall, the results of this project will be
combined with data being generated by other Expedition 363 scientists, and with
ocean and climate modelers, in order to achieve a deeper mechanistic
understanding of the role of the Indo-Pacific region in global climate
processes. In addition, it will determine if North Pacific deep water formed and
contributed to global heat transport during past periods of warmth.