* 1736285
* The Equatorial Line Observations Campaign: Physical Oceanography within the Maritime Continent
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Janet Sprintall, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 413,663.00

The Maritime Continent (MC) is a critical region in the global weather and
climate system forcing global atmospheric variability on sub-seasonal to decadal
time scales, and is the core region for the Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO).
Nonetheless the multi-scale interactions of the atmosphere, ocean and land
surfaces in the MC region are sparsely observed, poorly understood and badly
represented in models, leading to large systematic errors in extended range
forecasts such as precipitation. Propagation by the MJO eastward through the MC
is the least predictable part of the MJO lifecycle. The MC islands create a
natural barrier to this propagation by fostering land-air-sea interaction,
especially on diurnal time scales. This project is to support the physical
oceanography measurements of the MC as part of the interdisciplinary Equatorial
Line Observations (ELO) field campaign. The main objective of the ELO field
campaign is to use the collected in situ, remotely sensed and state-of-the-art
numerical models to characterize diurnal cycles of atmospheric convection and
upper ocean temperature during CCKW and MJO propagation across the MC region. An
improved understanding of the air-sea interactions in the MC region would result
in the advancement of forecasting in a densely populated region (i.e., MC).
Improved reliability of weather and climate forecasts will benefit the
policymakers, strategic planners, insurance industry and food security
industries that use these predictions for decision-making. Collaboration between
scientists from the USA, UK and Indonesia will contribute to research diversity
and capacity building among all the involved institutions with great benefit for
the early career researchers involved in this project. The data and results from
ELO will be widely disseminated at conferences, YMC workshops and in
publications.&lt;br/&gt;The ELO observational network will consist of three
land-based and two ocean-based stations along the equator spanning from the
eastern Indian Ocean to Sumatra and across the shallow Karimata Strait to
Borneo. This experimental design allows for coherent observations of dynamical
and thermodynamical properties of the atmosphere and ocean during CCKW and MJO
events across the MC. Meteorological and oceanographic instruments will be
deployed to measure upper ocean stratification, surface fluxes, precipitation
and atmospheric stratification to characterize the coupled air-sea variability
in the presence of CCKWs and the MJO. In this physical oceanography component of
the project, two moored chains of discrete temperature and salinity sensors will
be deployed within the shallow waters of Karimata Strait. The purpose is to
study the evolution of the upper ocean warm layer stratification associated with
the diurnal convection and its variability. In particular, the team is
interested in how the shallow seas in the Karimata Strait might precondition the
propagating CCKW and MJO systems before reaching Borneo. They will address the
importance of diurnal upper ocean temperature within the warm layer on the
evolution (enhancement or decay) of atmospheric convection during its nighttime
offshore propagation and in turn the impact of nocturnal precipitation on
oceanic barrier layer development and subsequent development of a warm layer in
the following days.