* 1736516
* Using Seafloor Compliance to image the Crust around Hawaii
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* M. Gabrielle Laske, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 08/31/2020
* USD 260,766.00

Hawaii has long been the textbook example of a hotspot, where Earth's convecting
mantle allows hot mantle rock to ascend through a relatively narrow and isolated
mantle plume. This ascending material ultimately erupts at the surface in
Hawaii's volcanoes. One of the most challenging questions concerns the geometry
of a plume. In laboratory tanks that are heated from below, plumes are usually
vertical and straight. But in a convecting spherical Earth, plumes should have
more complex geometries. A key tool to trace plumes through Earth's mantle is
seismic imaging. To image the Hawaiian plume, the PLUME seismic experiment
(Plume-Lithosphere Undersea Melt Experiment) deployed 80 seismometers in a 1000
km array across the Hawaiian region from 2005 to 2007 to collect earthquake
data. Initial seismic tomographic images trace the plume down to 1000 km depth
and reveal a complex geometry. One of the most surprising results is that the
mantle plume appears to approach the surface from the west and not from the
southeast as is commonly assumed. To draw more definitive conclusions however,
the initial mantle images must be improved by removing the distorting effects
caused by complex features in Earth's crust, which were ignored in the initial
processing. This project will examine a new type of data called seafloor
compliance, which is the deformation of the seafloor due to pressure variations
from long period ocean waves that pass by the stations. This deformation or
compliance strongly depends on the specific type of crustal rock beneath the
station. By analyzing seafloor compliance, the project will catalog new and
crucial details of Hawaii's crustal structure and refine the plume imaging. In
terms of broader impacts, this project will support a graduate student and will
make research results accessible to the wider community through teaching and
public lectures. Dedicated small projects will be used as recruiting tool for
undergraduate students to raise awareness in the Earth sciences and related
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hawaii's location far from any plate boundary
provides an opportunity to test basic hypotheses regarding plume/plate
interaction and related magmatism. Initial seismic tomography conducted for the
Plume-Lithosphere Undersea Melt Experiment (PLUME) has revealed the first high-
resolution 3-D images that support the presence of a deep-rooted mantle plume,
but the complexity of findings motivate a revision of the classic plume concept.
Some aspects of seismic imaging remain controversial, specifically the
continuity of the plume within the mantle, its interaction with the mantle
transition zone and the exact magma pathways in the very shallow mantle and
crust. A potential problem with published models is that mantle images were
produced assuming a relatively simple crustal architecture. Even rather modest
changes in crustal structure can profoundly impact the imaging of regions
beneath, and may even cascade downward into the lower mantle. Artifacts in the
mantle images may lead to false conclusions about geodynamical, geochemical and
geological processes that ultimately cause Hawaii's volcanism. This project
focuses on combining shallow-focus seismic datasets to illuminate Hawaii's crust
and shallowest mantle. The primary dataset is seafloor compliance, the transfer
function between pressure exerted by passing infragravity waves and the
resulting seafloor deformation. Seafloor compliance is particularly sensitive to
shear velocity in the ocean sediments. These new data will be combined with
other crust-sensitive datasets such as high-frequency Rayleigh wave dispersion
maps, crustal receiver functions and ambient-noise Empirical Green's Functions.
The resulting new crustal model will allow revision of mantle models and plume
geometry with much more fidelity than is currently available.