* 1736249
* RII Track-2 FEC: Using Natural Variation to Educate, Innovate, and Lead (UNVEIL): A Collaborative Research Network to Advance Genome-to-Phenome Connections in the Wild
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Zac Cheviron, University of Montana
* Cooperative Agreement
* Eric Lindquist
* 07/31/2023
* USD 4,599,660.00

Non-technical description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how organisms
function in complex environments and how they acclimate and adapt to
environmental challenges, remains a central problem in biology. This Research
Infrastructure Improvement Track-2 Focused EPSCoR Collaborations (RII Track-2
FEC) award capitalizes on complementary research strengths at the University of
Montana (UM) and the University of Nebraska - Lincoln (UNL) to address
fundamental scientific questions that are relevant to adaptation fitness and
conservation of wild populations. The project team members will form a network
?Using Natural Variation to Educate, Innovate, and Lead (UNVEIL)? to work
collaboratively on three core research projects. These projects use newly
developed genomic technologies to understand the genetic basis of traits that
influence the survival of wild animals and plants in changing environments. This
interdisciplinary research will not only advance the understanding of how
organisms cope with environmental challenges, but will also generate fundamental
knowledge about how complex traits arise from variation in genomes. Such general
insights have major implications that extend to conservation biology,
agriculture, and medicine. To help ensure that the research advances have real-
world utility, the UNVEIL network members will work closely with other
stakeholders to develop guidelines for the application of genomic information to
conservation. The project brings together an interdisciplinary group of
philosophers, geneticists, wildlife biologists, and natural resource managers to
develop guidelines for when and how genomic interventions should be used. The
UNVEIL network will also provide an ideal environment for the development of
early career faculty and for training postdoctoral fellows and students in
cutting-edge science and the ethical complexities of using genomic insights in
conservation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Newly developed systems genetics approaches to
understand the links between genotype and phenotype have rarely been applied to
natural populations in the context of environmental gradients. This project
seeks to meet this challenge by harnessing systems genetics to advance the
understanding of the genetic basis of fitness-related traits in natural
populations. The focus will be on three distinct species: the snowshoe hare for
its seasonal color molts; deer mice for its hypoxia response to altitude
changes; and Yellowstone monkeyflowers for its survival on hot soils. These
scientific research activities are paired with an ethics project explicitly
considering whether, when, and how to translate genomic knowledge into
conservation interventions. The project engages early-career faculty in
research, education, and outreach activities and mentors them for leading
positions as they progress in their careers. In addition, the project will
provide independent research opportunities to postdoctoral fellows and
interdisciplinary training to graduate students and empower the next generation
of genome scientists to apply genomic insights to conservation challenges.
Recruitment of postdoctoral fellows and graduate and undergraduate students will
focus on increasing the participation of underrepresented minority groups.
Annual symposia, workshops, exchange visits, and other training opportunities
will be coordinated by faculty members at UM and UNL together with other network
members from state and federal organizations. Stakeholder communications will be
facilitated by video products created by media arts students and scientists
working together in translating the research results and scientific concepts for
general audiences.