* 1736414
* AMPS: Financial Mathematics to Identify Optimal Electricity Distribution Pricing under Risk, High Photovoltaics Penetration, and Consumer Aggregation
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Benjamin Hobbs, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2021
* USD 239,823.00

With an increase in popularity of distributed generation, such as rooftop solar
Photovoltaics, consumers and utilities are faced with new operations and
planning challenges. These challenges arise from the nature of this generation,
whose individual facilities are very small and not controlled by the operator,
and where it is sited, either on the consumer's side of the power meter or on
the low-voltage grid. The goal of this project is, on the one hand, to calculate
the optimal investment by consumers in distributed electricity generation, while
allowing for possibility of an enrollment in a load aggregation program. While
on the other hand, the goal is to provide a way for the power utilities to
efficiently and transparently calculate their distribution charges used to
recover their network investment, and to understand how the level and form of
those charges affects consumer decisions to invest in distributed energy and
perhaps disconnect from the grid. In addition to the creation of an additional
course in the applied mathematics curriculum, it is expected that this project
will also lead to opportunities and connections with both utilities and
regulators, by informing their understanding of interactions of rate regulation
and future demand and distributed generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A framework
of tractable, forward-looking revenue trajectories with stochastic, dynamic
demand will be used to construct optimization problems from a consumer's point
of view. These will be solved in different scenarios with and without
distributed generation. For each scenario, an equilibrium solution for a system
with multiple heterogeneous consumers will be found. Dynamic interactions with
utility ratemaking policies, including feedbacks such as the famous 'death
spiral', are represented. Alternative rate policies for financing distribution
investment and operations will be evaluated for their stability, economic
efficiency, fairness among customer classes, and other objectives of retail rate
regulation. It is unlikely that any one rate regulation policy will be best in
all objectives, so it will be necessary to consider tradeoffs. The resulting
insights will usefully inform policy discussions about regulation and pricing of
the distribution function of electric utilities. The proposed framework will
include basic, simple but tractable models for which general analytical results
can be derived. These in turn will provide the basis for more elaborate
simulation models that will be calibrated for historical accuracy and allow for
a more complicated and realistic assumptions, such as consideration of long run
technology, property value, and policy uncertainties and sub-optimal decision
behavior. The project will demonstrate how modern Financial Mathematics, utility
optimization, dynamical programming, integrating real options, and simulation,
can be used to build more realistic models of the dynamic interaction of
electric distribution charging with consumer decision making under risk aversion
and short-run price volatility. In addition the framework will include longer-
run uncertainties about, e.g., technology and policy changes.