* 1736544
* Shorebased Analysis of Alvin and Sentry High-resolution Sidescan, Multibeam and Imagery Data from the 8 degree, 20' N latitude Seamounts
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2020
* Daniel Fornari, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 06/30/2020
* USD 45,683.00

The ocean basins are underlain by mafic volcanic rocks that are erupted on the
seafloor and originate at mid-ocean ridge spreading centers where upwelling of
mantle material forms ocean crust and volcanic islands and seamounts. Presently,
it is not known how much seafloor lava is erupted from fissures or other places
in the ocean crust that are away from the spreading centers. In 2016, a major
oceanographic expedition was sent out to an enigmatic seamount chain that
extends to the west from the East Pacific Rise at 8째 20'N latitude in the
eastern Pacific Ocean. To enhance the output of this expedition, two deep
submergence platforms, the ALVIN, a human-occupied deep submergence vehicle, and
SENTRY, an autonomous, robotic vehicle that is able to map deep ocean landscapes
and operate independently from the ship and its operators, were added to the
cruise and deployed. SENTRY provided high resolution mapping of the seafloor and
the ALVIN allowed sampling of specific locations within the maps. This allowed
targeted sample collection and selection of the most appropriate sites. It also
provided important geologic context to where samples were taken. These two
platforms returned a large volume (~20 terabytes) of near-bottom ALVIN and
SENTRY data that now require processing. The dataset includes visual
observations and high-resolution digital still and video imagery acquired using
ALVIN, and near-bottom sonar data from SENTRY that provides ~1 m resolution of
the volcanic terrain exposed on the seamount flanks and summits. This research
involves the processing and partial analysis of this unique, high-resolution
dataset in terms of extensive observational, sample and map coverage on volcanic
seafloor away from the axis of a fast-spreading mid-ocean ridge out to seafloor
ages of nearly 2 million years. The results of the processing and analysis is
critical for enhancing the information collected on the expedition and its
interpretation, especially with regard to evaluating relative age(s) of lava
emplacement, quantitative measurement of seafloor topographic features, and
illuminating the nature of seafloor volcanism along the seamount chain. Findings
have important implications for our understanding of magmatic processes that
occur significant distances (20-200 km) from a mid-ocean ridge spreading center
axis where it is believe that most magmatism in the ocean occurs. Results of
this work will also be key for constraining input parameters to geodynamic
models that seek to describe melting processes in the upper mantle at fast-
spreading ocean ridges. Broader impacts include providing important and
complementary data for an major oceanographic expedition that will significantly
enhance the research output, training of an early career scientist, processing a
key dataset for understanding seafloor volcanic processes, and generating maps
that could have importance for military submarine navigation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will process and provide preliminary
analysis of the ALVIN and SENTRY data collected on the 2016, a major
oceanographic expedition that explored the seamount chain that extends to the
west of the East Pacific Rise at 8째 20'N latitude in the eastern Pacific Ocean.
Data compilations and analyses that will be done include: georeferencing ~90,000
digital images acquired during 15 ALVIN dives and conducting quantitative
analysis of the still- and video-imagery to help generate volcanic facies maps
for each of the seamounts. These will be overlain on SENTRY multibeam and
sidescan maps to produce geological maps of the surveyed areas and provide slope
and seafloor textural analysis of SENTRY near-bottom sonar data. These will be
correlated to volcanic feature morphology and sediment distribution that will be
derived from digital still imagery analysis. The work will provide a
morphological and slope analysis of EM122 multibeam data over the entire span of
the 8째 20'N seamount area (~7000 km2) which will permit quantitative
measurements of seamount basal diameters, height, morphology, presence of
craters/calderas (and sizes), and seamount plan-view edifice shape
characterization and aspect ratio. All of this will be done as a function of
distance from the East Pacific Rise as well as the distance from each major
edifice center and distance from adjacent abyssal hill faults. From this
analysis, an estimation of the relative ages of features throughout the 8째 20'N
seamount chain will be done, based on contact relationships with adjacent
cones/edifices and faults at both regional and local scales. All processed data
will be provided to a public data archive with all relevant metadata within two
years. Publications from this work will be linked to data in the relevant data
centers and archives.