* 1736783
* Microbial Oceanography Links to New aerosols in Ice-covered Regions (MjOLNIR) in the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Peter Lee, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 08/31/2022
* USD 682,863.00

The most dramatic environmental changes occurring on the Earth today are taking
place in the Arctic Ocean. Recent models predict that complete summertime Arctic
sea ice loss will likely occur in the first half of the 21st century. The
rapidly-declining areal expanse of summer pack ice will lead to changes in
microbial community structure and production within both sea-ice communities and
in the open waters of the Arctic Ocean. As summer sea ice microbial communities
are replaced by open ocean populations, identifying changes in chemical
compounds, such as various aerosols, that are released to the atmosphere might
play a significant role in determining the future rate and impact of sea ice
decline. The aerosols produced by microorganisms will ultimately move across the
sea to air boundary and could affect cloud formation and with feedbacks that
impact the Arctic system. In this study, the investigators will use state-of-the
art methods to measure the relative abundances of aerosols that are associated
with the microbial communities found in sea ice, melt ponds, sea ice leads, and
in the open ocean. Better understanding of the changes in the structure of these
microbial communities will provide new information for the next generation of
models and may lead to more sophisticated understanding of various climate
feedback loops. In addition, the project involves a collaboration with Swedish
polar researchers and will strengthen scientific linkages between scientists in
the USA and Sweden. The project will support training for graduate and
undergraduate students, and the investigators will share research results with
the public through lectures, as part of the Cultivate Program, and social media.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will investigate how in-situ microbial
community composition and productivity in contrasting sea-ice and open-ocean
Arctic ecosystems impact the production and release of biogenic, volatile
organic carbon (VOC) compounds. These VOC compounds are instrumental in the
release and production of aerosols that ultimately form cloud condensation
nuclei. In addition, the investigators will perform shipboard manipulative
experiments to determine the effects of elevated sea surface temperatures,
enhanced light intensities, and lower salinities resulting from melting sea ice
and enhanced water column stratification. These changes will impose
physiological stress on microbial communities that is likely to impact both
phytoplankton community structure and the flux of the biogenic sulfur trace gas
dimethylsulfide (DMS). The investigators will test how temperature, salinity,
and light will affect the composition of the microbial community and thereby the
catabolic fate of the DMS precursor dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP), to yield
either DMS or methanethiol and methane (CH4). In addition, the investigators
will test whether the high CH4 concentrations observed in Arctic Ocean surface
waters are due to DMSP catabolism or, alternatively, the breakdown of
methylphosphonate. Using state-of-the-art instrumentation, they will monitor VOC
fluxes using a shipboard Proton Transfer Reaction Mass Spectrometer (PTR-MS), a
Membrane Inlet Mass Spectrometer, and high speed sorting flow cytometer to
measure VOCs, net community production, and microbial community composition,
respectively. They will make direct measurements of VOCs within sea ice by using
a newly developed ice crusher attached to the PTR-MS to provide new in-situ data
on the concentrations of DMS and CH4 in sea ice communities.