* 1736115
* Conference: The 4th World Congress on Integrated Computational Materials Engineering (ICME); Ypsilanti, Michigan; 21-25 May 2017
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* George Spanos, Minerals Metals & Materials Society
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 04/30/2018
* USD 15,000.00

This grant provides financial support for the conference entitled The 4th World
Congress on Integrated Computational Materials Engineering (ICME2017) to be held
from May 21-25, 2017 in Ypsilanti, Michigan. Building on the success of the 1st,
2nd and 3rd World Congresses on ICME (held in 2011, 2013, 2015), ICME2017 is the
premier forum for sharing and dissemination of the latest scientific and
engineering advances in this field. Integrated Computational Materials
Engineering (ICME) is an approach that uses computer modeling programs to
predict the behavior of materials and integrate this information into the
overall materials, processing, and manufacturing design cycle. ICME has received
international attention due to its great potential to shorten product
development time, while lowering cost and improving design and manufacturing
outcomes. ICME2017 will bring together researchers, professionals, and engineers
in a setting which facilitates rich discussions and interactions, and aims to
highlight the important advances in ICME on a global scale. Student
participation is greatly encouraged in order to give students exposure to recent
advances in ICME, and thus help prepare the next generation of leaders in this
field. This meeting is open to all interested individuals, including a mixture
of attendees from academic research, government, industry, and educational
professions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of ICME has helped to revolutionize
materials and manufacturing design by providing the potential to shorten product
development time, while lowering the associated costs. The key topical areas
that will be considered at ICME2017 include: (1) the wide range of materials
programs where an ICME approach validated by experimental efforts is applicable,
(2) individual computational methods utilized in ICME, (3) the roles of ICME in
graduate and undergraduate courses, (4) digital infrastructure required for
information sharing and model integration, (5) ICME implementation strategies,
(6) verification, validation, and uncertainty quantification, (7)
interoperability and communications standards, and (8) ICME networking
initiatives worldwide. This world congress will include over 200 presentations
comprising three concurrent sessions, with 140 podium speakers and a robust
poster session. The program has been designed to maximize interaction among
modelers and experimentalists and provide a balance between breadth of
information and depth of discussion and interaction opportunities; various types
of institutions across academia, government, and industry will be represented.
ICME2017 will attempt to provide the most advanced technical meeting possible,
with a mixture of senior and junior investigators, post-doctoral trainees and
students