* 1736021
* Collaborative Research:  A synthesis of EarthScope educational resources integrated into the "Alaska Native Geoscience Learning Experience"
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Jennifer Pickering, Alaska Pacific University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 08/31/2023
* USD 296,157.00

Alaska experiences more earthquake and volcanic activity than any other US
state, and many Alaskan communities are unusually remote and will potentially be
isolated from support during a natural disaster. The EarthScope Alaska Native
Geoscience Learning Experience (EarthScope ANGLE) aims to increase Alaskan
resilience to geohazards through education and building of an action oriented
statewide learning community that connects formal and informal educators,
emergency management personnel, scientists, students, community elders and other
organizations in rural villages. The great earthquakes and tsunamis that
devastated Sumatra on December 26, 2004, Chile on February 27, 2010 and Japan on
March 11, 2011 have heightened public concern about similar geologic hazards in
our own country. As part of a nationwide effort to study earthquakes and the
Earth's crust, the NSF EarthScope Program has been deploying hundreds of
seismic, GPS, and other geophysical instruments across the United States.
Recently deployed in Alaska, these instruments provide detail for ongoing
research showing that coastal regions are storing energy that will be released
in great earthquakes, with resulting tsunamis that may impact the entire west
coast of the US and Hawaii. Thousands of Alaskan residents live within severe
earthquake-shaking and tsunami-inundation zones, and millions of tourists visit
state and federal parks in these same areas each year. Teachers in the K-12
school systems convey some basics about geological hazards to their students,
and park rangers and museum educators likewise engage visitors at their sites.
Both of these groups also at times work with emergency managers. ANGLE is
strengthening these efforts by providing community-based workshops that bring
together all of these professionals to review the basic science of earthquakes
and tsunamis, learn about EarthScope and other research efforts that monitor the
dynamic Earth in the region, and develop ways to collectively engage students
and the general public on the mitigation of coastal geologic
hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ANGLE project is a collaborative effort among
geoscience educators from Alaska Pacific University and Central Washington
University with the Alaska Native Science and Engineering Program (ANSEP) at the
University of Alaska Anchorage. From 2017-2020, four Educator Professional
Development workshops and eight ANSEP academies for Alaska Native students will
be conducted. Through these workshops and academies, ANGLE establishes a
statewide network of stakeholders that includes students, teachers and Native
Elders from rural Alaska Native villages, some of Alaska's most vulnerable
communities. The emphasis on educators and Native students will ensure that a
wide variety of learners will be reached, either directly or by later contact
with ANGLE participants. A synthesis of existing EarthScope educational
materials and methods, translated to an Alaskan setting, will form the core of
the programming. Drawing from methods of previous EarthScope education projects,
ANGLE will incorporate best practices including societal relevance of science,
data collection and analysis, nature of science, learning community development,
current science standards, and place-based and cultural knowledge. Participating
educators will learn about ongoing research on Alaskan tectonics, earthquakes
and tsunamis, and about how EarthScope is advancing frontiers of knowledge about
geologic hazards in the region. Emergency management outreach leaders will
contribute to discussions on emergency preparedness actions. Master teachers
offer pedagogical guidance and ideas about assessment and interaction, while
experienced interpreters discuss how to reach a variety of audiences in settings
outside the classroom. In follow-up share-a-thons, the teachers and interpreters
showcase how they have crafted their new knowledge into Earth science and
emergency preparedness learning experiences for K-12 students and visitors to
parks and museums. Ultimately thousands of learners in various settings will be
reached. The final ANGLE-synthesized collection of EarthScope resources will be
hosted on the well-known Science Education Resource Center website (&gt;5
million visitors/year) and reviewed by the National Association of Geoscience
Teachers insuring high profile access to the resources for years to come.