* 1736255
* RII Track-2 FEC:  Building Genome-to-Phenome Infrastructure for Regulating Methane in Deep and Extreme Environments (BuG ReMeDEE)
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Lee Krumholz, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Andrea Johnson
* 07/31/2022
* USD 6,000,000.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Methane is a greenhouse gas that traps heat
in the atmosphere which results in undesirable changes to the climate. The
recent surge in methane emissions has invigorated interest of the scientific
community to explore the contributions of living microorganisms to both the
production and the breakdown of methane. To more deeply understand these
processes, this Research Infrastructure Improvement Track-2 Focused EPSCoR
Collaborations (RII Track-2 FEC) award will form a new collaborative consortium
of three institutions (South Dakota School of Mines and Technology, Montana
State University and University of Oklahoma) for an integrated research and
education effort that will focus on organisms that metabolize methane in extreme
environments. Sanford Underground Research Facility and Yellowstone National
Park will be used as testbeds for extreme environments in deep biosphere and
thermal systems, respectively. Further, this consortium will enable the use of
previously unexplored and novel microorganisms from extreme environments for
biological conversion of atmospheric methane into commercial products including
liquid biofuels, biopolymers, and direct current electricity. The project will
provide career guidance for twelve early career faculty as well as education,
training, and workforce development opportunities for a diverse cohort of junior
researchers and graduate, undergraduate, and Native American high school
students. Exchange visits among the consortium partners and industry engagement
in the project enriches the educational of the student participants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goals of
this project are to investigate methane cycling in deep and extreme environments
and develop new biological routes for converting methane into value-added
products. These goals will be accomplished through the following integrated
objectives: (i) characterize extreme methane oxidizing microbial communities;
(ii) investigate the metabolic activities of novel methanotrophs and their roles
in methane flux; (iii) model critical interactions of select members of these
communities; (iv) edit genomes of select methanotrophs for phenotypic
improvement in methane uptake and oxidation; and (v) establish a consortium for
sustained collaborations among university partners in South Dakota, Montana, and
Oklahoma in the field of methane regulation in extreme environments. The
research will include: analysis of methane flux among novel methanotrophs
individually as well as in interacting microbial communities; molecular
investigations in genome editing to overexpress methane related synthetic gene
cassettes and protein profiling; computational biofilm modeling, in-silico
characterization of active sites of regulatory proteins responsible for methane
oxidation to determine underlying molecular mechanisms; and bioelectrochemical
investigations to elucidate electrogenic activity of new, extremophilic,
methanotrophs and evaluate their potential for controllable, catalytic methane
oxidation. Activities related to conversion of methane into value-added products
facilitates industry engagement and potential career opportunities for students
in industries. The program includes mentoring of twelve junior faculty by senior
faculty in advancing through their careers and guiding graduate students.