* 1736392
* AMPS:  Uncertainty Quantification for Stochastic Analysis of Electrical Power Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Mark Kon, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2022
* USD 229,279.00

The reliable functioning of the electric power grid forms a critical part of a
modern industrial country. The failure to maintain the reliability of the grid
leads to significant societal, national security problems and environmental
costs. With the ever-increasing use of intermittent power sources such as wind,
solar, battery, along with new types of disruptions that are arising, the
overall reliability and stability of the electric grid is threatened. The
proposed research will have an impact on understanding the stability of the
electric grid given these intermittent power sources. This can lead to
significant cost savings based on modeling, in addition to a direct positive
impact on the environment, and a more stable civil society as well as
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the ever-increasing presence of intermittent
(stochastic) generators (wind, solar, battery, etc.) and loads, it is difficult
to integrate these power fluctuations into an electric grid while maintaining
reliability and safety. This is a hard problem - in particular it is high
dimensional, non-Gaussian, and it is not feasible with current computational
resources to obtain sufficient predictive accuracy. The aim of this project is
the development of mathematically rigorous numerical methods for computing the
statistics of a high dimensional Quantity of Interest (QoI) of the power flow.
In particular, the investigators propose: i) To derive stochastic analytic
regularity of the power flow with respect to the topology of the electric grid,
power generation and load uncertainties to help estimate convergence rates of
sparse grid type methods. ii) To develop a multi-level sparse grid reproducing
kernel method that is adapted to the stochastic regularity of the electric grid
topology. This method will be used to compute the statistics of the stochastic
(transient) power flow. iii) If resources permit, as an alternative mitigation
strategy for very large dimensional problems, the investigators propose a
splitting method of the QoI into non-linear (large deviation) and linear (small
deviation) components. The high dimensional small deviations are approximated
with a perturbation method with at most quadratic computational cost in
dimension. The large deviations are approximated with a multi-level sparse grid
reproducing kernel method. This work proposes to significantly improve the state
of the art in high dimensional UQ methods that are adapted to topologies such as
those of the electric grid. This is a very relevant topic since the the
application and theory of UQ methods to electric grids are in their infancy. A
National Academy of Sciences report from last year underscores the current
importance of this issue.