* 1736949
* U.S. GEOTRACES Pacific Meridional Transect: Tracing Basin-scale Nutrient Cycling and Carbon Export with Dissolved and Particulate Barium-isotopic Distributions
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Tristan Horner, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 12/31/2021
* USD 393,532.00

The goal of the international GEOTRACES program is to understand the
distributions of trace chemical elements and their isotopes in the oceans. This
project would measure stable isotopes of barium on a 2018 U.S. GEOTRACES
expedition in the Pacific Ocean. Barium is a trace element whose distribution is
relevant to all three themes of the GEOTRACES program, as barium can be used to:
study chemical cycling within the oceans; trace exchanges of elements at ocean
boundaries; and infer past environmental conditions. The data collected here
will be the first of their kind for barium isotopes and will illuminate the
geochemical cycle of this element. Moreover, conducting this work as part of the
GEOTRACES program will maximize the return on investment in the barium isotope
data by providing a rich interpretative framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to understand how the interplay between internal cycling and
boundary processes sets basin-scale barium concentration and isotopic
distributions in the Pacific Ocean. Despite possessing a nutrient-like dissolved
profile, marine barium cycling has a fundamentally different boundary condition
to the major algal nutrients: barium cycling is not driven by production of
organic matter but rather by its remineralization. Respiration of sinking
organic matter in the ocean's 'twilight zone' releases carbon dioxide,
mineralizes nutrients, and promotes precipitation of micron-size crystals of
barite. Since barite is the major vector of particulate barium in seawater, the
abundance and isotopic composition of barium in the oceans is tied to global
carbon and nutrient cycling at the 'dark end' of the biological carbon pump. The
data collected here will be used to test hypotheses across an unprecedented
range of oceanographic conditions regarding: the formation, export, and
regeneration of particulate material and the connection to seafloor processes;
the importance of boundary sources to regional and global trace element and
isotope budgets; the formation of putative soft-metal sulfides in oxygen-minimum
zones; and the origin of enigmatic suspended particles in the deep open ocean.
This proposal will contribute to education by training undergraduate research
fellows and through presentation of seminars and guest lectures to regional
science educators through collaboration with a regional conservation
organization.