* 1736823
* Inter-hemispheric Water Exchange in the Indian Ocean: Discovering the Red Sea Overflow Water Pathways and Variability
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Amy Bower, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2022
* USD 415,314.00

This project will be analyzing data on ocean temperature and salinity, and
numerical model outputs to examine how Red Sea waters enter and propagate
through the Indian Ocean. The Red Sea produces one of the saltiest waters of the
global oceans. These waters enter the Indian Ocean at depths 500 to 1,500 m;
they spread along pathways that are not well understood and can travel as far as
the southern tip of Africa, as well as off western Australia. Our limited
understanding of Red Sea water spreading is because of the historical scarcity
of observations in the Indian Ocean. It is only the last 15 years that salinity
and temperature data from this region have become available to scientists. These
data will be used to identify Red Sea water masses and trace them throughout the
ocean by looking at their temperature and salinity characteristics that are
significantly different than those of the surrounding waters. The project will
contribute into understanding how such water flow contributes to the transfer of
heat in to deeper parts of the ocean, a process that influences the Earth's
climate. The study findings will promote the progress of science and,
indirectly, will advance the national health, prosperity and welfare through
information that could improve climate prediction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Red Sea
Overflow Water (ROW) contrasts sharply with both the fresher and cooler
Indonesian Intermediate Water (IIW) and the Antarctic Intermediate Water (AAIW)
that occur at similar intermediate depths, making it a tracer for the
intermediate- depth circulation. This saline water may also affect the
stratification and dynamics of the intermediate layer. The proposed research
will investigate the RSOW pathways, temporal variability, and the physical
mechanisms associated with its spreading in the Indian Ocean using in situ
observations, data-assimilated simulation outputs and a particle tracking
method. The specific objectives are to: (i) Characterize the large-scale
intermediate circulation of the Indian Ocean, including monsoonal-related
variability, and investigate its connection to the surface circulation; (ii)
determine the pathways of the RSOW in the Indian Ocean to understand how it
reaches western Australia and whether it reaches the south Atlantic; (iii)
investigate the physical mechanisms associated with the RSOW spreading and the
frontal zones between the three intermediate water masses of the Indian Ocean
and their relation to the circulation. The project will lead to the construction
of a quantitative description of RSOW space-time distribution and the
intermediate circulation of the Indian Ocean using new data and modern
approaches. The aim is to understand the role of this saline water to the
circulation and potential impacts on the global overturning circulation through
the Indo-Atlantic water exchange. The Indian Ocean is one of the most
understudied regions of the global oceans, and even its basic dynamics are still
under discussion. This work will fill in some of the major gaps in our knowledge
of the Indian Ocean circulation, which differs markedly from the other large
ocean basins.&lt;br/&gt;