* 1736989
* Laboratory and Numerical Experiments on Ocean-scale Turbulent Stratified Mixing
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Alberto Scotti, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 690,123.00

This project will use laboratory experiments and numerical modelling techniques
to identify the mechanism by which waters in the surface of the ocean are mixed
with heavier deeper waters through a process that is called overturning. Water
in the world oceans is arranged in nearly-horizontal layers of density
increasing with depth. Because of the difference in density, transfer of
material between layers (i.e., lifting of denser water and sinking of lighter
water) requires an external source of energy and the whole process is called
mixing. There is considerable interest in understanding mixing in stratified
bodies of water. This process is slow; it is estimated that it takes about 1,000
years to completely overturn the ocean. Yet, since the deep ocean holds large
stores of heat and carbon dioxide, the overturning process is important as it
regulates climate on the planet over millennial and longer time scales, and thus
of great societal interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stratified mixing requires a
source of energy (stirring), and the aim of this project is to characterize the
efficiency of the process. To understand the concept of efficiency, it is
convenient to think by analogy to an automobile. The gas burned in the engine
releases a certain amount of energy, but only a fraction of it goes into moving
the drivetrain. The rest is lost as heat. Likewise, only a fraction of the
energy provided by the stirring mechanism goes into doing work against gravity,
the rest being dissipated as frictional heat. Direct observations of ocean
mixing with increasingly high resolution using, for example, acoustic sensors
and fast temperature sensors, have shown surprising structures in shear-driven
turbulence that suggest mixing at ocean scales may behave differently than
small-scale laboratory measurements have suggested. This project addresses these
issues through the study of turbulent mixing in carefully controlled laboratory
experiments at scales relevant to oceanic flows and the use of numerical
simulations. The experimental component is conducted in the UNC Joint Fluid Lab
tank, a 36m long facility in which stratified shear flows with high buoyancy
Reynolds number can be generated. This ensures a clear separation between the
Kolmogorov and Ozmidov scales. The experiments are designed to establish the
behavior of the flux Richardson number (a measure of efficiency), in the limit
of high buoyancy Reynolds number and finite gradient Richardson number. The data
acquired in the lab are used to train, via data-assimilation, a suite of
increasingly complex numerical models, with the final goal of creating tools
that can be used to diagnose efficiency from ocean data and to improve the
parameterization of stratified mixing in global models.