* 1736635
* Quantifying Temperature Dependence In Growth &amp; Grazing Rates of Planktonic Herbivores
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Susanne Menden-Deuer, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 893,886.00

Plankton, single-celled organisms that inhabit the world's oceans are
responsible for the generation of oxygen, cycling energy and matter between the
atmosphere and the deep ocean and are the basis for virtually all seafood
harvested. These life-giving functions critically depend on the relative rates
at which plankton grow and get eaten. How temperature influences those rates is
essential to understand plankton responses to environmental changes and ocean
dynamics. It is well established that plankton grow faster when temperatures are
higher however, whether feeding has a similar temperature dependence is unknown.
That means oceanographers are missing key data required to build global
predictive models. This project will fill essential knowledge gaps and measure
physiological rates of singled celled zooplankton across temperature gradients
representing the global ocean, from polar to tropical regions and throughout the
seasonal cycle. Researchers will combine laboratory experiments with specimens
taken from the coastal ocean (Narragansett Bay), which is exemplary in its
strong seasonal temperature variations. These data will provide a clear picture
of the production capacity and activity of plankton in a global and dynamic
ocean. The project supports an early career scientist, as well as graduate and
undergraduate students. Scientists will continue communicating their research to
the public through large-scale outreach events, education at the high-school
level, and engagement through online and other media. Moreover, researchers will
continue collaborating with the Metcalf Institute for Marine &amp; Environmental
Reporting to support their Annual Science Immersion Workshop for Journalists and
their ongoing work to disseminate research findings through web-based
seminars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Grazing is the single largest loss factor of
marine primary production and thus affects a key transfer rate between global
organic and inorganic matter pools. Remarkably, data for herbivorous protist
growth and grazing rates at temperatures representative of the vast polar
regions and during winter and spring periods are extremely sparse. By combining
laboratory experiments with ground truthing fieldwork, this project alleviates a
central knowledge gap in oceanography and delivers the empirical measurements
necessary to derive algorithms to incorporate temperature dependence of
heterotrophic protist growth and grazing rates into biogeochemical models. The
extraordinary seasonal temperature fluctuations in a temperate coastal estuary
(Narragansett Bay) are exploited to measure rates of heterotrophic protists
isolated from different temperatures and seasons and to quantify the temperature
and acclimation responses of these ecotypes. This project delivers data urgently
needed to solve the conundrum of whether herbivorous growth and predation is
depressed at low temperatures, implying low trophic transfer rates and high
carbon export, or if predation proceeds at rates comparable to temperate systems
with primary production largely lost to predation. Large temperature gradients
in the global ocean mean that cross-biome and biogeochemical models are
particularly sensitive to assumptions about the temperature dependence in
modeled rate processes. Establishment of the dependence of heterotrophic
plankton physiological rates (growth and grazing) to gradients of temperature,
mimicking realistic conditions experienced by plankton in a changing ocean, is a
key step towards integrating much needed biological information in
biogeochemical modeling efforts. This project makes a significant contribution
to linking ecological research with ecosystem models by providing empirically
rooted algorithms of the temperature dependence of protistan herbivory and
growth rates, key processes in the transformation of organic matter in global
biogeochemical cycles and tools critically missing in ecosystem models.