* 1736668
* Collaborative Research: Improved observation and parameterization of bottom boundary layer turbulence and particle properties for sediment fate and transport modeling
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2017,09/30/2022
* Stephen Monismith, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,375,915.00

Sediment fate and transport models are often utilized to help address
environmental questions related to the environmental impacts of remediation
efforts, the potential for reliable natural recovery, and the potential impacts
of extreme events. In order to effectively implement sediment fate and transport
models, bed erosion and deposition rates must be accurately parameterized. These
processes are dependent on physical forcing, the distribution of sediment in the
water column, and the properties of sediment such as bulk density, particle
size, and biogeochemical composition. This research will employ high-resolution
numerical simulations along with analysis of in-situ measurements of physical
processes and particle characteristics to quantify turbulent forcing and
particle properties affecting sediment resuspension, settling, and flocculation.
The project links academic-level researchers directly with practitioners
actively involved with several USEPA Superfund sites and indirectly with
environmental researchers, engineers, and policy makers. The project will
support the Ph.D. research of two graduate students who will be advised by a
diverse group and trained in advanced computational fluid dynamics, acoustic and
optical field instrumentation, as well as practical aspects of environmental
engineering. Results from this study will link methods and results from academic
research to practice, enabling application of novel methods for quantifying and
predicting sediment and contaminant fate and transport to present-day
contaminated sediment sites. Additionally, the PIs have worked extensively with
community modeling efforts and have contributed sediment transport modules to
the Environmental Fluid Dynamics Code (EFDC), a state-of-the-art hydrodynamic
model in use by the USEPA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, novel in-situ
acoustical and optical instrument platforms will be deployed and laboratory
experiments will be conducted to measure the physio-biogeochemical
characteristics of flow and sediment in a turbulent, current and wave-driven
shallow estuarine setting. Acoustic instrumentation will measure vertical
distributions of mean flows and turbulence throughout the water column,
including within the boundary layer, due to currents and waves. These will be
combined with a floc camera and optical instruments that measure settling flux,
particle size distributions and particulate biogeochemical compositions.
Laboratory experiments will measure erosion rates and bulk densities of in-situ
sediment cores. The field and laboratory observations of the sediment
characteristics will be used to inform a high resolution large-eddy simulation
(LES) model that resolves the details of the turbulent, sediment-laden boundary
layer. The suite of data obtained from the field observations, laboratory
experiments, and LES model will be used to understand the relationship between
particle size distributions and turbulence in wave-driven estuarine environments
and how these dynamics are affected by biogeochemical properties of the
suspended particles. These dynamics will in turn be related to properties of the
bed to understand how the turbulence and particle size distributions affect
erosion rates. Finally, the LES model will be used to understand flocculation
dynamics and the effects of sediment-induced stratification that may act to
dampen the near-bed turbulence and reduce subsequent erosion and entrainment of
sediment into the water column.