* 1736599
* US GEOTRACES PMT: Cobalt Biogeochemical Cycling and Connections to Metalloenzymes in the Pacific Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2019
* Mak Saito, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 10/31/2019
* USD 347,686.00

Cobalt is important for many forms of marine life, yet it is one of the scarcest
nutrients in the sea. Cobalt's oceanic abundance and distribution, along with
other scarce nutrients, can influence the growth of microscopic plants
(phytoplankton). This in turn can influence carbon cycles in the ocean and
atmosphere. Therefore, knowledge of the controls on cobalt's abundance and
chemical forms in seawater is a valuable component of our ability to understand
the ocean's influence on global carbon cycling. Within phytoplankton and other
marine microbes, metals such as cobalt, iron, nickel, and copper are used as
critical components of enzymes responsible for key cellular reactions. Since
these enzymes require metals to work, they are named metalloenzymes.
Participating in a Pacific Ocean cruise from Alaska to Tahiti, this project will
study the oceanic distributions of dissolved cobalt and the cellular content of
a group of metalloenzymes known to influence biogeochemical cycles. The project
will provide scientific impact by creating new knowledge about oceanic
micronutrients in regions of economic interest with regard to fisheries and
deep-sea mining. Measurement of proteins in the North Pacific will provide data
of broad biological and chemical interest and will be made available through a
new NSF-funded "EarthCube Ocean Protein Portal" data base. Educational impact
will stem from participation of a graduate student and two young technicians, as
well as the PI's development of a high school chemistry curriculum for use in
two local high schools, thus allowing teachers to include real oceanic and
environmental data at their first introduction to
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cobalt has a complex biogeochemical cycle. Both
its inorganic and organic forms are used by biology in the upper ocean and it is
removed from solution by being scavenged in the intermediate and deep ocean.
This scavenging removal results in cobalt having the smallest oceanic inventory
of any biologically utilized element. Recent studies, however, have found that
large dissolved cobalt plumes occur in major oxygen minimum zones due to a
combination of less scavenging and additions from sedimentary and
remineralization fluxes. The GP15 US GEOTRACES Pacific Meridional Transect (PMT)
provides an opportunity to examine the influence of oxygen depletion on cobalt
chemistry. Moreover, the study of the protein component of microbial communities
using new proteomic techniques will provide evidence of how different major
microorganisms respond to the chemical environment (e.g. through transporter
production for specific nutrients and micronutrients) as well as the biochemical
basis for metal requirements related to the use of specific metalloenzymes.
Specifically, the PMT provides an opportunity to confirm that the Pacific oxygen
minimum zones contain a large amount of cobalt and to test the hypotheses that
simultaneous zinc scarcity could induce wide-scale biochemical substitution of
cobalt for zinc in the North Pacific Ocean.