* 1736425
* EAGER: Data Integration to Enable Cancer Research
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Parker Antin, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 06/30/2020
* USD 296,188.00

Datasets of all types are being generated at a fast pace. A central challenge
for life science researchers is sharing, integrating, and analyzing disparate
data types to discover fundamental biological principles. This project seeks to
address that challenge by leveraging the tools and cyberinfrastructure developed
through the NSF BIO-funded CyVerse project (CyVerse.org; DBI-12565383) to
develop and test novel computational solutions that will allow the vast imaging
data housed in the Cancer Imaging Archive to be shared and analyzed with other
relevant data types. The results of this work should provide new, much-needed
tools for the cancer research community. In addition, the outcomes should serve
as the basis for developing new solutions for integrating data types for the
broader biomedical and basic research communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data-
driven discovery, especially in the field of cancer research, is hampered by
poor interoperability across data storage platforms and limited access to tools
for computational integration of large, heterogeneous datasets. To address these
limitations, two pilot projects will be conducted. The first will integrate TCIA
image data with CyVerse's image management and analysis capabilities, developing
a proof-of-concept model for how researchers can rapid manage and analyze high-
quality cancer image data. The second pilot will enable cancer researchers at
University of Arizona Cancer Center and elsewhere to aggregate their public and
private cancer image data using CyVerse's capabilities and to integrate image
and genomic data via a custom user interface. Together, the results of these
pilots will provide researchers with the computational systems and technology
needed to more rapidly manage, analyze, and disseminate their work.