* 1736158
* Workshop: Blue Skies Manufacturing Workshop at the 2017 NAMRC/MSEC; Los Angeles, California; June 4-7, 2017
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2020
* K. Scott Smith, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 03/31/2020
* USD 48,029.00

This award initiates a new activity, the "Blue Skies Manufacturing Workshop"
during North America's largest manufacturing conference. The conference is the
co-located 2017 International Manufacturing Science and Engineering Conference
sponsored by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers and the 45th Annual
North American Manufacturing Research Conference sponsored by the North American
Manufacturing Research Institution of the Society of Manufacturing Engineers.
This conference will take place from June 4-7, 2017 and is hosted by the
University of Southern California. This is the ideal venue for the workshop,
which is designed to identify bold visions for the manufacturing sector more
than ten years in the future, and to identify the required basic research needed
to achieve that bold vision. These two leading conferences in the Manufacturing
Engineering field act as global bridges between industries, government
laboratories, and academic institutions. Blue Skies Activities will include: 1)
Brief introductory presentations by Workshop organizers and others; 2)
Presentations by 6 ,8 manufacturing thought leaders; 3) Interactions among
workshop participants, NSF program directors, Manufacturing thought leaders, and
staff of the interagency Advanced Manufacturing National Program Office. The
speakers will be selected from one-page abstracts; their travel to the workshop
will be supported by the award. A panel of judges will evaluate the
presentations and decide upon a winner. The Society of Manufacturing Engineers
has pledged to introduce a new society-level award, the David Dornfeld
Manufacturing Vision Award, to the best presentation. The workshop, expected to
be attended by at least 80 attendees of the conference, is intended to be the
first instance of an annual event that will help articulate and develop a broad
manufacturing vision, and to catalyze support for that vision. The vision will
be a useful resource for policy makers, federal funding agencies, companies
developing their own manufacturing strategies, university researchers, and
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The support will cover (1) the registration fees,
and (2) the travel fees for the speakers and PIs. The call for abstracts is
disseminated through the Society of Manufacturing Engineers and the American
Society of Mechanical Engineers; the submitted applications go through a
selection process by the conference committee. The highest rated applications
will be invited to give full presentations. After the conference, a summary of
the Blue Skies visions will be published as a North American Manufacturing
Research Institute white paper.