* 1736091
* I-Corps: Electroencephalography based assessment of cognitive function
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2017
* Andre Fenton, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 09/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project arises from
objective cognitive assessment aided by electroencephalography (EEG) technology.
Stress, anxiety, irritability, lack of focus, emotional reactivity and problems
with relationships amongst coworkers all impact productivity. Stress alone is
responsible for up substantial healthcare costs in the U.S. Similarly, good
mental health is associated with improved creativity, inspiration and mental
clarity, improved relationships and reduced anxiety, improved collaboration and
increased employee loyalty. This project aims to explore the commercial
potential of including objective cognitive assessment as part of healthcare and
wellness programs. Users would be monitored for signs of psychological distress
and if detected, an intervention such as therapy, coaching or training would be
suggested in order to minimize the impact of distress in its early stages.
Objective cognitive assessment can have an impact on the overall productivity of
employees and is likely to increase the mental capital of the organization.

This I-Corps project is based on electroencephalography (EEG) aided assessment
of cognitive function and builds on decades of cognitive evaluation research,
recent developments of biomedical signal acquisition and processing, and
expertise in statistical analyses, data science, and machine learning. The
proposed technology expands prior developments of both research and clinical
devices for recording brain activity in diverse settings including emergency
rooms, sports fields, military and aerospace. The technology also directly
builds on experience with quantifying cognitive state of a person in a wide
range of settings such as exercise, cognitive processing, and communication.
Furthermore, it builds on a decade long efforts in cognitive assessment in
animal models of epilepsy, schizophrenia, intellectual disability and autism.