* 1736698
* Local Generation of Nonlinear Internal Waves on the Continental Shelf: Beams to Modes
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2017,03/31/2024
* Karl Helfrich, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 690,421.00

This project studies waves that are formed in the interior of the ocean, at the
interface of water masses with different temperature and/or salinity properties.
Such waves, called internal waves are generated when tidal flows interact with
bathymetric irregularities in the interior of the ocean or the steep continental
slope. These internal tidal waves tend to concentrate their energy along
specific paths that resemble that of a light beam and propagate almost
vertically in the water column. During the internal tide propagation, another
type wave is generated, with different characteristics, called internal soliton
waves. They propagate horizontally and have been linked to vertical mixing,
cross-shelf transport of materials and larvae, and sediment mobilization. This
study focuses on understanding the transition from principally beam-like
internal tides to shorter nonlinear waves, especially in the coastal ocean.
Laboratory, experimental work combined with theoretical and modelling activities
will be used to understand the life-cycle of these energetic waves and inform
modeling and interpretation of the coastal environment advancing our
understanding of ocean mixing. Over the course of this work, the principal
investigator will advise undergraduate students through the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution (WHOI) Summer Student Fellowship Program on research
topics directly related to the internal wave generation and propagation.
Additionally, this study will contribute to the summer program in Geophysical
Fluid Dynamics (GFD), held annually at WHOI, and it will involve GFD fellows
with aspects of this research. This proposal will also contribute to maintaining
the WHOI GFD Laboratory, a valuable resource to the scientific research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Onshore propagating large-amplitude internal
solitary waves are ubiquitous on continental shelves throughout the world's
oceans. These waves emerge in packets from the nonlinear steepening of the
internal tide as it propagates onshore. An under-appreciated aspect of this
process is that the radiated internal tide is often dominated by vertically
propagating beams generated on the continental slope, while the emergent
solitary waves propagate horizontally with a single vertical mode structure. How
the transition from principally beam-like internal tides to shorter nonlinear
waves with modal structure occurs is not well understood, especially in the
coastal setting. In particular, the time and length scales for emergence and the
resulting properties of the solitary waves are of interest and will be examined
as part of this study. A combination of laboratory experiments and numerical
modeling work will be used to examine internal tidal beam generation at the
continental slope and subsequent evolution of the beam as it propagates onto the
confining topography of the shelf where it may eventually lead to the emergence
of horizontally propagating modal internal solitary-like waves. The work will
consider idealized stratifications, topography, and forcing (e.g. as single
forcing frequency) in order to focus on the underlying dynamics and improve our
understanding of this transition and the conditions that promote, or inhibit,
the generation of these waves from the internal tide. The experimental component
will be used to explore the generation and initial propagation of an internal
wave beam onto a shelf and to provide a test for the subsequent modeling. The
modeling will address limitations inherent in the laboratory work and use two
complementary approaches. The first is an idealized multi-mode Korteweg-de Vries
(KdV) model that generalizes previous linear, hydrostatic models of internal
tide generation and captures the solitary wave dynamics. The second is to use
the MIT general circulation model that allows exploration of additional factors
not considered in KdV-type models.