* 1736332
* Development and Validation of a Submersible Oceanic Luminescent Analyzer of Reactive Intermediate Species (SOLARIS)
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Jason Kapit, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2021
* USD 862,421.00

The health and function of the ocean is controlled by the production and
consumption of a broad spectrum of chemicals. While stable chemical species can
be measured using traditional methods of water collection and either shipboard
or lab-based analyses, this approach is not amenable to chemicals that have
lifetimes on the orders of hours or less. Due to their rapid production and
consumption, these reactive compounds are short-lived and typically exist in low
levels within the ocean; yet, they have a disproportionately large influence on
their surrounding environment. In fact, there is an emerging recognition that
these short-lived reactive chemicals may even be essential to the overall
efficiency and health of the ocean. The intrinsic difficulty in measuring short-
lived species has been a crippling constraint on measuring these important
chemicals, and has thereby limited the ability to predict their role in the
health of the ocean and its inhabitants. Thus, this research will develop, build
and validate a remotely-operated, underwater chemical sensor that will enable
direct measurements of these key reactive chemicals in the ocean. The instrument
will be initially designed and tested using the targets hydrogen peroxide and
superoxide, two reactive oxygen species (ROS) that are notoriously difficult to
measure and yet are key to the health and biogeochemistry of the ocean. This
project will also support collaborative education efforts with the Boston Green
Academy by introducing high school students to the world of deep-sea
instrumentation and its importance in understanding our
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to design, develop and validate a
biogeochemical sensor for marine research, in the form of a submersible oceanic
(chemi)luminescent analyzer of reactive intermediate species (SOLARIS). The
SOLARIS will combine an advanced and adaptive fluidics system with a highly
sensitive photodetection analyzer, comprising a submersible in situ
chemiluminescent sensor. This instrument will extend analytical capabilities
toward an ability to characterize the dynamics of reactive chemical species in
environments that have been heretofore out of reach, in particular the deep sea.
The SOLARIS will represent the development and integration of four modules,
which together comprise an analytical platform capable of calibrated in situ
measurements at pico- to nano-molar detection levels. These modules will include
custom designed software controllable pumping and valve manifolds, allowing
careful control and on-the-fly modification of fluid transfer and pumping
configurations for calibration, background measurements, and standardization. At
its hub the underwater photodetection system will involve the development of a
transparent, pressure-bearing sapphire flow cell to be integrated into a
pressure housing containing a highly sensitive photomultiplier tube. Together
with an integral spectrophotometer used for conducting calibrations and analyte
decay measurements, these systems will comprise the analytical module. The
SOLARIS will be configured and deployed in both a rosette-mounted "pelagic mode"
for examining water column dynamics in coastal and more offshore waters, as well
as in a "benthic mode" while integrated onto a submersible vehicle for
preliminary investigation of deep sea biological communities. Both of these
platforms will be validated as part of an integrated science plan to make the
first in situ measurements of superoxide and hydrogen peroxide - research that
will enable scientific exploration of the role of ROS in controlling the
elemental cycling, carbon degradation, and organismal health throughout all
depths of the global ocean.