* 1736256
* Collaborative Research: Faunal Composition, Provinciality and Paleobiolgy of a Late Cretaceous Arctic Vertebrate Assemblage Revealed Through Cross-Latitudinal Comparisons
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Jaelyn Eberle, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2022
* USD 92,221.00

The 70-million year old Prince Creek Formation of Arctic Alaska provides fossil
evidence that a surprisingly diverse array of dinosaurs, birds, flying reptiles
and small mammals lived in polar forests characterized by warm summers and five-
to six-months of darkness and snowfall during the polar winter. Enduring these
seasonally intense and variable conditions makes these animals uniquely suited
to test major paleobiological questions pertaining to physiology, migration,
body size changes, ecology and distribution. This project will examine these
questions through new Arctic specimen collections and identifications,
temperature determinations and growth studies, and comparison to findings with
animals living at warmer lower latitudes. This project will bring together a
diverse team of scientists who will share new ideas and methodologies and
contribute to the education and training of graduate and undergraduate students.
Results will be disseminated in scientific venues and presented publicly through
museum exhibitions and K-12 presentations. The latter will include visits to
rural, northern Alaskan schools to provide underserved Alaska Native students
and teachers with an opportunity to learn about the fossils in their area and
interact with NSF-sponsored researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using macro- and
microfossil remains, this study will establish a comprehensive dataset on the
faunal composition of a Mesozoic polar assemblage, including descriptions of
probable new species unique to the Arctic. Statistical techniques will be used
to compare the faunal compositions between mid- and high latitudes to understand
North American distribution patterns. Histological analyses of bones and teeth
will provide the first rigorous testing of the affects of polar environments on
the growth and physiology of dinosaurs and mammals. Lastly, a novel technique
using biomarkers will be used to provide more precise paleotemperature estimates
to understand the temperature regime experienced by the polar fauna.