* 1736060
* I-Corps: Wavenumber Spiral Frequency-Steerable Acoustic Transducer for Structural Health Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2018
* Massimo Ruzzene, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 02/28/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is related to
reductions in inspection and maintenance costs of commercial and military
aircraft. As the average age of existing aircraft is extending beyond the design
life, fatigue cracks are a major issue that requires close monitoring to ensure
continued airworthiness. Extensive and time consuming manual non-destructive
inspection programs have been implemented to monitor and insure the safety and
structural integrity of the aircraft. The Wavenumber Spiral Frequency-Steerable
Acoustic Transducer (WS-FSAT) is a Structural Health Monitoring (SHM) sensor
that enables inspection of in hard-to-reach areas within an aircraft or other
asset, where significant structural risk is present, and promises to enable
remote inspection of critical structures without disassembly. The technology has
the advantage of inherent directional sensing capabilities over relatively wide
areas, which translates to lower size, weight and installation costs. Potential
benefits include the reduction of the time and cost of inspections, and of the
associated aircraft downtime, and of structural integrity risks through more
frequent monitoring of structural risk areas. The proposed I-Corp program
explores implementation and commercialization opportunities of the technology
within the aerospace industry and its broader applicability for inspection and
monitoring of structural components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
explores application and market opportunities for the Wavenumber Spiral
Frequency-Steerable Acoustic Transducer (WS-FSAT). The WS-FSAT is a novel
ultrasonic transducer that enables in-situ, nondestructive inspection of
aircraft structures to detect defects that impact structural integrity and
safety. WS-FSATs have inherent directional capabilities with the ability to
detect, locate and characterize structural defects with significantly lower
hardware and signal processing complexity than other approaches. The WS-FSAT
maps the direction of wave sensing to a specific frequency component in the
spectrum of the received signal, which greatly facilitates the identification
and localization of damage. These directional capabilities rely on the design of
the electrodes on a sensing substrate that performs the transduction of
mechanical strains associated with waves propagating in the structure to an
electrical signal. Such design process is at the core of the technology, and is
suitable to meet the needs of inspection of complex structural components.