* 1736612
* Collaborative Research: Lead-210 and Polonium-210 as tracers for scavenging and export: GEOTRACES Pacific Meridional Section
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* David Kadko, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2022
* USD 244,646.00

The goal of the international GEOTRACES program is to understand the
distributions of trace chemical elements and their isotopes in the oceans. These
chemical species play important roles in the ocean as nutrients, tracers of
current and past oceanographic processes, and as contaminants from human
activity. Their biogeochemical cycling has direct implications for research in
such diverse areas as the carbon cycle, climate change, and ocean ecosystems.
This project will use measurement of two natural radionuclides -- lead-210 and
polonium-210 -- to provide important information about the rates of processes
that affect trace elements and isotopes (TEIs) that will be measured during a
U.S. GEOTRACES expedition in the Pacific Ocean in 2018. The research proposed
here will address key tasks formulated within the GEOTRACES Science Plan.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many processes in the ocean cannot be observed directly
but tracers such as polonium-210 (half-life = 138 days) and lead-210 (half-life
= 22.3 years) that have unique chemical properties and relevant decay timescales
can be used to provide important constraints on their rates and pathways. The
goals of this research are to: 1) use Pb-210, along with another project
measuring Be-7, in aerosols and precipitation to characterize aerosol and TEI
sources, 2) determine scavenging rates of particle-reactive TEIs through the
water column using Po-210 and Pb-210, 3) use Po-210 / Pb-210 disequilibrium in
the upper water column as a proxy for the sinking flux of particulate organic
carbon (POC), and 4) use Pb-210as a tracer of the influence of hydrothermal
processes on water column distributions of TEIs. This work will build on a
database of Po/Pb distributions in the world ocean (and the Pacific Ocean, in
particular) obtained through programs such as GEOSECS, GEOTRACES, and
independent studies. A graduate student will be trained as part of this project.
The lead investigator, Cochran, plans to incorporate information about GEOTRACES
sampling strategies in the planning for a travelling exhibition on "The Oceans"
through his adjunct appointment at the American Museum of Natural History (New
York). Project partner Kadko plans to incorporate GEOTRACES work in an
international graduate course through the Nippon Foundation, Partnership for
Observation of the Global Oceans Center of Excellence.