* 1736629
* The role of heterotrophic bacteria in protecting cyanobacteria from hydrogen peroxide in coastal systems.
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Rose Cory, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 874,085.00

Toxic cyanobacterial harmful algal blooms (CHABs) are now a worldwide problem
that poses dangers for humans and aquatic organisms including life-threatening
sickness, beach closures, health alerts, and drinking water treatment plant
closures. This project focuses on the basic science needed to understand
interactions between the microorganisms present in CHABs and the chemistry of
the lakes they inhabit. In particular, it will study the sources, fate, and
effects of hydrogen peroxide, which is a potentially important control on the
toxicity and species present within these blooms. This research will be
conducted in Lake Erie, a source of drinking water for 11 million people that is
threatened by CHABs annually. Results will be directly integrated into two water
quality models that are widely used by water managers and other stakeholders.
This project will support the training of two PhD students, including a first-
generation college attendee, and undergraduate students from backgrounds that
are underrepresented in the earth sciences. Research will also be integrated
into outreach aimed at increasing diversity in the earth sciences by involving
women and underrepresented minorities in K-12 as well as college and adult
educational settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is
to determine the influence of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) on cyanobacterial
community composition and function in nearshore ecosystems. Preliminary results
from Lake Erie show that dominant primary producers rely on heterotrophic
bacteria to draw down H2O2 from transiently high environmental levels that are
likely inhibitory to members of the cyanobacterial community. This suggests that
H2O2 plays important and still poorly understood roles in aquatic microbial
ecology. A combination of field sampling, experiments, and state-of-the art
"-omics" will be used to test the overall hypothesis that H2O2 decomposition by
heterotrophic "helpers" is an important determinant of microbial interactions
and community structure and function. Lake Erie will be studied because (i) it
is a model system for shallow coastal areas receiving high terrestrial nutrient
runoff, (ii) it offers strong inshore-offshore gradients of light and nutrients
for comparative studies, and (iii) existing sampling infrastructure, archived
samples, and preliminary data can be leveraged. Field and laboratory experiments
and measurements will be integrated to answer the following questions: Q1: What
drives the temporal dynamics of H2O2 concentrations? Q2: Which enzymes and
organisms are responsible for protecting the community via biological H2O2
decay? Q3: How does protection from H2O2 by helpers influence the composition
and function of the community? The study will perform controlled lab experiments
on cultures and on natural waters during different points of the bloom. Measures
of H2O2 concentrations and rates of production and decay, along with supporting
chemical and biological measurements, will be used to assess the major sources
and sinks of H2O2. Molecular tools will be used to determine the pathways
underpinning H2O2 decay and the effect of H2O2 on cyanobacterial community
composition function. In parallel, impacts of varying H2O2 concentrations on
growth rates of major cyanobacteria will be assessed experimentally. These
experimental results will be placed into context through comparisons with the
structure and function of microbial communities from field samples across
spatial, temporal, and chemical gradients in this coastal ecosystem. The
approach of integrating studies of H2O2 with "-omics" in natural systems is
novel, and will advance our fundamental knowledge and understanding of the
relationship between microbial community composition and function.