* 1736068
* RAPID: Aquatic refuge and recovery in the face of drought in a biodiversity hotspot
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* James Godwin, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2020
* USD 170,986.00

Most studies of the effect of drought on freshwater organisms have focused on
short, seasonal droughts, while the effects of atypical intense droughts are not
well understood. The southeastern United States has recently experienced the
most extreme drought in at least 10 years. Alabama has been particularly hard
hit, with nearly 98% of the state being directly affected by drought conditions.
The lack of rainfall during Fall 2016 reduced many streams to trickles while
others have completely dried; major rivers reached low levels not seen in over
60 years. Alabama is known as a global biodiversity hotspot for freshwater
species of fish, amphibians, and invertebrates. Many of these species are
threatened, endangered, and/or found nowhere else on Earth. This study seeks to
determine the role of downstream refuges on the effect of intense droughts in
aquatic ecosystems with high species diversity. The specific objectives are to:
1) determine changes in species composition in response to intense drought, 2)
Identify habitat offering critical refuge from the drought to species with
different movement abilities, 3) Build a predictive model of the effects of
intense drought and future recovery at local and regional scales. Two graduate
students and several undergraduates will be involved in the sampling and
research activities of the study. This research will provide management tools to
identify and protect Alabama Strategic Habitat Units. The study also will offer
summer camps for middle-school students and public outreach activities to
citizen science groups organized with collaboration of the Auburn University
Museum of Natural History.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will assess the
impacts of extreme drought on the dynamics of habitat use as well as evaluate
the resilience of aquatic species to flash drought. The investigators
hypothesize that the ability to use downstream refuge during drought is a
bottleneck that varies based on species vagility and position in the stream
network. Stream habitats in two drainages that have experienced the exceptional
drought will be sampled and compared to historic, baseline data collected since
2012 to test this hypothesis. The study will predict shifts in distribution
patterns of stream fauna in response to flash drought by combining pre-drought
survey and environmental DNA (eDNA) data from streams of various sizes in two
ecoregions of Alabama, with species-specific vagility potential based on
functional trait databases, life history information, and professional judgment.
Predicted and observed patterns will be compared using fine scale surveys, broad
scale eDNA collections, and spatial analysis. The results of this investigation
will provide critical information pertinent to understanding the resiliency of
specific taxa and stream communities in general to drought disturbance in a
global hotspot for diversity.