* 1736065
* EXP: Collaborative Research: Empowering Learners to Conduct Experiments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Camillia Matuk, New York University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2021
* USD 112,000.00

This project seeks to transform current practices in the teaching of scientific
research methods by shifting the fundamental dynamics and focusing in a
scientific domain that is relatable to a broad audience: designing and
conducting social and behavioral science experiments. Scientific inquiry is key
to making societal progress and improving our understanding of the world. Social
and behavioral science programs are largely designed to prepare future
researchers, but have a minimum expectation that students become critical
consumers of research. Understanding the scientific method and the experimental
methods used by researchers is necessary for establishing an ability to
effectively assess the research that students will encounter in both the media
and scientific outlets. Student understanding of scientific inquiry is
significantly enhanced when anchored in inquiry experiences; however,
opportunities for scientific research experiences are limited, even in research
methods courses, due to the challenges of teaching experimental design and
problems regarding access to and recruitment of participants. Without these
experiences, students in higher education struggle to fully understand
scientific inquiry. To address common barriers to learning how to conduct
research, this project is designing a flexible, computer-based platform to be
collaborative, narrative-based, engaging, and inspired by constructionist
theories to facilitate learning with the use of artificial intelligence (AI)
support. The platform developed in this project will serve as a model of a new
genre of constructionist research environments, that enable learners to leverage
technologies to create, modify, and replicate experiments, recruit participants,
and analyze their results to learn about the world. The design-based research
approach will operate in two cycles; in each cycle, a revised module and set of
tools will be deployed. This results in two major research contributions: (1)
Using mixed-methods, the theoretical and educational contribution is to study
the process by which students in higher education learn to conduct experimental
research, and about the roles of AI assistance, collaboration, narrative, and
activities motivated by curiosity, exploration, and reflection. (2) The
technological contribution is an innovative, AI-assisted set of scenario
creation tools that empower learners to create experiments and that allow us to
understand how an intelligent, collaborative, engaging, narrative-based platform
can support students in higher education in designing and conducting social and
behavioral science experiments. With this system, it will be easier to create,
run, replicate, and build upon studies and to reach out to a broader audience
than the pool of university students used in typical in-person laboratory
experiments. As a result, the platform will make it possible to transform social
science research practices and even has the potential to foster new scientific
discoveries.