* 1736217
* Oceanic Geostrophic Turbulence Inferred From Vertical Structure Observations
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Charles Eriksen, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,337,802.00

Appreciation that the ocean is full of eddies on a vast array of scales began
with the discovery of what are commonly referred to as mesoscale eddies: those
with horizontal scales of order tens to about 100 km. These eddies are
geostrophic (a state where the pressure gradient force from density gradients is
in balance with the Coriolis effect from the rotation of the earth) in contrast
to meteorological eddies like tornadoes which are significantly ageostrophic.
Because they are the most energetic features of oceanic motion, understanding
how these geostrophic eddies work is key to understanding and predicting
circulation, the distribution of properties, and biomass in the ocean. Testing
theories of geostrophic turbulence will stimulate new work to better understand
oceanic states in the past and to predict their future. Laws for the dependence
of energy wavenumber spectra implied by geostrophic turbulence were proposed on
theoretical grounds half a century ago. These distinguished between an inverse
cascade transferring energy to larger scale and a forward cascade transferring
enstrophy (the energy of rotating motions) to shorter scale. While the existence
of an enstrophy cascade has been identified in spectra of trophospheric wind
observations, evidence supporting such a cascade in the ocean is scant and
contradictory. Recent observations of the depth structure of current and
vertical displacement at the Bermuda Atlantic Time Series (BATS) site seem to
confirm the scaling predictions for both the inverse energy and forward
enstrophy cascade portions of the wavenumber spectrum. These preliminary
observations will be extended and generalized by sampling four new sites with
distinct eddy energy and latitude regimes. This project will train a graduate
student in the use of the new glider technology and join the cadre of young
scientists being trained to use autonomous platforms for oceanographic
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The initial observations at the Bermuda Atlantic
Time Series (BATS) site show potential energy exceeds kinetic energy by more
than an order of magnitude in the steeper portion of the spectra, implying
vortex stretching dominates relative vorticity in potential vorticity
fluctuations in the enstrophy cascade. Temporal variations on scales of several
weeks suggest that the transition wavenumber between the two slope dependences
varies as the inverse cube root of vertical wavenumber which nearly preserves
enstrophy regardless of eddy energy. The goal of this project is to test if: 1)
energy and enstrophy transfer portions of the wavenumber spectrum of geostrophic
turbulence are a general feature of ocean eddies; 2) potential energy
consistently exceeds kinetic energy in the oceanic enstrophy cascade wavenumber
range; and 3) enstrophy for geostrophic eddies is self-limited to modest Rossby
number. To accomplish these goals, Deepglider repeat survey missions in
distinctly different eddy energy and latitude regimes in both the highly
energetic Northwest Atlantic and the eddy desert of the Gulf of Alaska in the
Northeast Pacific will be conducted. Missions will rely on chartered small boats
or, in one case, on ancillary use of a large vessel. The approach at each site
is to survey from surface to bottom a roughly 100 km by 100 km region of ocean
along a common track every three weeks or so for a year. By comparing estimates
from BATS and four new sites, at least a preliminary climatology of the
geostrophic eddy inverse energy and forward enstrophy cascades will be created.
These calculations will provide rich targets for new theories and numerical
models of the ocean.