* 1736602
* Ventilation History of the Sulu Sea: Record of Abrupt Changes in the Tropical Western Pacific Thermocline
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Braddock Linsley, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 06/30/2021
* USD 279,979.00

The potential impacts of rapid high-latitude ice sheet melting on sea level and
oceanographic circulation in the coming several centuries are of increasing
concern. There is evidence that the great ice sheets of the last glacial maximum
did not melt at a uniform rate, but instead disintegrated most rapidly in one or
two abrupt melting steps known as Meltwater Pulses 1A (MWP-1A; ~14,600-13,500
years BP) and 1B (MWP-1B; ~11,450 to 11,000 years BP). MWP-1A has been
documented in several locations, but there remains controversy over whether
deglacial MWP-1B existed and how much sea level rose across that time interval.
Preliminary data from the Sulu Sea basin indicate that the subsurface ocean
rapidly warmed and freshened during the several centuries of MWP-1B. These
results suggest wide-spread oceanographic changes in the western Pacific but it
is not known whether this change is related to sea level rise driven by melting
ice or some other change in the ocean-climate system. This research will utilize
the sediment archive in the Sulu Sea to further understand the origin of the
ocean changes tied to the MWP-1B event and document whether similar events have
occurred over the last 395,000 years, a period spanning three glacial-
interglacial cycles. The product will be a new and unique reconstruction of
thermocline conditions in Sulu Sea and sea level related ventilation history.
Developing a better understanding of the ventilation history of the western
tropical Pacific thermocline and the relationship to high-latitude ice sheet
melting events will facilitate more accurate predictions about future changes.
Broader impacts of the project include support for a Ph.D. student,
incorporation of results into teaching, and continued practice of public
outreach activities.

This project will reconstruct the timing of thermocline and deep basin
ventilation events in the Sulu Sea in the western tropical Pacific using
geochemical measurements of deep dwelling planktonic and benthic foraminifera.
Earlier geochemical work on shallow dwelling foraminifera in the Sulu Sea has
provided detailed records of millennial-scale surface ocean change over the last
395,000 years. Preliminary oxygen isotope data from the thermocline dwelling
foraminifer Globorotalia tumida across the MWP-1B interval in a Sulu Sea
sediment core indicates a larger decrease in delta-18O than in the surface
dwelling species previously measured. This unexpected result raises the
following questions: (1) is this evidence of glacial meltwater influx into the
tropical Pacific thermocline or an Asian monsoon related signal at the same time
as MWP-1B? (2) if this is an ice sheet meltwater signal, why is the response
larger in the thermocline than at the surface? (3) is this change in thermocline
properties at the time of MWP-1B related to pulses of rapid sea level rise or to
changes in the western boundary current advection of surface and thermocline
waters into the western Pacific? To address these and other questions this
project will analyze delta-18O on G. tumida (calcifies ~160-200 m) at high
resolution in samples from Sulu Sea sediment core MD97-2141 spanning the
Holocene to Marine Isotope Stage 6 (~130,000 years BP), and across glacial-
interglacial transitions back to ~395,000 years BP. These data will be paired
with Mg/Ca measurements on selected intervals to isolate the water temperature
contribution to measured changes in foraminifera delta-18O. The project will
also utilize analyses of the planktonic foraminifera Globorotalia crassaformis
that calcifies at ~700m and the benthic foraminifera Oridorsalis umbonatus to
assess the timing of deeper ventilation events in the Sulu Sea.