* 1736123
* RII Track-2 FEC: Advanced Biomanufacturing: Catalyzing Improved Host Development and High Quality Medicines through Genome to Phenome Predictions
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Sarah Harcum, Clemson University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jose Colom
* 07/31/2022
* USD 6,052,552.00

Non-technical description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure
Improvement Track-2 Focused EPSCoR Collaborations (RII Track-2 FEC) award brings
together Clemson University, University of Delaware, Tulane University, and
Delaware State University to develop new biological approaches to better
understand the Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell line, which is used to
manufacture most biopharmaceuticals. For example, CHO cells are used to
manufacture more than 50% of biopharmaceuticals, and products from CHO cells
have global sales over $70 billion per year. A lack of understanding of the
fundamental link between genome stability and the phenome significantly limits
the ability to improve cell lines and ultimately increase product yields. This
project will provide foundational knowledge linking the genome (what is in the
chromosome or DNA) to what is observed (the phenome). This award provides the
opportunity for investigators with complementary expertise to collaborate in
advance of developing bio-manufacturing knowledge. Additionally, this project
will mentor four early-career tenure-track underrepresented minority (URM)
faculty and train postdoctoral scholars and graduate and undergraduate students.
The project?s vision is to create a sustainable, high impact, collaborative
research team from three EPSCoR jurisdictions that innovates fundamental genome-
phenome knowledge and solves biopharmaceutical manufacturing challenges to: 1)
improve patient access to medicines; 2) develop a highly skilled, diverse, and
inclusive workforce; and 3) acquire fundamental genome to phenome knowledge
applicable to any biological system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells are the most
widely used mammalian host cell line to manufacture biopharmaceuticals,
including infliximab to treat Crohn's disease and erythropoietin (EPO) to treat
severe anemia. These cell lines provide a unique opportunity to quantitatively
address the complex interactions between the genome and phenome because these
cells can be cultured in very tightly controlled environments (bioreactors) to
generate variable phenomes due to genome instability. This project focuses on
studying the basis for genomic instability in CHO cells and aims to expand the
quantitative understanding of the complex interactions between the genome and
environment that generates the variable phenotypes. This project will strengthen
existing collaborations among academics and provide mentoring for URM tenure-
track faculty members at four institutions in South Carolina, Delaware, and
Louisiana. Together, these researchers will develop systems biology approaches
to understand and re-engineer the genome-phenome relationship and apply this
knowledge to advance the ability to manufacture biopharmaceuticals. The project
will: 1) expand the research infrastructure in participating institutions; 2)
build individual and collective competence graduate students in genome-phenome
knowledge and CHO cell cultivation and engineering; 3) share genome-phenome
knowledge and tools that could be applicable to any other organism whether or
not it has issues with genome stability; 4) broaden and foster the participation
of tenure-track early-career underrepresented minority (URM) faculty members;
and 5) provide research experiences for URM students and establish students
exchanges among the participating EPSCoR jurisdictions.