* 1736364
* Collaborative Research:  AMPS:  Multi-Fidelity Modeling via Machine Learning for Real-time Prediction of Power System Behavior
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Steven Pekarek, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 143,898.00

The operation of current power systems depend on deterministic and static
models, which are not suitable for analyzing smart power grids due to the
increasing large-volume of data collected by the grids and sensors and the need
to integrate intermittent renewable resources and dynamic load compositions.
Large uncertainty in the model prediction is problematic as it does now allow
careful planning, and failure to identify large fluctuations and possible
instabilities could endanger the reliable operation of the power grid. Hence, it
is crucial to incorporate new monitoring capabilities realized by new tools such
as machine learning and predictive multi-rate modeling in modeling the smart
grid. Classical methods that deal with uncertainty lead to inefficient solutions
as they are too slow to converge to a solution and hence they cannot be used
effectively for real-time control of power grids. This difficulty stems from the
requirement of sampling the very complex power grid thousands of times in order
to arrive to a reasonably accurate solution. The goal of this project is to
establish significant advances in research and education in the development of
machine learning and real-time predictive modeling of power systems, with
particular focus on the smart grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Machine learning and
real-time predictive modeling have received increasing attention in recent
years. Extensive research effort has been devoted to these topics, and novel
numerical methods have been developed to efficiently deal with sensor data and
complex engineering systems. Both machine learning and real-time predictive
modeling enable us to better extract the useful information from available
sensor data and make critical decision in real time with the presence of
uncertainties. For example, solar and wind energy will depend on the weather
condition. Machine learning and real-time predictive modeling are thus critical
to many important practical problems such as power system stability analysis and
social cyber-network prediction, etc. For large-scale power systems,
deterministic simulations can be very time-consuming, and conducting predictive
simulations further increases the simulation cost and can be prohibitively
expensive. One of the biggest challenges in machine learning and real-time
predictive modeling is how to develop hierarchical reduced-order models and how
to fuse information from such hierarchical reduced-order models. This project
aims to address these critical challenges. A novel set of deep-learning based
multi-fidelity algorithms (deep Gaussian processes) will be developed for real-
time prediction of power systems. The approach under development in this
research project is based on scalable algorithms for building deep-learning
based reduced-order models for efficient power system dimension reduction. The
new algorithms will be based on building multi-fidelity models via deep learning
for power systems, and they will significantly advance the current state of the
art of deep learning and real-time predictive modeling. The project will also
integrate educational opportunities and will expand the population of modelers
who use machine learning and predictive modeling tools to solve network
problems. The project will expose a diverse group of undergraduates and minority
students to machine learning and predictive modeling.