* 1736346
* The 1st International Workshop on Near Limit Flames
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Yiguang Ju, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 12/31/2017
* USD 9,999.00

1736346 Ju&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiences in attending technical conferences
are extremely beneficial to students. These experiences will not only help with
the students? professional development, but also stimulate their critical
thinking in formulating future research directions. This award is to partially
support the travel expenses of graduate students in attending the First
International Workshop on Near Limit Flames, held at Boston University, July 29
to 30, 2017. This workshop is an important meeting on combustion science and
engineering. Presentations in this conference represent the most updated
research outcome in combustion flame at extreme conditions. The conference
facilitates the exchange of combustion flame research results through plenary
lectures and oral presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approximately 80% of
energy conversion is accomplished by combustion, which is critically relevant to
environmental sustainability. Modern combustion systems often operate at
conditions that are near the flammability limit in order to achieve high
efficiency. The extreme engine operating conditions and drastic change in fuels
have significantly changed the flame regime and dynamics. As such, it is
necessary to advance the fundamental understanding of near-limit flame dynamics.
This workshop will discuss the recent progresses and challenges and to formulate
future collaborations in theoretical, computational, and experimental studies of
near-limit flame dynamics. Understanding the near-limit flame dynamics is
critical to control combustion processes and to design advanced combustion
systems for clean energy and a sustainable environment.