* 1736146
* Cluster Hiring Initiatives at US Research Universities: An Analysis of Productivity and Variation in Outcomes
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Steven Brint, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 09/30/2019
* USD 248,379.00

This project investigates the productivity and variation in outcomes of cluster
hiring initiatives at U.S. research universities. Cluster hiring is as an
approach to hiring multiple faculty members over a short period of time. These
faculty members are expected to work in high-impact interdisciplinary areas
designated by the university. These new hiring approaches have been justified
for their capacity to meet the grand challenges facing the country that require
the skills and knowledge bases of scholars from several disciplines. Cluster
hiring initiatives are resource-intensive, because they involve not only hiring
of multiple faculty members but the allocation of labs, offices, staff support,
and instrumentation. In spite of the relatively large investments entailed by
cluster hiring programs, the outcomes of these programs have not been
systematically investigated. Given the high expectations for these hiring
initiatives and the opportunity costs involved in making these relatively large
investments, solid, empirically grounded guidance on how to maximize returns on
investment in cluster hires, and when not to make investments, should prove to
be a valuable contribution to university administrators and to national and
state policy makers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on two kinds of
comparisons. The first is between faculty members hired through cluster hiring
initiatives in the same, or closely related, fields at different universities.
The second is between faculty members hired through cluster hiring initiatives
and those hired in closely related fields through traditional departmental
processes at the same universities. The goal is to use these comparisons to
determine the conditions under which cluster hiring yields productive groups and
the conditions under which it fails to do so. The project will also make
available a data base on cluster hiring initiatives for the use of higher
education and educational policy scholars.