* 1736359
* Collaborative Research: Miniature Low-Cost Vibration Tags and Computing Infrastructure for Identifying Marine Animal Sounds
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* David Mann, Loggerhead Instruments
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2022
* USD 332,139.00

With the advent of large-scale marine passive acoustic studies it has become
clear that the sources of the majority of biological sounds is not known.
Knowledge of sound sources is important because sound can provide a robust
measurement of biological activity, such as the distribution of spawning fishes,
many of which like the cods and groupers are commercially important. It is very
difficult to identify acoustic cues produced by fishes because many of them only
make sounds during specific behaviors such as territoriality, aggression,
courtship, and spawning and at night. Video technology has limitations in that
it requires light and being in the right place at the right time. Innovative
tags based on miniature accelerometers will be developed to capture sounds from
marine animals. Newly recorded sounds will be deposited in the open, online
infrastructure of the Macaulay Library of Natural Sounds, and the submission
process will be streamlined to encourage similar use of this free repository. By
creating computing infrastructure that enables sharing, this project will build
a system that enables a self-sustaining community-driven solution to the science
problem. These miniature tags will enable broader research into the motion of
small structures and additional animals at minimal cost. This project will
support the career of three young scientists and a postdoctoral research
scientist. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and test a suite of
inexpensive miniature accelerometer recorders that can be implanted or attached
externally to fish, and develop an online system capable of storing data from
thousands of these sensors. The three tag designs will address trade-offs
between data storage, power, and tag size. The data storage tag will use a
microSD card to store raw data. The acoustic transmission tag will transmit raw
accelerometer data on an ultrasonic frequency that is received and decoded by a
passive acoustic recorder. The micro-tag will be the smallest, lowest power tag,
that will have triggered recordings to save likely signals. The data storage and
micro-tags will have a mechanism for external attachment and releasing the tag,
which will float to the surface for recovery. The project will produce
inexpensive acceleration tags and computing infrastructure to advance knowledge
of underwater sound sources.