* 1736601
* US GEOTRACES PMT: the geochemistry of size-fractionated suspended particles collected by in-situ filtration
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Phoebe Lam, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2023
* USD 372,786.00

A researcher at the University of California, Santa Cruz will analyze the
chemical composition of marine particles collected from the ocean. Marine
particles will be collected in two size classes, 1-51um and &gt;51um along the
U.S. GEOTRACES Pacific Meridional Transect (PMT), which will sample from Alaska
to Tahiti along 152°W. The smaller particles generally remain suspended in
seawater, where they can interact with dissolved elements in seawater, whereas
the larger particles tend to sink which means these elements can be transported
to the bottom of the ocean. We will measure a suite of trace elements (e.g.
iron, aluminum, zinc, manganese, cadmium, copper, cobalt, titanium, and barium),
some of which are required for life, and others that act as tracers of
oceanographic processes, as well as the major biologically-produced carrier
phases (e.g. particulate organic carbon and the biominerals, calcium carbonate
and biogenic silica) in the size-fractionated particles collected from the US
PMT section. The data will be used to assess the relative importance of particle
concentration, composition, and size distribution on the cycling and removal of
trace elements and their isotopes (TEIs). Results will not only contribute to
the overall goal of the GEOTRACES program, but also provide critical information
to other science communities interested in the role of particles in sequestering
carbon from the atmosphere through a process known as the biological carbon
pump. A graduate student and a postdoc will be supported and trained on this
project, and undergraduate students will be involved in several aspects of this
work. The results from this study will be integrated into class curricula taught
by the researcher. The scientist will also work with a science journalist who
will sail on the expedition to translate the process and initial results of this
research to the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particles play essential roles in
the cycling and distribution of trace elements and isotopes (TEI) in the ocean
by being sources and sinks for many TEIs. The scavenging of dissolved TEIs by
particles is a major removal term for many particle-associated TEIs, but is
poorly understood and represents a major uncertainty in our understanding of the
biogeochemical cycling of many TEIs. The scavenging of TEIs is affected by
particle size, concentration, and composition, whereas the subsequent removal of
particles by sinking is influenced by particle dynamics processes such as
particle aggregation and disaggregation. We will measure the major (particulate
organic matter, calcium carbonate, opal, lithogenic particles) and minor
(particulate trace metals) phase compositions of size-fractionated particles
(1-51um; &gt;51um) collected by in-situ filtration on the the US GEOTRACES
Pacific Meridional Transect (PMT). The PMT will be the first meridional section
of the US GEOTRACES program and will cross many gradients in surface
productivity, biological community composition, subsurface silica
concentrations, and depth of the calcite saturation horizon. Therefore, the US
PMT section is expected to vary dramatically in particle concentration,
composition, and size distribution, allowing us to examine the factors
controlling scavenging efficiency in the ocean.