* 1736417
* AMPS:  Collaborative Research:  Analysis of Local Power Grid Properties: From Network Motifs to Tensors
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Harold Vincent Poor, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 115,000.00

Power grids are a critical infrastructure upon which society relies for
effective operation of many other pursuits, including commerce, healthcare,
transportation, etc. The list is quite long, as electricity use pervades almost
every aspect of human activity. Thus, methods for improving the resilience and
security of the energy infrastructure are of deep interest to society and have
substantial potential impact on its proper functioning across a very broad
front. The past decade has seen an increasing interest in the application of
tools developed in the interdisciplinary field of complex network analysis to
improve our understanding of power system behavior. Indeed, a power grid can be
naturally described as a graph where nodes represent, e.g., transformers,
substations or generators, and edges represent electrical connections. Methods
of complex network analysis have provided new insights into the fundamental and
intrinsic characteristics of power system vulnerability and the effectiveness of
associated risk mitigation strategies. However, knowledge on the role of local
network structures in functionality of power systems yet remains limited. The
project develops a new methodology to enhance our understanding on a functional
role of various local network features in unveiling hidden mechanisms behind
vulnerability of real power systems and their dynamic response to
malfunctions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project contemplates a new approach to
analysis of the local topological properties of power grids via network motifs,
which are smaller recurrent patterns occurring in network structure. This
methodology provides a basis for understanding linkages between higher-order
network topologies and functionality of power grids. The proposed formulation
presents a broad platform for the development both of new analytical methods for
characterizing power system stability, vulnerability and resilience, and of
algorithms for detecting faults, attacks and other anomalies in power grids.
Furthermore, the project provides opportunities for strengthening our
understanding of the role of motifs more generally in the study of network
behavior that may be applied more broadly in a variety of cyber-physical
settings.