* 1736985
* A Lagrangian approach to quantifying isopycnal dispersion and the role of mixing in the Eastern North Atlantic Oxygen Minimum Zone
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Jaime Palter, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 290,962.00

In the ocean interior, microbial respiration creates a layer of low oxygen
waters that is inhospitable to many marine organisms. This layer is most
severely oxygen-depleted along the eastern margins of every tropical and
subtropical basin, in the so-called Oxygen Minimum Zone (OMZs). OMZs which are
dynamically isolated from the oxygenated surface layers play a role in ocean
biogeochemistry and ecosystem structure that is disproportionate to their size.
For instance, OMZs control the global nitrogen cycle, as they are the principal
locations where bio-available nitrogen is removed from the ocean. Such nitrogen
removal is accompanied by the production of carbon dioxide, providing a source
of the greenhouse gas to the atmosphere. The OMZs also influence the
distribution of large pelagic fish Moreover, OMZs are predicted to expand under
global warming, an effect that is already evident in observational records and
strongest in the Atlantic Ocean. This project focuses on understanding of these
critical regions by describing the dynamics and quantify the rates that govern
isopycnal dispersion and mixing in the tropics using a high resolution
Lagrangian set data collected under previous NSF funding. This research is
expected to advance conceptual models of the processes controlling oxygen
concentrations in the OMZs and their representation in ocean circulation models.
A graduate student will be trained in modern oceanographic analysis techniques
and the results from the project will be incorporated in the classroom. Visits
to middle school classrooms through the Rhode Island Teacher At Sea program will
discuss oceanographic topics each spring by incorporating discussions on ocean
hypoxia and how acoustic methods are used to observe
circulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ocean circulation models do not accurately
simulate the intensity of the ocean's OMZs, a persistent problem that is
hypothesized to be linked to their representation of isopycnal mixing. A
quantification and process-level understanding of such mixing has been
historically challenged by the scarcity of high-quality data collected in these
regions. From 2003-2005, NSF supported the Lagrangian Isopycnal Dispersion
Experiment (LIDEX) to overcome these challenges. The LIDEX data, which included
Lagrangian trajectories from the deployment of 92 isopycnal RAFOS floats at the
edge of the Atlantic OMZ, are poised to address the problem of isopycnal mixing
in the tropics. The LIDEX floats were successfully ballasted to drift on two
different density surfaces and released in clusters at five locations near the
western edge of the Atlantic OMZ. The resulting trajectories represent among the
most accurate oceanic observations of Lagrangian particles to date. All floats
carried temperature sensors and half were equipped with oxygen sensors. 62
floats were tracked continuously four times a day for 5 months, and 49 floats
completed a 15-month mission with only one short gap. Synthesis of these data
can provide valuable insight into mixing in this region, and ultimately help
improve predictions of the fate of OMZs. The following three critical questions
will be addressed:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. What are the processes and rates of
dispersion on isopycnal surfaces from several kilometers to hundreds of
kilometers?&lt;br/&gt;2. How does the diffusivity calculated from the float
dispersion compare with other attempts to quantify mixing, and what does this
comparison tell us about the flux of oxygen into the OMZ?&lt;br/&gt;3. Do the
representations of subgridscale turbulence in coarse resolution ocean general
circulation models prevent them from successfully simulating OMZ intensity?