* 1736448
* AMPS:  Dynamics-Aware Algorithms for Real-Time Structured Fault Detection in Power Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Rene Vidal, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 230,728.00

The U.S. power grid is in the midst of its most fundamental transformation since
its inception. Spurred by the need to reduce emissions, the electric generation
mix is drifting away from traditional, reliable sources, towards volatile and
uncertain renewable sources. Simultaneously, there is an unprecedented increase
in the quantity, quality, and variety of sensing and monitoring devices. From
phasor measurement units (PMUs) to smart meters, the power grid is soon to
experience an overflow of data that has the potential of providing an
extraordinary amount of information at the transmission and distribution levels.
However, despite this burst in data availability, there is still a lack of
analytic tools that can leverage the newly available telemetry to help operators
face the paradigm shift that renewable sources pose. Moreover, the modernization
of monitoring systems that use cyber resources to transmit information for
processing and analysis begets new challenges and threats. Without the proper
tools to correct and validate the collected data, undetected errors or
maliciously modified data can mislead operators and bring the system towards
blackouts. This work addresses these challenges by developing novel algorithmic
tools that take into account intrinsic properties of the
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a theoretical framework
and associated algorithms that can reliably utilize the newly available
measurements to provide useful real-time information that can allow operators to
use resources better and react to unforeseen events. More precisely, the PIs
seek to combine tools from statistics, dynamical systems, and optimization to
develop a data analytic approach to identify and prevent cyber-physical attacks,
correct missing, and corrupted data, identify network structural changes, and
recognize abrupt local changes in supply- demand imbalance. This research is
unique within the existing the literature in power system monitoring in several
ways. Firstly, it acknowledges and leverages the fact that there are spatial and
temporal correlations between the measurements generated by the underlying
dynamical system (the power grid). Secondly, it builds a unifying modeling
framework that can jointly capture how grid measurements are affected by (a)
topology changes in the network, (b) abrupt changes in supply or demand, and (c)
measurement errors. Thirdly, it develops a novel algorithmic framework that
exploits structural sparsity properties of the different network disturbances to
discriminate and identify the source of a given grid transient behavior. The
research will also build a large-scale simulation testbed to assess the accuracy
and scalability of the designed algorithms and in this way bridge the gap
between theoretical models and actual power systems.