* 1736926
* Collaborative Research: Advancing Deformation Monitoring Methods at Axial Seamount
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2024
* Scott Nooner, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 172,641.00

This research project continues long-term study and monitoring of the most
active submarine volcano in the world. Axial Seamount is located about 300 miles
off the coast of Oregon and represents one of the best places to study how
volcanoes work because it erupts frequently and repetitively and has numerous
monitoring instruments linked to shore via cable which is part of the newly
commissioned National Science Foundation's Ocean Observing Initiative. This
research focuses on continuing the present time series data collection effort
and using the data to understand how magma (molten rock) is stored in the
shallow crust at volcanoes, how it is delivered to the surface, how eruptions
are triggered, and how eruptions can be successfully forecast. Field work
involves use of newly developed, precise, pressure sensors and autonomous
underwater vehicles using geodetics to measure vertical movements of the
seafloor, which take place as Axial Seamount, gradually inflates like a balloon,
with magma seeping in and filling its subterranean magma chamber a few
kilometers below the seafloor. During inflation (the present situation) and
deflation (loss of volume due to eruption of lavas on the seafloor, the last of
which occurred in 2015) the seafloor moves up and down as much as 8-12 feet. As
observed in Axial's last two eruption cycles, when the volcano is fully "re-
inflated" it is ready to erupt again. Monitoring for almost two decades has
shown that Axial Seamount inflates to a similar amount before each eruption.
This allowed the two previous eruptions to be successfully forecast months in
advance. Collection of this new data will be complemented by geodynamic modeling
focused on understanding how volcano inflation influences the deformation field
around it. Broader impacts of this research have broad implications for the
understanding of volcano hazards, utilizes the new Ocean Observing Initiative's
cabled array and complementary sensor suites, helps build infrastructure for
science, and provides training for students. It will also result in a new
software package to enable autonomous underwater vehicles to perform terrain-
following grids of features on the seafloor. Results from this study may have
important implications for better understanding magma chamber filling and
eruption associated with volcanoes on land where the continental crust, many
times, adds complexity to fundamental magma generation and magma chamber filling
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Axial Seamount is on the Juan de Fuca Ridge off
the coast of the northwestern United States. It erupted in 1998, 2011, and most
recently again in April 2015. It has been instrumented for this period of time
with sensors that can detect ground motion and changes in elevation over time.
It is now hooked to the undersea data cable and junction box of the National
Science Foundation's Ocean Observing Initiative's cabled array. Thus, Axial
Seamount is an ideal natural laboratory for the long-term study of active
processes of submarine volcanos in a mid-ocean ridge setting. Long-term research
and monitoring of Axial has created a remarkable time-series dataset of bottom
pressure observations that have revealed repeated cycles of inflation and
deflation that have been used to forecast eruptions with increasing accuracy.
The 2015 eruption was the first captured in real time by the network of sensors
now installed inside the volcano's caldera and on its flanks. These
installations have revealed the inner workings of the volcano in unprecedented
detail. This research will follow up on recent work by using autonomous
underwater vehicles that generate high-resolution bathymetric maps that show the
Axial deformation field extends well beyond its summit caldera. These new data
complement the continuous, but spatially limited, pressure sensor measurements
and put them into a geologic, morphological framework. This research will
continue the pressure measurements and further develop a new autonomous
underwater vehicle navigation technique to improve seafloor survey reliability
and reproducibility. Results of this will be used to advance modeling of the
deformation of the Axial subsurface magmatic system. It will also explore new
quantitative numerical methods for improving eruption forecasts.