* 1736538
* Collaborative Research: Refining foraminiferal I/Ca as a paleoceanographic oxygenation proxy for the glacial Atlantic Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Ellen Thomas, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 07/31/2021
* USD 59,263.00

This collaborative project seeks to refine the use of I/Ca ratios in fossil
foraminifera from marine sediments as a proxy for reconstructing past dissolved
oxygen levels in the ocean, a fundamental variable because of the role oxygen
plays in the biogeochemical cycle of carbon and in controlling the distribution
of marine life. The present oceans because of warming and eutrophication are on
a trajectory to lower oxygen contents and future expansion of marine "dead
zones" - regions where waters have oxygen levels below the threshold necessary
for life. Ocean-wide changes in dissolved oxygen levels that are projected to
occur over the next century are expected to have magnitudes similar to those
that occurred over the natural glacial-interglacial cycles of the last few
millions of years. A better understanding of the ocean's oxygen history in the
past, especially the geographic and bathymetric extent of oxygen depletion, can
help improve future forecasts. While a number of geochemical proxies are
available to reconstruct extreme oxygen changes that affected the whole or large
parts of the global ocean in the distant geological past, proxies sensitive to
the subtler oxygen fluctuations expected to occur in the near-future have been
lacking. Measurements of foraminiferal I/Ca in preliminary studies have shown
excellent potential to differentiate and reconstruct intermediate oxygen levels
in the water column. This project will further evaluate and refine I/Ca as a
quantitative proxy for reconstructing hypoxic and suboxic conditions, oxygen
levels most relevant to future threats to marine ecosystems on a human time
scale. Broader impacts of the project include the support of an early career
scientist and two senior PIs, as well as two graduate students and several
undergraduates. Public outreach will be through collaboration with the local
Syracuse Science Museum and through the mainstream media.

The project team will conduct I/Ca analyses of foraminifera from a large suite
of core top samples from the west Africa margin to further develop empirical
calibrations between iodine and subsurface oxygen levels. They will compare I/Ca
data with two independent oxygen proxies (nitrogen isotope data and carbon
isotope gradients in benthic foraminifera), targeting both the upper and deep
oceans. The team will then apply I/Ca measurements to downcore planktic and
benthic foraminifera from a variety of regions in the Atlantic and Southern
Ocean to quantitatively reconstruct past variations in the distribution and
intensity of the oxygen minimum zone (OMZ), with a focus on changes in the
glacial ocean at different depths and in different parts of the Atlantic basin.
In addition, a representation of the marine iodine cycle will be incorporated
into a widely-used Earth System Model (cGENIE), enabling explicit data-model
comparisons for the first time. Graduate and postgraduate training in earth
system modeling will be provided through a two-day workshop to be held at
Syracuse University. This project will lead to further develop of a promising
proxy (I/Ca) for hypoxic and suboxic conditions, investigate the variability of
ocean oxygenation with climate change, and advance the capacity for future
integration between proxy oxygen data and earth system models.