* 1736582
* SCC-IRG Track 2: Data-Informed Modeling and Correct-by-Design Control Protocols for Personal Mobility in Intelligent Urban Transportation Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Behcet Acikmese, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,022,619.00

This Smart and Connected Communities project will develop a unified model-based
and data-driven framework for modeling and controlling three core components of
personal mobility in intelligent urban transportation: parking, ride-sharing
services, and traffic flow on urban arterial roads. Data from recently installed
technologies such as smart parking meters and probe-based sensors (e.g., wifi
sensors) can be leveraged in, e.g., designing dynamic parking pricing and to
help guide drivers to available parking spaces using smart-device apps. Such
data will be available via collaborations with the Departments of Transportation
(DOT) in Los Angeles and Seattle. Furthermore, we will engage several commercial
districts in Los Angeles and Seattle, which are significant stakeholders in new
parking systems and serve very diverse communities. Coupling new technologies
with methodological innovations, this project aims to reduce negative impacts of
traffic congestion on the environment, quality of life, productivity, and
physical and financial well-being. In-situ experimental trials will allow for
the impact of policy changes suggested by the research to be assessed.
Collaborations with municipal partners will also be leveraged to create
opportunities for workforce development that avail students to domain experts
and aid in research-capacity building. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In pursuit of
utilizing new data-driven technologies, this project will develop stochastic
decision models for parking, ride-sharing, and traffic flow in urban
environments. The team will explore: i) Stochastic Game-theoretic(SG) and Markov
Decision Process (MDP)-based models to capture vehicle behavior as well as the
traffic dynamics as an ensemble behavior; ii) Synthesis of correct-by-design
decision algorithms using formal methods and convex optimization; iii)
Integration and testing of the proposed algorithms in a relevant urban
environment. Developed models will capture individuals' behaviors as well as
overall urban traffic dynamics and will be validated against real data. This
project will explore new ways to merge formal methods with optimization-based
MDP and SG synthesis for decision-making policies that incorporate unique set of
specifications at an individual and ensemble level. Formal methods techniques
allow for qualitative specifications (e.g., access, fairness, etc.) to be
encoded into objectives for which the proposed correct-by-design innovations
will lead to provable guarantees needed to ensure sustainable policy
development. Finally, with collaborators at the Seattle DOT, experimental trials
that go beyond data collection will be conducted in selected Seattle commercial
districts to test and validate designed control and parking policy changes.