* 1736153
* Quantifying the relationship between the Earth?s convecting interior, plate motions, and earthquakes in Alaska using three-dimensional numerical simulations
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Lucy Flesch, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 07/31/2022
* USD 294,288.00

It is important to understand the levels of mantle coupling that drives
intraplate continental deformation, a fundamental question in geophysics, as it
will aid in seismic hazard analysis for earthquakes that occur far away from
plate boundaries. How mantle flow drives surface deformation and motions in
oceanic lithosphere is well established and has been key in further
understanding many aspects of plate tectonics, however, within intraplate
continental lithosphere the quantification of this coupling remains poorly
understood. Alaska provides a unique opportunity to assess the level of
continental lithospheric/mantle coupling due to its thin lithosphere and surface
motions that are not easily explained by relative plate motions and gravity
acting on high topography. The diffuse Pacific - North America plate boundary
zone in Alaska is related to the subduction of the Pacific plate and Yakutat
microplate beneath the North American plate and clockwise rotation of the Bering
plate to the west, and has been used as an analog for an early Tibet. Observed
surface motions in Alaska, however, illustrate that it is unlike any other
convergent continental plate boundary. For example, all convergence of the
approximately 5 cm/yr of Pacific - North America relative plate motion is
accommodated within a 500 km zone, and surface motions beyond this zone are
directed southward towards the plate boundary. Because the of the long time
scale over which significant intraplate earthquakes occur it is vital to
understand how stress is transferred form the mantle into these regions, this
study will to address that fundamental question This project will also support
the research of a graduate and undergraduate student.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will perform 3-D finite element geodynamic
modeling to investigate the role mantle flow in driving intraplate surface
motions and deformation in Alaska. These numerical experiments will be
constrained using geophysical observations and have a physically accurate model
volume (geometry) for the diffuse Pacific-North American plate boundary zone in
Alaska. The resolution of this 3D geometry will allow us to determine the level
of coupling between the Alaskan lithosphere and convecting mantle beneath it. We
will differentiate between physically viable models by comparing our various
model's predicted surface velocities to the observed surface deformation field,
constrained by GPS and Quaternary fault slip data, This work will seek to answer
the following questions: (1) What are the driving forces of the Bering plate?
(2) What are the relative contributions of lithospheric thickness, lithospheric
rheology and mantle flow in driving intraplate deformation in northern and
central Alaska? (3) What force(s) is/are responsible for compression and uplift
of the Mackenzie Mountains?