* 1736323
* SHF: Small: Automating Improvement of Development Environments for Cyber-Physical Systems (AIDE-CPS)
* CSE,CCF
* 08/16/2016,08/31/2019
* Taylor Johnson, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2019
* USD 457,424.00

People and society depend on cyber physical systems in diverse domains from
transportation systems, such as automotive and aerospace, to medical devices.
Due to the safety-critical nature of these cyber-physical systems, their safe
and reliable operation is essential. The reliable and correct operation of
development tools used to design cyber-physical systems is also vital, since
defects in development tools have the capability to culminate in defects in
cyber-physical systems themselves. While extensive research efforts exist to
address problems such as state-space explosion for models of cyber-physical
systems, less effort has been invested in developing methods to ensure
correctness of development environments for cyber-physical systems. The design
and engineering process for cyber-physical systems (CPS) relies on numerous
artifacts, model translation layers, programming languages, and development
tools, which are often assumed to be correct but are in fact not.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops randomized differential testing and
fuzzing methods to automatically find candidate defects in CPS development
environments. The project investigates new formal methods and testing approaches
to automate improvement of CPS development environments. This framework relies
on three primary efforts: randomly generating CPS models, translating CPS models
between different development tools, and comparing both dynamic and symbolic
executions of CPS models. The framework increases confidence in the correctness
of development environments which aids in realizing the societal benefits of
cyber-physical systems.