* 1737218
* Collaborative Research: Tracking the Subtropical Front across the Mid Pleistocene Transition Using Sea Surface Temperature and Nutrients
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Melissa Berke, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 263,727.00

This project seeks to reconstruct changes in the position of the Subtropical
Front (STF) in the Agulhas region of the Southern Ocean south of Africa over the
last 1.5 million years. Ocean currents play a significant role in the
distribution of heat and salt in the global ocean. Ultimately, changes in these
currents influence marine nutrient distribution, ocean uptake of atmospheric
CO2, and global climate. South of Africa, the Agulhas Current moves warm, salty
water from the southern Indian Ocean into the South Atlantic Ocean. However,
during intervals of near-global cooling, it is thought that the amount of this
warm water escaping around Africa decreases or is even stopped, cutoff by a
northward migration of the STF. Because a northward shift of the STF has the
potential to both expand the surface area of the Southern Ocean and limit water
exchange between the Indian and Atlantic Oceans, the region south of Africa is
an important climate target to advance our understanding of how the physical
movements of the STF may impact regional and global climate. Migrations of the
STF are relatively poorly resolved for the past 1.5 million years, in part due
to a prior lack of sediment cores in the critical region of front migration.
This research combines multiple proxy records of ocean changes at a location
sensitive to STF position to study how STF movement may have influenced ocean
circulation and CO2 uptake. The project will support two female PIs (one early
career) as well as two graduate students and several undergraduates. Broader
public outreach is planned in the context of K-12 classroom and web-based
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will generate an integrated
reconstruction of upper ocean dynamics along the Subtropical Front over the last
1.5 million years from sediments in a new International Ocean Discovery Program
core (Site U1475) recovered from the southern Indian Ocean at a location well
suited to monitor STF position. They will use multiple sediment proxies to
generate an integrated reconstruction of upper ocean dynamics along the STF
using reconstructions of water temperature, export production, and nutrient
utilization. North-south migrations of the STF have been hypothesized to control
movement of water through the Indo-Atlantic Gateway, an exchange that has
important implications for the air-sea balance of CO2 and the strength of the
meridional overturning circulation of the Atlantic. The resulting data will be
used to document the location of the STF with respect to the core site and the
nutrient status of the subantarctic region of the Southern Ocean during episodes
of expansion. Specifically, the investigators will produce new high-resolution
records of water temperature (using Uk37, TEX86, and foraminiferal census counts
using a Modern Analog Technique), export production (using total organic carbon,
biogenic silica, and total alkenone (C37tot) content), and nutrient dynamics
(using foraminiferal-bound organic matter d15N) for the last 1.5 million years
to constrain the history of the STF and its response to climate change. Emphasis
will be placed on the Mid Pleistocene Transition (MPT), the time interval
between 1.25 and 0.7 million years ago when the dominant periodicity of climate
cycles changed from 41 kiloyears to 100 kiloyears in the absence of substantial
change in orbital forcing. Reconstructing the location of the STF across the MPT
is key to understanding the role that STF migration may have played in altering
the Southern Ocean biological pump (with consequent changes in atmospheric CO2).