* 1737768
* Increasing ATE Career Placement for Students with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD): Identification and Dissemination of Best Practices
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Mary Ellen Gardiner, Pellet Productions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,089,967.00

According to the U.S. Center for Disease Control (CDC), the national prevalence
of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) increased by 119.4 % from 1 in 150 (in 2000)
to 1 in 68 (in 2010). The factors contributing to the increased prevalence of
ASD include heightened public awareness, improved screening, changes in the
diagnostic specification, and, notably, improved ability to recognize and
diagnose higher-functioning individuals with ASD who may have been overlooked in
the past. Evidence suggests that these individuals, sometimes referred to as
having high-functioning ASD, may be the fastest growing sector of the autism
population. The implications for institutions of higher education and for
employers is far-reaching. In addition to improved diagnosis, the success of
interventions and efforts to include students with ASD in mainstream activities
has contributed to increased rates of college attendance. The number of students
entering college with high-functioning autism spectrum disorders is expected to
increase in coming years, and data reveal an enrollment rate of students with
ASD at community colleges at more than twice that of four-year
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce a series of video-based
educational materials for the professional development of educators and
employers. The overarching focus is to: 1) build awareness of academic and
employer-based STEM programs that promote the college and workplace based
success of individuals with ASD and, 2) to promote existing "Best Practices" to
an expanded community of educational institutions, students with ASD and their
families, and employers. The videos will showcase applied best practices across
multiple STEM disciplines and specifically in technician preparation programs in
advanced technological education. Pellet Productions will first perform an
analysis of the current landscape of academic- and employer-based supports for
individuals with ASD, and then produce a series of recruitment and professional
development videos including: six student profiles, three ATE and STEM videos
for families, and one ATE and ASD overview video for general audiences and a
long form documentary-style best practices video that will form the basis for a
professional development course to be offered via an online format. An e-Book
will be produced to both accompany the course and serve as a stand-alone guide
to best practice implementation. The primary audiences include: ATE faculty,
student affairs personnel, corporate sector human resource personnel and
supervisors, and students with ASD and their families to help guide their
college and career decision process.