* 1737918
* ATD:  Collaborative Research:  Multivariate Quantiles for Rapid Spatio-Temporal Threat Detection
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Singdhansu Chatterjee, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

Different kinds of data on societal attributes, observed from multiple sources,
at multiple locations, and at different points in time, will be studied in this
project. The geometrical properties of such data will be analyzed to quantify
and characterize normal patterns in the data, which will then be leveraged to
identify sudden departures from normal patterns within societies. Methodology
for understanding normal patterns in the data and rapidly detecting change in
one or more aspects of the data will be devised in this project. Data from
different locations around the world will be analyzed and used to formulate
strategies for risk mitigation and emergency responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
geometric properties of high-dimensional spatio-temporal data will be studied in
this project to construct a multi-dimensional extremity indicator. This
indicator and other statistical and machine learning techniques will be used for
rapid spatio-temporal change detection, under a variety of technical conditions
and frameworks. Such changes may be towards specific known directions, or
generic departures from normal patterns. Methods for detecting changes in
extremes and tails of multivariate probability distributions will likewise be
developed as part of this project. Social, economic, and supply chain logistics
data will then be studied to develop policy and rapid response strategies using
data-driven techniques.