* 1737500
* Computer Science for All Teachers
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Melissa Rasberry, American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 11/30/2018
* USD 500,725.00

The American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences (AIR) proposes a
one year effort to continue to grow the CS for All Teachers community of
practice (CoP) while building a research agenda for the community going forward.
The CS for All Teachers project will enrich and deepen the teacher support
provided by the virtual CoP that was originally developed by AIR in 2013,
redesigned in 2015, and rebranded (from the CS10K Community) in
2016.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;According to the U.S. Department of Education's
Office of Educational Technology (2014), there are four features which most
strongly associate with value received by online community participants:
distributed leadership, structured activities, tangible products, and resource
repositories and robust tools. AIR will focus on these key features during this
year to cultivate a sustainable teacher-led community of practice. With this new
funding, AIR has three goals:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Cultivate a sustainable
teacher-led community of practice, which is driven by member needs and
interests. AIR will pilot a corps of teacher leaders, who will help to sustain
and deepen engagement as community ambassadors. The pilot findings will inform
the future development of a teacher leadership toolkit. In addition, AIR will
work with the Computer Science Teachers Association to explore
microcredentialing and/or badging of teachers for participation in professional
development activities in the CoP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Expand and improve a
user-friendly, secure website. AIR will work with their web developer to
implement updates to the website, including upgrades to Drupal 8 and responsive
design features. Additional data will be collected on recruitment and
communications strategies, on members who respond to specific content within the
community, and from the implementation of the Drupal recommendations module
(similar to Amazon's "if you liked X, you may like Y" offerings). When combined
with analytics updates, these new data will facilitate planning for better
professional learning and content curation activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3.
Implement more robust evaluation activities to guide community programming and
to develop a long-term agenda for research. AIR will tap into the expertise--
both content and research-based--of CS education advisors to review and provide
feedback on pilot activities for this year and evaluation plans for subsequent
years. An initial needs assessment will be completed, along with the
implementation of new site surveys and other feedback mechanisms. In addition,
AIR will conduct an outreach plan to identify and contact inactive members of
the community (i.e., those who have not logged in for at least 6-12 months) to
determine their interests, needs, and concerns. The analysis of these data will
provide a clearer sense of what will be needed to increase engagement of all
community members, and subsequently contribute to planning for future
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CS for All Teachers will continue its efforts to
better understand how teachers are putting their community engagement to use in
their own classrooms and how valuable it is for their daily work in order to
better tailor community activities.