* 1737492
* SCC-Planning:  Caution:  Heavy Load Ahead
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Kris Wernstedt, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 99,354.00

Waze, Twitter, variable message signs, Google Transit, transportation agency
live camera feeds, and scores of mobile apps and other sources provide high
quality, dynamic information to travelers in cities around the country. This
information, much of it crowdsourced, epitomizes the allure of big data and
smart and connected communities. Readily available to almost any traveler with a
smart phone, it holds the promise of enabling better decisions to reduce traffic
congestion, improve road safety, facilitate transit use, guide infrastructure
investments, and otherwise improve transport outcomes. However, two stumbling
blocks cloud this vision. These relate to, first, the challenges digital
overload and other human cognitive limitations impose on decision-making; and,
second, the reluctance of many transportation agencies to rely heavily on
crowdsourced data in their operational (e.g., traffic management) and longer-
term (e.g., infrastructure planning) decisions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
planning project addresses these two challenges. More specifically, PIs are
working with public transportation managers in two inner-ring, Washington, DC
metro area counties with highly diverse national- and foreign-born populations
to develop a longer-term research effort to understand: (1) personal and
institutional factors that influence the generation and use of information from
crowdsourcing apps and other digital technologies in transportation; (2) impacts
of perceived information overload on drivers, public managers, and planners
(consumers and producers of information); 3) effect of overload on
transportation incidents and patterns, and 4) effects on transport system
performance of different types, levels, and quality of crowd-sourced transport
information. Ultimately, PIs seek to yield better transportation outcomes for
travelers in our study area, and to provide transferable lessons for communities
around the country.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The work integrates across social
psychology, public administration, decision sciences, transportation
engineering, and computer sciences. Its focus on digital overload, co-production
of information by individuals and institutions, and model-based informatics
uniquely captures decision dynamics widely distributed across space and
individual actors. As such, it seeks to advance understanding of smart
transportation system performance by incorporating a neglected element of
information use (overload) critical to traveler behavior. By expanding a model-
based informatics perspective to consider overload and aggregating decision-
making distributed across a large number of individuals, it augments social
psychology efforts to capture the collective effects of individual overload and
stress as well. It also fosters new synergies between public administration --
which rarely considers uncertainty and risk as central parts of a decision
situation -- and the behavioral decision sciences, which rarely consider the
public interest nature of managers' responsibilities and their collaborative
decision environment.