* 1737399
* Collaborative Research: Mesozooplankton food webs in intermittent upwelling systems: An overlooked link in a productive ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Robert Cowen, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 09/30/2021
* USD 907,932.00

This project will examine the coastal ocean mesozooplankton community and their
predation by early life stages of fish in the northern California Current. The
goal is to understand how these predator-prey interactions change during
different oceanographic regimes that vary seasonally in the region. This study
will use a very high-resolution imaging system coupled with net samples to
measure trophic interactions within the zooplankton community across a range of
environmental parameters (e.g., temperature, relative timing and intensity of
upwelling). The camera provides detailed information on the fine-scale abundance
and spatial distributions of a wide diversity of plankton, while the net samples
will provide biological samples for diet-related analyses. This project will
train 12 undergraduate and two graduate students and one post-doctoral scholar.
The research team will develop a variety of educational activities and products
to facilitate greater outreach to public audiences. Plankton imagery from this
project will be used to build the Global Plankton Imagery Library, an open-
access repository for plankton imagery that will be a resource for the research
community. The researchers will expand the imagery available in the Plankton
Portal, a public website they developed in partnership with the Citizen Science
Alliance's Zooniverse, that invites citizen scientists to participate in
classifying plankton from field photographs. They will collaborate with Science
Education specialists to include Plankton Portal kiosks in a new public exhibit
at the Oregon State University's Hatfield Marine Science Center (HMSC) Visitor
Center, which annually hosts 150,000 visitors of all ages. Importantly, this
activity will not only educate K-12 and beyond, but will enable researchers to
study what factors motivate citizen scientists, what characterizes "heavy-
users", and how those users can be supported and encouraged into advanced
collaborator roles. A multi-media artist will join the research cruises as part
of the new Artist-At-Sea program. Their artwork will be displayed at the HMSC
Visitor Center and University of Oregon's Charleston Marine Life Center and a
scaled traveling show will tour Oregon metropolitan areas and underserved
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eastern boundary currents are among the most
productive marine ecosystems on the planet and support a significant proportion
of global fisheries, yet there are unanswered questions about the role of non-
crustacean zooplankton in transferring production through upwelling food webs.
This study will answer key questions about the food web dynamics associated with
mesozooplankton linkages, sources of carbon production, and consequences for
upper trophic levels in different shelf upwelling systems. Not only is there a
knowledge gap in how the food web currently functions in transition areas of
major eastern boundary current systems, but there is increasing evidence that
these systems are changing. Regional and global shifts in major currents,
including upwelling strength, together with temperature-induced latitudinal
shifts in species ranges that are already occurring and predicted to continue
will have major effects on interactions among species, and consequently, food
webs. Understanding these interactions and predicting future changes is highly
relevant to science, society, and economies. The researchers plan to sample the
winter and summer seasons in the northern California Current off central Oregon
(intermittent upwelling) and northern California (continuous upwelling) with the
high resolution In Situ Ichthyoplankton Imaging System to obtain an accurate
description of mesozooplankton communities: their abundances, and horizontal and
vertical spatial distributions, over contrasting upwelling/downwelling system
dynamics. In parallel, they plan to collect depth-discrete mesozooplankton
samples to quantify seasonal diets for larval fishes and gelatinous zooplankton
and prey-specific growth rates of larval fishes. Stable isotope analysis of
mesozooplankton predators and prey will reveal the relative role of new vs.
regenerated production in sustaining food webs such major eastern boundary
currents.