* 1737591
* SCC-IRG Track 1: Sociotechnical Systems to Enable Smart and Connected Energy-Aware Residential Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Torsten Reimer, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Vishal Sharma
* 09/30/2023
* USD 3,980,061.00

This project aims to develop a new paradigm for smart and connected residential
communities that engages inhabitants in understanding and reducing their home
energy use while increasing their environmental awareness, responsiveness to
collective goals, and improving their quality of life. The research will lead to
discoveries concerning how individuals, groups, and residential communities make
decisions related to their home energy consumption. Based on this knowledge,
this project will develop feedback mechanisms integrated into user-interactive
smart devices to enable optimal energy management. The Indiana Housing and
Community Development Agency, several industry stakeholders and various
community action groups will be engaged in this work throughout the lifetime of
the project. Smart and connected (S&amp;C) technology will be implemented in
several hundred households in multiple residential communities that will be used
as research test-beds and will cover a wide range of demographics, locations,
and construction. The research outcomes will be integrated in teaching modules
that support curriculum and workforce development as well as capacity-building
in engineering, social and economic science, and polytechnic schools at Purdue.
Through sociotechnical research advances, community engagement, and
dissemination, this project will create a national model for "S&amp;C energy-
aware residential communities" in the housing sector, and by example point the
broader research community toward S&amp;CC research frontiers that enhance
community functioning and national prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental
advances in machine learning and mechanism design, along with integrative
research in human-machine interaction, behavioral and social sciences, and
building energy systems will lead to discoveries that challenge our current
understanding of behavior and response to feedback both at the individual and
community-level. Given the large population size and the range of learning and
community-based feedback mechanisms along with audio/visual end-user systems,
the findings pertaining to the use of customized feedback and S&amp;C technology
to influence behavior will lead to general principles of human behavior that can
be transferred to domains beyond energy use. The researchers will establish a
new sociotechnical modeling approach based on Bayesian multi-scale clustering
algorithms and game-theoretic models that will impact multiple disciplines and
research activities in different S&amp;CC application domains, such as energy,
water, transportation, economic development, environmental quality, and urban
planning.