* 1737380
* SCC-Planning:  Plan an Integrated Active Travel and Green Infrastructure System for Mental Wellbeing in Disadvantaged Communities through Crowdsourcing Technology
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Hongwei Dong, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 99,485.00

The purpose of this research project is to develop a multidisciplinary research
team at the California State University, Fresno to study how active travel and
green infrastructures can be better planned to improve residents' mental
wellbeing through a combination of crowdsourcing technology and traditional
survey questionnaires and interviews. The study will focus on residents in
disadvantaged communities in Fresno, California. This study aims to contribute
to the field and the society in several ways. First, the findings of this study
will advance understanding of the relationship between urban infrastructure,
people's travel and park use behavior, and public health, particularly mental
health. Second, this study will be able to propose urban policy solutions to
health and infrastructure inequalities that plague many American cities,
particularly those disadvantaged communities in small- and medium-sized cities.
Third, this project will support a strong interdisciplinary research team at the
California State University Fresno, a minority-serving institution and a
federally designated Hispanic Serving Institution. In addition to this research
project, the research team will facilitate local initiatives to promote public
health and social equity through continuing community engagement and student
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will allow the group to
build an interdisciplinary, socio-technical research team that is able to use a
combination of crowdsourcing technology and traditional survey and interview to
investigate the connections between active travel and green infrastructure and
mental wellbeing. The crowdsourcing technology will allow the research team to
collect data at finer spatial scales in a real-time fashion. An online database
will also be developed to store the real-time data that will be collected
through the crowdsourcing technology. The team will also engage and interview
local elected officials and staff as well as residents in the studied
communities. The interview will help them to understand these perspectives
regarding how the active travel and green infrastructure in studied communities
can be improved. A public workshop will be designed to further to broaden
engagement.