* 1737080
* The Biological Pump in the Eastern Equatorial Pacific: in situ measurements of Oxygen and Nitrate
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Steven Emerson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2023
* USD 894,703.00

In the sunlit surface waters of the world's oceans, phytoplankton combine
nutrients and carbon dioxide to form organic matter and release oxygen. Some of
this surface water biological production ends up in the deep ocean, resulting in
a net removal of carbon from the surface ocean and atmosphere. One way to
estimate this export of carbon to the deep ocean, also called the "biological
pump," is by carefully measuring the amount of oxygen that is produced along
with the organic matter. Oxygen dissolved in seawater can be measured very
precisely by sensors that can be deployed for years at a time on instrument
platforms like moorings, floats, or gliders. In this project, a team of
investigators will deploy twelve floats in the equatorial Pacific Ocean to
measure ocean profiles of temperature, salinity, oxygen, and nitrate (a nutrient
for phytoplankton). The data will be transmitted by satellite and combine with
computer models of ocean circulation to understand the biological pump in this
productive area of the ocean. The project will support two early-career
researchers: a graduate student and a postdoctoral research
fellow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be a combination of in situ
measurements of oxygen and nitrate on specially-equipped profiling floats with
data interpretation using a high-resolution Global Circulation Model (GCM). The
plan is to construct 12 Argo floats with specially-mounted Aanderaa Optode
oxygen sensors and ISUS nitrate sensors, and to deploy them in the region
between 8 degrees N and 8 degrees S from about 95 degrees W to 140 degrees W;
the location where carbon export is greatest in both satellite-based and GCM-
based maps of global carbon export. The data will be interpreted in terms of net
biological oxygen production, which is stoichiometrically related to Annual Net
Community Production (ANCP) and annual organic carbon export, using a Regional
Ocean Model System (ROMS) physical transport model with a Biogeochemical
Elemental Cycling (BEC)-like ecosystem. Previous NSF research has shown that it
is possible to determine the air-sea pO2 difference using oxygen sensors on
profiling floats to an accuracy of plus or minus 0.2 % by calibrating the
sensors against atmospheric oxygen when the floats surface to transmit data to
shore. Since the air-sea flux and net biological production are usually the
dominant terms in the upper ocean oxygen mass balance, it has been possible to
determine ANCP in subarctic and subtropical gyre locations using a one-
dimensional, upper-ocean model. The goal in this project is to determine the
ANCP in the strongly advective equatorial region, and compare it to carbon
export values determined from satellite-based and GCM-based methods that so far
have not been tested with observations.