* 1737634
* SCC-Planning:  Enhancing Water Resource Management and Infrastructure Improvement through Sensing, Computation, and Community Engagement
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Fang Jin, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 99,940.00

Constructing and maintaining an effective water supply and management system is
paramount to enhancing the resiliency of our communities, promoting economic
growth in agriculture-dominant regions, and ensuring food security locally,
nationally, and worldwide. There are four major socio-technical challenges
facing our water systems: i) water shortage, ii) lack of technical and
infrastructural integration, iii) disconnects in supply and conservation needs,
and iv) inefficient resource management strategies. Stakeholder-driven
fundamental research is necessary to overcome these challenges. This
interdisciplinary planning project aims to establish a community of stakeholders
with the objectives of (1) identifying the grand challenging problems in water
supply chain, (2) sharing experiences of modernizing water infrastructures
across counties, and (3) addressing the hurdles preventing effective water
resource management, especially in the Southwest region of the United States.
This capacity building project brings stakeholders including researchers,
consumers, water supply companies, and authorities together to share their
experience, strengths, and weakness, and to develop a short- and long-term
strategic plan for addressing the challenges pertinent to water resource
management. The proposed plan will offer a model for states and counties with
similar circumstances and thus build a connected community, where stakeholders
share their concerns and experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this
planning project will hold (1) a focus group-based study to discuss the
persisting, urgent problems among water stakeholders, and (2) a workshop where
stakeholders will have the opportunity to learn about challenges from a range of
perspective, share advances in water technology and infrastructure, and discover
potential research opportunities to address the problems exposed. Thus, this
planning project will engage a wide range of water-related stakeholders and
promote effective water conservation strategies to protect the region's water
supply. By improving water use efficiency, the project will support efforts to
meet growing water needs and minimize competition between food, energy, and
municipal sectors. The resulting water usage model will help communities develop
better programs for water conservation and improve water use efficiency. The
project will develop a central area of focus in the water community for future
research efforts, and lay the groundwork for much more fruitful collaboration
between stakeholders.