* 1737443
* SCC-IRG Track 2: Community on Multimodality: Participatory Action, Service, and Support (COMPASS)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Wonhyung Lee, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,357,220.00

Those in need of help often do not know how to locate or access service
providers. Likewise, service-providing agencies often work in silos. The lack of
communication also applies to volunteers; people do not know who to help and how
they can be resourceful. Response becomes even more problematic when a problem
demands the coordination of service providers, volunteers, and government
structures, and after business hours, when the communication channels that can
aid people in need become sparse. This project will (i) simplify the discovery
and use of services, (ii) enable two-way communication between stakeholders
(e.g., residents and service providers), (iii) deploy resources more
efficiently, and (iv) assist stakeholders in assessing and promoting the
wellbeing of their communities. The end result will be directly applicable to
communities across the US, and has the potential to be influential beyond the
human and physical services domain. It will advance computer science, electrical
and computer engineering, and social and behavioral sciences to collectively
address the challenges associated with this problem, and will create educational
opportunities to encourage students to cross disciplinary boundaries. Women and
underrepresented groups will be encouraged to participate in this project by
collaborating with community-based organizations, and via programs at the
University at Albany.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multidisciplinary project takes
a community-wide approach that will integrate people and data with analytics and
engineering using social and behavioral sciences to maximize the efficiency of
delivering human and physical services, and also improve the sense of
connectedness of residents with service providers and government structures. The
project will study the limitations of extant services, which will in turn inform
the development of novel decision-making mechanisms with sufficient behavioral
realism. The outcome will be an integrated "one-stop" service of services. This
project will (i) develop new data mining methods for uncovering complex
interdependencies within a dynamic sociotechnical system, (ii) devise novel
information processing, machine learning, and control methods to dynamically
optimize delivery of human and physical services under uncertainty with humans
in the decision-making loop, and (iii) shed light on the ability of communities
to integrate emerging technologies to become more connected in human
interactions.