* 1737109
* Tectonic control of the carbon cycle and climate: Resolving the effects of global spreading-rate variations with high temporal resolution over the past 20 Myr
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Colleen Dalton, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 07/31/2022
* USD 417,369.00

Plate tectonics elevates mountain chains, rearranges connections between the
ocean basins, redistributes gasses between the Earth's mantle and surface, and
can affect the Earth's climate at a variety of timescales. Volcanism, most of
which occurs as a consequence of plate tectonics, releases carbon dioxide (CO2)
into the atmosphere. The first-order control on this degassing comes from
volcanism associated with seafloor spreading and crustal construction at mid-
ocean ridges and volcanism at subduction zones. Therefore, it is likely that
changes in the rate of seafloor spreading can cause changes in the atmospheric
CO2 concentration over time. This project seeks to investigate the role of
seafloor spreading in contributing to a global cooling of 8-10 degrees C that
began around 16 million years ago and continued for at least 12 million years.
Variations in spreading rate along the global mid-ocean ridge system over the
past 20 Myr will be reconstructed. These records will be used to estimate the
rates of oceanic crustal production and CO2 degassing during crustal production.
The estimates of CO2 degassing can be compared to changes in ocean temperature
over this time. Results will be put into models of the carbon cycle to assess
the impact on atmospheric CO2 levels. This project supports the training of a
graduate student in geophysics and paleoclimatology. It also supports the
training of undergraduate students, and the project will lead to a new course at
Brown University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce the first
synthesis of global seafloor spreading rates and ocean crustal production for
the past 20 Myr using newly available plate reconstructions at high temporal
resolution, global compilations of seafloor fabric and magnetic anomalies, and
the recently derived astronomical timescale for magnetic polarity reversals over
this time period. The astronomical timescale provides a highly precise
independent dating system that avoids the need to assume constancy of seafloor
spreading between (coarsely spaced) radiometric tie points and the need to
choose a particular ridge system as a template. New paleotemperature estimates
via the alkenone method will permit a continuous reconstruction of ocean
temperatures 0-20 Myr. Results will be integrated into a global carbon cycle
model with the aim of testing the hypothesis that a global slowing of spreading
rates caused atmospheric CO2 levels to fall by several hundred ppm since ~14 Myr
and led to global cooling.