* 1737128
* Collaborative Research: Impact of the Amazon River Plume on nitrogen availability and planktonic food web dynamics in the Western Tropical North Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Ajit Subramaniam, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 612,576.00

This is a focused program of field research in waters of the Western Tropical
North Atlantic influenced by the Amazon River Plume during the high river flow
season. The Amazon Plume region supports diverse plankton communities in a
dynamic system driven by nutrients supplied by transport from the river proper
as well as nutrients entrained from offshore waters by physical mixing and
upwelling. This creates strong interactions among physical, chemical, and
biological processes across a range of spatial and temporal scales. The field
program will link direct measurements of environmental properties with focused
experimental studies of nutrient supply and nutrient limitation of
phytoplankton, as well as the transfer of phytoplankton nitrogen to the
zooplankton food web. The Amazon Plume exhibits a close juxtaposition of
distinct communities during the high-flow season, making it an ideal site for
evaluating how nutrient availability, nutrient supply, and habitat longevity
interact to drive offshore ecosystem dynamics and function. This project will
include German collaborators and will seamlessly integrate education and
research efforts. The investigators and their institutions have a strong
commitment to undergraduate and graduate education and to increasing the
diversity of the ocean science community through active recruiting and training
efforts. The team has a strong track record of involving both undergraduate and
graduate students in their field and lab research. The two research cruises
planned will provide opportunities for students and technicians to interact with
an interdisciplinary and international research team. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ultimate objectives of this project are to understand the processes and
interactions that promote distinct communities of nitrogen-fixing organisms
(diazotrophs) and other phytoplankton around the Amazon Plume and to explore the
impacts of these diazotroph-rich communities on zooplankton biomass and
production. The research team includes scientists with expertise in nutrient and
stable isotope biogeochemistry, remote sensing as well as specialists in
characterizing water mass origin and history using naturally occurring radium
isotopes. This combination of approaches will provide a unique opportunity to
address fundamental questions related to plankton community structure, primary
production, and links to secondary production in pelagic ecosystems. The project
will address the following key questions focused on fundamental issues in
plankton ecology resulting from previous research in this
region:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A. What mechanisms promote the preferential
delivery of bioavailable phosphorus and the resulting strong nitrogen limitation
associated with the northern reaches of the Amazon Plume during the high flow
season? &lt;br/&gt;B. What factors lead to the clear niche separation between
diazotrophs within and around the Amazon Plume and how are the distinct
diazotroph communities influenced by hydrographic and biogeochemical controls
associated with the Amazon River Plume and offshore upwelling processes?
&lt;br/&gt;C. How does the nitrogen fixed by the different types of diazotrophs
contribute to secondary production, and how efficiently does diazotroph nitrogen
move through the food web?