* 1737342
* US GEOTRACES PMT: hydrogen sulfide as a strong ligand affecting trace metal cycling
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Gregory Cutter, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2023
* USD 393,513.00

Trace metals like iron and zinc are essential for the growth of the microscopic
plants (phytoplankton) that dominate photosynthesis in the sunlit surface ocean.
Other trace metals like copper or mercury are highly toxic to these same
organisms. Even at concentrations of as low as one gram in a trillion grams of
seawater, trace elements can alter the community consumption of carbon dioxide
and the production of oxygen by ocean ecosystems. The resulting beneficial
and/or toxic response depends on the chemical form of each trace metal.
Dissolved in seawater, these metals can exist either as individual, free ions or
attached to other dissolved chemical compounds, generically called ligands.
Complexation is the process by which trace metals become chemically attached to
ligands. This project will study the complexation of six biologically important
trace metals with a ligand known as hydrogen sulfide. Data from work done during
an expedition in the Pacific Ocean from Alaska to Tahiti will provide new
scientific insight on hydrogen sulfide's importance in controlling essential and
toxic metal bioavailability in various marine waters and thus have scientific
impact on ocean carbon and ecosystem models. A graduate student will play a
leading role in the project. Educational opportunities will be greatly enhanced
by working alongside other world-class scientists as a participant in a large
collaborative program. Additional graduate learning and outreach will include
communicating experiences and research findings with the public with a blog and
by interactions with undergraduate students as a teaching assistant.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the oxygenated ocean, hydrogen sulfide is biologically
produced in sunlit surface waters and emitted from hydrothermal vents on ocean
ridges. It can then complex dissolved trace metals or react with them to form
insoluble metal sulfides. In both cases, the abundance and cycling of essential
trace elements would be affected and the importance of these reactions are
currently not known. These sulfide - trace metal studies will be conducted as
part of the 2018 US GEOTRACES Pacific Meridional Transect (PMT), a cruise track
that allows sampling of productive coastal waters, low nutrient surface waters,
and plumes of metal- and sulfide-rich hydrothermal waters near the bottom. The
dissolved ions of hydrogen sulfide will be measured at sea soon after
collection. Metal sulfides contained in and on particles will also be filtered
and analyzed. This project will address several specific scientific questions.
To what degrees does sulfide complexation vary as a function of the various
biological and chemical regimes encountered? Are essential metals removed by
precipitating with hydrogen sulfide in the upper water column? Does the reaction
of metals with hydrogen sulfide in hydrothermal waters stabilize these dissolved
complexes and allow long range transport? Related study will develop from close
collaborations with other GEOTRACES scientists studying trace metals and their
complexation with ligands other that sulfide, providing overall context and
novel capacity to fully understand trace element cycles in the ocean.