* 1737760
* Acquisition of an Ion Chromatograph (IC) for Water Quality Analyses in an Undergraduate-Led Lab
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2018
* Brian Mailloux, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2018
* USD 67,053.00

The acquisition of an Ion Chromatograph (IC) will upgrade the water quality
analysis facilities at the all-women's Barnard College. The funding will be used
to purchase the instrument, to train users, and to enable users to present their
results at national conferences. The Ion Chromatograph will be used by mainly
undergraduate students at Barnard College to measure water quality parameters.
The anion data is critical for understanding the fundamental chemical, physical
and biological controls that affect water quality, and how that water quality
changes over time. For example Chloride and Bromide can be used to trace natural
and anthropogenic recharge whereas nitrate and nitrite are essential nutrients
but can also impact water quality. The students are part of collaborative teams
and the data they collect will be used in their undergraduate thesis research
and peer-reviewed publications. These collaborations include both national and
international projects looking at water quality. Examples include engineering
green infrastructure in New York City to improve water quality of runoff and
examining groundwater in Vietnam to better understand groundwater recharge in
relation to Arsenic contamination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Few measurements are
more fundamental to environmental science than the concentration of ions in
solution. Over the last 9 years, the Mailloux lab has conducted these
measurements using a Dionex ICS-2000 Ion Chromatograph (IC) housed at Barnard
College, an undergraduate women?s college in New York City. This workhorse
instrument has sadly died. It had been used to measure anions and low molecular
organic acids in water collected from groundwater, surface water, and laboratory
experiments. Since the instrument was bought in September 2008 we have run over
24,000 samples, blanks, and standards. The diverse data from these measurements
has been used in 9 peer-reviewed papers with the PI, with 3 of the papers having
an undergraduate co-author and 8 of the papers having a graduate student co-
author. In addition, the IC has been used in at least 19 senior theses and is
regularly used in 2 classes. The goal of this award is to replace the broken
instrument in order to maintain our research momentum, run a free short course
to teach the students how to use the new instrument, and to take students to a
national meeting. The new instrument we are requesting is a Dionex Integrion
with an AS-AP autosampler equipped to run anions and low weight organic
molecules such as acetate and lactate. The new instrument will be used on NSF
and non-NSF projects to analyze samples from both the field and laboratory
experiments on undergraduate and graduate student led projects. To support
current NSF funding using this instrument, we have current demand in excess of
2500 samples per year, and expect to continue to run thousands of samples per
year over the life of the instrument. The data obtained from these measurements
will support peer reviewed research and publications, and the education of many
young women. The new instrument will enable us to continue to perform world-
class, student-driven research on water quality, hydrology, and biogeochemistry
at Barnard College.