* 1737758
* Dimensions: Collaborative Research: Assembly and function of nectar microbial communities
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Tadashi Fukami, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,450,000.00

The goal of this project is to study the ecology of micro-organisms (life too
small to be easily seen, like yeast and bacteria) that live in the nectar of
flowers. Nectar is an interesting place for such organisms to live because it
doesn't last long -- most flowers last only a few days. Yet, each flower can be
home to a complex and changing "community" of yeast and bacteria; they are
miniature ecosystems. Scientists will conduct experiments to explore how those
micro-organisms get into nectar and whether the order in which they arrive
determines the final set that end up living there. Because each flower contains
its own separate ecosystem that can be easily tweaked by scientists, this study
system is a good one for understanding how ecosystems of all sizes may develop.
Such understanding is important when trying to help preserve rare species and to
keep ecosystems functioning in ways that benefit both humans and wildlife. In
this project, for example, the particular set of yeast and bacteria that end up
in flowers may have a large impact on what pollinators visit flowers and thus on
how effectively the flowers are pollinated. Given that a lot of what humans eat
depends on pollination of crops, understanding what can lead to more effective
pollination has both economic and social relevance. High-school students will be
mentored in research through a 7-week summer research internship. Graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows will help mentor those high school students
and be mentored, themselves. Workshops on bioinformatics will be offered to
train students in essential skills of data analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
combination of field observations, field experiments, and laboratory experiments
will be conducted on nectar microbes associated with a hummingbird-pollinated
shrub in California. Data will be integrated through construction of a
simulation model of plant-hummingbird-nectar microbe interactions, providing
tests of community assembly theory. Researchers will integrate genetic,
phylogenetic and functional dimensions of biodiversity by studying how (1) yeast
genetic diversity and bacterial phylogenetic diversity are influenced by
flowering phenology, (2) yeast genetic diversity and bacterial phylogenetic
diversity suppress each other through antagonistic priority effects within
floral nectar, (3) yeast genetic diversity and bacterial phylogenetic diversity
alter hummingbirds' foraging preference by modifying nectar chemistry as a
result of growth in nectar, thereby affecting functional diversity of flowers in
terms of nectar chemistry, pollination success, and seed production, and (4) how
functional diversity of flowers feeds back to affect yeast genetic diversity and
bacterial phylogenetic diversity via altered dispersal of yeast and bacteria
across flowers.