* 1737823
* Properties of Meso-scale Polar Cap Structures and their Coupling to Nightside Auroral Dynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Yukitoshi Nishimura, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2019
* USD 445,863.00

The coupling of the solar wind with Earth's magnetic field gives rise to a range
of disturbance effects in the space environment near Earth. Communications,
navigation and energy production and distribution can be significantly affected
by this space weather. The ability to forecast disturbances that may impact
these technologies hinges upon detailed knowledge and understanding of the
connected Sun-Earth system, including complicated coupling processes between the
magnetosphere and ionosphere. A particular aspect of the latter is patches and
arcs of auroral emissions observed in the polar cap. Some recent studies suggest
that these structures, originating on the dayside, can drift across the polar
cap and play a role in the creation and dynamics of space weather disturbances
in the nightside ionosphere. Determining the precise nature of these polar cap
structures and their relation to other dynamic features in the nightside
ionosphere and magnetosphere is the main objective of this project. It will be
attempted through a comprehensive analysis of simultaneous observations of the
relevant phenomena from a variety of sources. The resulting understanding
constitutes a critical step towards being able to include this effect in
ionospheric space weather specification and forecast models. A graduate student
will be trained as part of the research effort.

This project aims to determine the properties of polar cap patches and arcs and
their statistical association with auroral intensifications (PBIs) and
streamers. Airglow 630.0 nm imagers will be used to track polar cap structures
and determine the fraction of PBIs that are preceded by polar cap patches, and
the fraction of polar cap patches that lead to PBIs. The properties of the polar
cap patches/arcs such as size and speed will be determined with radar
measurements, and the corresponding lobe measurements (flow, particle, FAC
structure) determined with conjugate spacecraft. Specific project goals for the
research effort include: (1) Establishing the airglow/arc-PBI connection
statistically, (2) Determining the properties of the meso-scale structures in
the polar cap, and (3) Establishing the possible magnetospheric counterpart for
the ionospheric flow channels.