* 1737960
* Collaborative Research:  ATD:  Statistical Detection of New Patterns and Potential Threats in Geospatial Sequences of Social and Political Events
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Michael Baron, American University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The project focuses on the statistical detection and interpretation of new
trends and geospatial pattern changes in sequences of social and political
events. Millions of such events occur on a local, regional, national, and
international scale. They are being recorded in publicly available domains, fed
from a multitude of sources, from news media to social media, blogs, and tweets.
Events include civic unrests, demonstrations, crimes, arrests, human rights
activities, political conflicts, protests, cyber attacks, terrorist activities,
publication of news, their analyses and discussions, and so on. Such events
occur at random times, while their location, size, and consequences involve a
lot of uncertainty. An abrupt change of pattern, appearance of a new
distribution or trend is typically caused by a new circumstance that may
represent a potential threat. For the prompt detection of such threats,
sensitive yet reliable and computationally feasible statistical algorithms for
change-point detection in geospatial sequences will be elaborated, followed by
social, economic, and political interpretation of statistically detectable
changes. The project will provide general tools for the prompt reaction to
threatening anomalies identified in large continuously monitored databases, with
a special focus on new patterns that represent potential threats to homeland
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quick detection of sudden changes and
unexpectedly appearing new trends is crucially important for the prompt reaction
to potential security threats. To handle large data sets of high dimension in
change-point detection problems, to combine simultaneously observed geospatial
sequences of event data, and to develop computationally feasible algorithms for
fast threat detection, three general approaches are exploited: (1) recursive
change-point detection algorithms that are updated with each new data point
while storing and processing minimum required information at each step; (2)
auxiliary change-point warning schemes represented by computationally
inexpensive and fast algorithms for the early detection of potential threats;
(3) sequentially planned change-point detection algorithms that invoke the main
detection scheme at the special interim time points only, and (4) maximum use of
prior information by means of Bayesian detection algorithms.