* 1737587
* SCC-Planning: vSmart Connections for for Conserving and Catalyzing Cultural Community Resources
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Dryver Huston, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 12/31/2018
* USD 99,993.00

Many U.S. towns, cities, and communities have historic and cultural resources
that play significant roles in community life; Vermont is, a leading example.
The existing heritage support systems for preserving and protecting these
resources (e.g. local and regional nonprofits, public programs housed in local
and state governments, and extensive regulatory underpinnings that address
housing, land use planning, and smart growth through preservation) pose
significant technical and social challenges. For example, engineering technology
applied to historic infrastructure (e.g., cultural sites, aging buildings,
materials and structures) presents a number of unique challenges seldom
addressed by U.S. engineering programs. Exposure to the constraints imposed by
preserving cultural resources will better prepare engineers for the 21st century
challenges of the aging infrastructure. In turn, the cultural resources network
(CRN) in Vermont would benefit from advanced technologies and engineering
expertise, which are largely untapped. Our goal is to catalyze the community
networks currently caring for Vermont's cultural resources, and connect them
with a network of engineering expertise (ETN) and smart technologies using
Vermont as a living laboratory. Two planning workshops will be convened to
enhance the understanding, appreciation, and challenges facing both sectors. The
project will yield scientific insights into the collaborations and connections
that support historic infrastructure in Vermont, as well as policies that
support these relationships. The project also will yield tools for non-invasive
testing and data collection for historic and cultural resources that can be
replicated in other communities. Finally, an assessment of changes in the
community networks (ETN and CRN) will be explored so that knowledge gained in
the project can support other communities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The longer-term intellectual merit of this project includes (1)
performing smart analytics (e.g., network analysis) to identify the evolution of
community connections and cooperation, the key features, and potential
governance policies to help enhance network functioning; (2) building a smart
mobile facility that provides high-tech, non-destructive testing technologies
and new methods for digitizing, documenting, and visualizing site-specific
cultural resources to communities in need; and (3) assessment of the existing
and post-grant community networks (ETN and CRN) so that benefits can then be
transferred and scaled to other regions. Both the proposed planning grant
workshops and longer-term educational training programs will enhance the
understanding, appreciation, and challenges facing both sectors. The broader
impacts will bring engineers and (1) the CRN representatives together to
catalyze the existing network of cultural resources in Vermont; (2) provides a
new educational perspective (e.g., training modules) for undergraduate and
graduate level engineering curricula, and (3) associated educational efforts
(e.g. certificate in preservation engineering), and (4) outreach and technology
transfer (e.g. mobile facilities with high-tech equipment for low-cost
applications). The proposed network analysis and associated assessments are
viewed as key components for integrating the two community networks. This
research builds naturally on the successful transdisciplinary initiative in
Complex Systems at the University of Vermont; envisions the development of new
approaches in modeling this complex sociotechnical system for the purpose of
preserving cultural resources in Vermont and beyond.