* 1737827
* Dimensions US-China: Collaborative Research: Microbe eco-evolutionary feedbacks as drivers of plant coexistence and diversity gradients
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Yaniv Brandvain, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 12/31/2022
* USD 157,079.00

Grasslands comprise 26% of global land area and 80% of agriculturally productive
land. In addition to their agricultural importance, grasslands also play key
roles in diverse ecosystem services, including the production of clean water and
the prevention of flooding. Native grasslands are often very species-rich, with
richness increasing with increasing annual precipitation and declining following
disturbance. These patterns of diversity can have important consequences because
species-rich grasslands have been shown to be more productive and more resilient
to unpredictable events like drought, flooding, or tornado damage. It is
essential to understand the processes that govern both the patterns of plant
diversity and the benefits of plant diversity to better manage grassland areas.
The different processes that create and maintain the rich diversity of plant
species coexisting in grasslands are unknown, but recent research suggests that
plant pathogens may play a role. This project examines the extent plant disease
determines natural patterns of plant diversity within grasslands by conducting
parallel experiments at multiple field sites within the United States and China.
Undergraduates, graduate students and post-doctoral researchers will be trained
in diverse field and laboratory methods, including students and faculty from
colleges and community colleges adjacent to study sites in Illinois, Missouri
and Kansas. Data from this project will generate new directions for the
management of rangelands and also lead to improvements in the yield and
resilience of agricultural and native ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pathogens
are predicted to accumulate and limit plant productivity most strongly in
grasslands with low plant phylogenetic diversity, low plant genetic diversity
and high precipitation. These predictions will be tested through a coordinated
set of field observations, field manipulations, and greenhouse assays, performed
on parallel diversity and rainfall gradients in North American and Asian
grasslands. Specifically, patterns of plant and pathogen phylogenetic diversity,
patterns of plant resistance due to genetic diversity, and patterns of
ecological and evolutionary feedback will be tested across rainfall gradients in
central United States and China. Rainfall manipulations of experimental plant
communities will test environmental dependence of plant species coexistence,
productivity benefits of plant diversity, and the role of pathogens as drivers
of these processes. These empirical studies will be integrated with mathematical
models to generate predictions of patterns and benefits of plant biodiversity,
as well as predictions of vulnerabilities of grasslands to environmental
perturbations.