* 1737274
* NSFGEO-NERC: Collaborative: Toward a New Picture of the Multifaceted Meteotsunami
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Alexandru Sheremet, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 467,979.00

This is a comprehensive investigation of the meteotsunami (MT) evolution and its
interaction with the ocean environment. MT is sea-level oscillations in the
tsunami time scale (minutes to hours) generated by atmosphere perturbations,
such as squall lines and frontal passages. MT events are common and documented
all over the world. Like tsunami, strong MTs pose a serious threat to human life
and coastal infrastructure. The team proposes to conduct a 3-year field
experiment to collect unprecedented high-resolution observations off Louisiana
(chosen for high MT probability, various bottom friction and existing NOAA and
BOEM observations) to fully capture the nonlinear transformation of a MT from
generation to its shoreline manifestation. Theoretical analyses and numerical
simulations will be combined with the observational data to predict how the MTs
transform as they approach shore. The project leverages UK researchers who will
collaborate with the team at no cost (being funded by UK Natural Environment
Research Council (NERC) under the bilateral agreement). The proposed data
collection and the resulting public database will provide a unique source of
high-resolution information, leading to an essentially new picture of MT. The
new data will produce robust statistics and allow for testing of all future
theoretical and numerical developments. Thus, representation of the MT process
in numerical models and their ability to predict MT events will be improved.
Understanding the MT evolution and improving MT early-warning strategies will
protect small fishing vessels and coastal communities. The project will also
upgrade the Wave-Current-Surge Information System in the Gulf of Mexico with new
high-resolution observation capabilities. Two Ph.D. students will be trained and
outreach activities through local K-12 education are planned over the course of
the project.&lt;br/&gt;Compared to tsunami, MT evolution is much more nonlinear
and more strongly affected by bottom friction. Thus, knowledge acquired in the
study of seismic tsunami is not readily transferable to MT research. The events
are generated by an atmospheric disturbance that moves at the speed of the
oceanic response, which is assumed to propagate as a linear long wave. However,
this assumption has not yet been critically tested because of the poor spatial
and temporal resolution of available observations. The proposed work is based on
the hypothesis that in a generic Proudman-resonated MT event trapped waves are
also excited. Although usually less dangerous, they might represent an important
part of the process, and behave as precursors to the main wave. The work focuses
on the propagation stage of MT: a theoretical description of the nonlinear
evolution of both free and trapped components of MT will be developed, including
solitary waves, and will be validated for the real topography, and accounting
for realistic bottom friction. Data analysis and model development will be
integrated into an evaluate-learn-correct cycle that will improve representation
of the process and ability to anticipate MT events. Effective numerical models
and early-warning strategies could be developed and tested following the
findings of this project. Presently, MT early-warning systems mostly rely on
interpreting atmospheric data. The new high-resolution observations from this
project will be used to incorporate in this cycle elements of real-time ocean
response.