* 1737586
* SCC-Planning: Pedestrian Safe and Secure Communities with Ambient Machine Vision
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Shannon Reid, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2019
* USD 99,156.00

This project with the University of North Carolina at Charlotte in cooperation
with the Charlotte-Mecklenburg counties addresses community challenges of
pedestrian safety and community policing, building on advances in cyber-physical
systems (CPS). As communities adopt technologies such as vision-based traffic
cameras and smart traffic signs at intersections, the data from these
technologies possess traces of the activity within a community of which a few
might need a response because of risk to individual and public safety or suggest
a local police response. Such technologies may provide a more accurate
community-wide operational picture. With this data communities can have a better
understanding of itself and within established law and custom will better serve
and protect individuals and the public at large. This planning grant will enable
community planners, local government, and businesses along with technologists,
urban planners and traffic engineers to explore the potential of these emerging
technologies for improving the quality of life of a
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant will leverage research in
CPS, big data, and urban transportation planning to provide new capabilities for
community engagement. It will draw upon technologies from computer vision,
machine learning, edge computing, and generally CPS and the Internet of Things.
This will set the stage for designing edge computing systems for ambient vision
processing at city street intersections with cooperative processing over the
entire edge network in a city. The project will advance knowledge of pedestrian
and driver behaviors and models, specifically in urban transportation settings.
It will enable the study and characterization of driver behaviors for driver-in-
the-loop traffic control system. The planned extensive community engagement will
facilitate ascertaining community goals and concerns, especially regarding
privacy and transportation mobility planning in future community deployment of
these proposed technologies.