* 1737041
* GEOTRACES Pacific Meridional Transect: Measurement of chlorofluorocarbons and sulfur hexafluoride
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Rana Fine, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 12/31/2021
* USD 528,175.00

The goal of the international GEOTRACES program is to understand the
distributions of trace chemical elements and their isotopes in the oceans. The
National Science Foundation is supporting a U.S. GEOTRACES sampling expedition
in the Pacific Ocean in 2018, that will conduct full ocean depth at sites
extending south from Alaska to Tahiti. The purpose of this project is to measure
the concentrations of chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) compounds and of sulfur
hexafluoride (SF6) along this transect of stations. These gas measurements can
be used to determine the "ages" of water parcels and the rates of important
oceanographic and biogeochemical processes. Such information is essential to the
interpretation of the trace element and isotope data that will be gathered as
part of GEOTRACES. The trace gas concentrations, ventilation ages, and rate data
will all be made available to other investigators within six months of
collection, forming an important foundation for the GEOTRACES Pacific
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will measure CFC-11, CFC-12, and
SF6 concentrations aboard the 2018 Pacific Meridional Transect. Beyond the
concentration measurements, the project has the following specific objectives:
1) Calculate tracer ages and identify the relative extent of ventilation and
dilution of thermocline and intermediate water masses within which Trace
Elements and their Isotopes (TEIs) reside across different circulation regimes,
2) Calculate rates of biochemically important processes (including apparent
oxygen utilization and denitrification rates) and distinguish between the
contributions from physical and biogeochemical processes across the different
circulation regimes, 3) Put tracer and hydrographic GEOTRACES data into context
of larger space and time scales using historical tracer, hydrographic, ARGO CTD
and oxygen data. The CFC and SF6 tracer data will contribute to interpretation
of the key GEOTRACES trace elements and isotopes by characterizing physical
processes, which can affect trace element speciation and internal cycling.
Calculated tracer ages are the backbone of this project and are the primary
service for other GEOTRACES PIs. Tracer ages will be used to address each of the
objectives. As tracer ages are an important part of the contribution to the
GEOTRACES program, uncertainties will be estimated for the ages related to
internal ocean variability and effects of mixing due to non-stationarity of the
atmospheric transients.