* 1737857
* ADT: i-Group Learning and i-Detect for Dynamic Real Time Anomaly Detection with Applications in Maritime Threat Detection
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Fred Roberts, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 299,967.00

Threats to national and global security through the maritime transportation
system can be multi-faceted and serious, ranging from human and drug
trafficking, smuggling, transport of nuclear material and dirty bombs, to
garbage dumping and illegal fishing. Hence it is important to design an
efficient early detection and risk assessment system for maritime traffic over
space and time. With today's data gathering capabilities and global regulation
and agreements, it is now possible to achieve such a goal with sophisticated and
advanced statistical tools. The project develops novel statistical tools for
individualized grouping and baseline distribution formation and for subsequent
individualized detection of abnormal deviations from the baseline distribution,
with a quantified risk assessment. The new developments are target-oriented and
more precise, thus more effective than conventional methods. The project
utilizes the Automated Identification System (AIS) data that, by international
convention, is transmitted by over a million vessels worldwide, and combines
this data with geological, geographical, and geophysical data about oceans and
river systems, and coastlines and ports. It provides a timely and effective tool
for the improvement of national security. The project also provides a rich
training ground for next generation data scientists with interdisciplinary
research experiences in maritime security and risk
assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates novel statistical
approaches for threat detection, utilizing a wide range of data sources. The
developed iGroup method and iDetect tools are general statistical methods that
form a useful framework for many threat detection and risk assessment problems.
They enrich the theory and methods of a new statistical analytical toolkit. The
project focuses on utilizing the developed methods in one important application,
maritime traffic threat detection and risk assessment. It advances the science
of threat detection by developing new tools for dealing with heterogeneous data,
extending the data-depth method to complex space, finding new learning tools for
handling features that differ in importance, and producing anomaly detection
methods for situations where data is missing, incorrect, or deliberately
misleading. The development of a real-time threat detection and risk assessment
system for maritime traffic can enhance maritime safety and at the same time
detect human and group movements on vessels and more generally criminal and
terrorist activities of various kinds. The methods to be developed also offer a
general framework for threat detection in other areas, such as cell phone
monitoring, cyber security, anti-money laundering, market analysis, information
retrieval, and personalized medicine. The project also has a strong
interdisciplinary educational component for training the next generation of data
scientists.