* 1737550
* SCC-Planning:  Community Energy: Technical and Social Challenges and Integrative Solutions
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2017,06/30/2020
* Jason Dedrick, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 06/30/2020
* USD 99,965.00

The concept of Community Energy involves integrating small-scale solar power,
demand management and energy storage at the community level to create economic,
environmental and social value for individuals and communities while improving
the reliability and resilience of the electric grid. While this concept has
great potential benefits, it raises a number of conceptual issues that must be
addressed to realize its potential. These include: (1) How economic and
behavioral incentives are perceived and valued in a community context and
whether these differ from the perceptions and values of individual energy users;
(2) How residents and other stakeholders will perceive such a project and what
factors affect their acceptance and participation; (3) How highly granular data
can be analyzed, visualized, and communicated to encourage acceptance and
facilitate participation in a Community Energy program. To address these issues,
this planning project brings together residents and stakeholders in the Mueller
community of Austin, Texas, to create knowledge and tools to develop a Community
Energy program that will serve as a model for other communities across the U.S.
Planning and developing such a project will engage residents and stakeholders at
each stage to maximize the probability of success. The results of the research
will be published in academic, policy and practitioner outlets, and the data
analysis and visualization tools will be distributed freely to researchers,
policymakers and practitioners. The planning project will support and train
graduate students at Syracuse University in research methods that integrate
social science and data science in an active research
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is an urgent need to improve the reliability
and resilience of the electric grid and to integrate new technologies such as
rooftop solar, battery storage and electric vehicles. These technologies can
strain an aging grid that was not designed to handle them, but if managed
properly can actually provide valuable resources to the grid such as demand
response and load shifting. These benefits are greater if aggregated at the
community level. However, this requires gaining the understanding and
participation of community members and developing tools to analyze, visualize
and communicate large, heterogeneous datasets to a variety of stakeholders. This
multidisciplinary, integrative project addresses these issues through (1)
identifying and engaging key community stakeholders, (2) conducting community
workshops and implementing a survey of community members in the Mueller
neighborhood (3) developing data analytics, visualization and communication
tools that integrate data on electricity use, weather, and location factors, in
consultation with targeted stakeholders and community members, and (4)
developing a full proposal to implement the Community Energy program in the
Mueller community. The project involves collaboration with the Pecan Street
Institute in Austin, which collects detailed household electricity data on over
300 homes in the Mueller neighborhood and has well-established relationships
with residents, local government, developers and the local business community.