* 1737286
* Collaborative Research: Climate, human and ecosystem interactions in the face of a rapidly changing North Asian biome
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Sarah Fowell, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 08/31/2023
* USD 357,202.00

In many parts of the globe environmental change and socio-economic conditions
are increasingly tied together producing regional vulnerabilities that are still
poorly understood and under-anticipated. Northern Asia, and particularly the
subarctic zone of southern Siberia and northern Mongolia, has experienced rates
of warming that are so far unprecedented elsewhere and provide an opportunity
for the early study of human and environmental impacts due to global warming. A
Mongolian-American collaborative research team will investigate the three way
relationship between pastoral nomadic food production, environmental robustness,
and climate fluctuation in order to better understand principles of human
organization that serve to sustainably manage this complex relationship.
Pastoral nomadism is an indigenous Arctic and subarctic subsistence economy that
sustains numerous populations from Mongolia to the Arctic Ocean and is known for
its flexibility, stewardship of rangelands, and productive success within small-
scale societies as well as nation states. By comparing early historical
pastoralism and its socio-economic organization to environmental conditions and
climate variation over more than a millennium, this project provides a deep-time
perspective on sustainable and unsustainable practices in use today under a
changing climate regime. This research aims to promote successful adaptation to
environmental change on behalf of a broad spectrum of communities and lifeways
and across national borders. The researchers believe that this research will
help to sustain systems of indigenous food production throughout northernmost
Asia with emphasis placed on maintaining local environments. The results have
broader applicability to other pastoral nomadic regions of the world, most
notably the African continent in terms of environmental and land use policy
making. The project strengthens interdisciplinary collaboration and provides
hands-on training for U.S. and Mongolian junior scholars, undergraduates, and
graduate students in climatic bio-social science and cross-disciplinary research
integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project framework relies on a combination
of high-resolution historical and environmental data that will be analyzed as
time series and compared across two time scales: a short sequence of 25 years
(1990 to present) and a long-sequence of 1300 years (700 AD to present). Data
from the past quarter-century will comprise 1) trends in forest productivity as
revealed by the tree-ring record; 2) trends in steppe productivity; 3)
ethnohistorical and ethnographic evidence of human use of these ecosystems in
relation to recent socio-economic change; and 4) livestock population and
mortality data. Contemporary patterns will be contextualized by more than one
thousand years of climatic and socio-cultural observations. These will be
compiled from tree-ring analysis, lake core and palynological studies, and from
archaeological research, all of which provide alternate environmental indicators
as well as a record of the relationship between nomadic pastoralists and the
northern forest ecosystem. By juxtaposing the trajectory of the forest-steppe
and human communities over time, this research develops new approaches and
insight to the linkages between ecosystems, climate, human culture, and policy
that promote long-term sustainability. Data and results will be widely
disseminated through publications and public outreach but principally will be
shared with and developed for the indigenous communities that rely on
pastoralism across the Asian Arctic and subarctic biomes.