* 1737590
* SCC-IRG Track 2: Towards Quality Aware Crowdsourced Road Sensing for Smart Cities
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Alex Anas, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,032,000.00

With nearly a billion automobiles on the road today, the current transportation
systems have begun to show signs of serious strain, such as congestions, traffic
accidents, road surface defects, and malfunctioning traffic regulation
infrastructures. Therefore, it is of great importance to collect and disseminate
road/traffic condition information accurately, efficiently, and timely.
Traditionally, road and traffic monitoring are conducted through either
stationary sensors or instrumented probe vehicles. Unfortunately, the
prohibitively high deployment cost of such devices makes it impossible to
achieve large-scale deployment, leading to limited road coverage and delayed
information update. To mitigate these problems, this project develops QuicRoad,
a Quality of Information (QoI) aware crowdsourced road sensing system that can
collect road/traffic information from a variety of sources, including
smartphones, social media and transportation authorities (as well as future
connected vehicles), and then distribute the collected information in real time.
The PIs team up with local transportation agencies in the Buffalo-Niagara region
on applications related to road surface and traffic condition monitoring, border
crossing delay estimation, and incident management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project integrates across both social and technological research dimensions. In
the technological dimension, it leads to a novel Quality of Information (QoI)
aware information integration framework that can jointly optimize the estimation
of the QoI of various sources, and the information-integration as well as
decision-making process. In the social dimension, it answers fundamental
questions such as whether and to what degree the road/traffic condition
information provided by the proposed QuicRoad system would change the social
behavior of the travelers. By seamlessly integrating the technological and
social dimensions, the proposed research can not only improve the coverage and
quality of assisted driving and road navigation services for travelers, but also
support policy-making in traffic planning and operations by transportation
authorities. The research will potentially benefit a wide spectrum of real-world
road sensing applications aimed at improving road safety, mitigating traffic
congestions, and reducing fuel consumption and emissions, and eventually
contribute to building a sustainable society.