* 1737824
* Dimensions: Collaborative Research: Integrating phylogenetic, genetic, and functional approaches to dissect the role of toxin tolerance in shaping Drosophila biodiversity
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Kelly Dyer, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 634,454.00

Unusual adaptations to the environment have long fascinated scientists and the
public. There has been much research to understand the evolution of
morphological structures (e.g., shape, color, size). However, far less is known
about the evolution of novel biochemical adaptations and the impact of these
adaptations on the biodiversity of the organisms in which they appear. Of
particular interest is how these traits arise if they are costly to the
individuals who harbor them. This research investigates the evolution of
biochemical adaptations and the genetic and ecological mechanisms that shape
them. The research explores the tolerance of insects (fruit flies) to potent
toxins in mushrooms that they consume. By investigating the mechanism of toxin
tolerance and how this unique adaptation is maintained in this model system, the
research will enhance the general understanding of how novel traits emerge and
shape biodiversity. This project also includes activities designed to increase
public scientific literacy and familiarity with biodiversity by training
teachers and students, from middle school to the undergraduate level
(particularly from underrepresented minorities), and generating photographic
identification guides for insect species associated with
mushrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flies from some groups of Drosophila feed on
both toxic and non-toxic mushrooms, and can tolerate high doses of potent
cyclopeptide mushroom toxins that are deadly to most other multi-cellular
organisms. This research tests hypotheses that predict that: 1) tolerance to
these toxic cyclopeptides evolved multiple times; 2) the genetic mechanism of
tolerance is not the same in all species; and 3) trade-offs between the
physiological costs of tolerance and the benefits of access to a low-competition
resource maintain tolerance. The mechanisms of tolerance and their evolution
within different fly species are being characterized using metabolomic and
transcriptomic analyses that are analyzed in a phylogenetic framework. To assess
the genetic basis of variation in toxin tolerance, the researchers are
performing artificial selection experiments and genome sequencing. Finally,
observational and competition experiments are being used to identify how
selective pressures maintain toxin tolerance in natural populations. In sum,
this research will provide an in-depth evolutionary, ecological, and
physiological assessment of a costly and novel biochemical adaptation, and its
impact on biodiversity.