* 1737842
* EAGER:   SC2: PHY-Layer-Integrated Collaborative Learning in Spectrum Coordination
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2019
* Matthieu Bloch, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 02/28/2019
* USD 99,877.00

With the explosion of wireless devices, spectrum is becoming a scarce resource
that wireless systems fiercely compete for. To ensure that future civilian and
military systems, ranging from connected Internet of Things (IoT) devices to
battlefield ad-hoc networks, continue to support services with growing quality,
systems must evolve beyond the traditional spectrum licensing model and towards
an intelligent spectrum sharing paradigm, in which networks nodes collaborate to
efficiently share the spectrum. This radical paradigm shift requires the
integration of the latest machine learning advances with the more recent
progress in software defined radio, in order to endow wireless devices with the
intelligence and agility necessary to realize the vision of efficient
unsupervised spectrum sharing. The proposed research aims at addressing this
fundamental issue, and will offer ample opportunities to provide
interdisciplinary training of students at the intersection of machine learning
and communications engineering.

The project envisions a paradigm shift in radio design, which will intertwine
agile communications engineering techniques with advanced machine learning
algorithms to fuse the traditional physical-layer and link layers into a
"collaboration layer". Specifically, the approach comprises three key elements:
(1) a multi-carrier modulation format at the physical layer that provides the
required agility to react to interfering signals; (2) a high-performing
modulation recognition software that exploits the latest advances in deep
learning and convolutional neural networks to accurately classify the radio
frequency signals in the environment; and (3) a decision module exploiting the
latest advances in regret minimization online algorithms to achieve high
exploration versus exploitation performance in the wireless environment.