* 1737921
* Collaborative research: Physics and Quantum Technology Applications of Defects in Silicon Carbide
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Kyungwha Park, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2023
* USD 483,381.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research on defects in materials that are good candidates to be used for quantum
computing. Silicon carbide is a promising material for quantum information
processing due to its maturity in industry and compatibility with current
electronic device fabrication. Defects refer to disruptions in the perfect
regular array of silicon and carbon atoms in a perfect silicon carbide crystal.
Promising defects include vacancies such as a silicon atom missing from a site
where it is expected or a missing silicon and missing carbon atom on neighboring
sites; and the presence of a nitrogen atom along with an associated vacant site.
Electrons are confined to quantum mechanical states localized in a small volume.
These states can be initialized, manipulated, and measured; they are promising
candidates for qubits which are the quantum computer analogs of bits in ordinary
computers. Defects in silicon carbide have attractive properties for a range of
applications, including quantum-enhanced sensing of electric and magnetic
fields, secure quantum communications over long distances, as well as quantum
computation. The PIs will develop theoretical tools to understand and exploit
the most promising defects in silicon carbide and assess their potential for
applications. In particular, the PIs will calculate the dynamics of these
defects under interaction with lasers and with static electric fields, using
both computational techniques and analytical theory. This work will pave the way
toward sensing applications. The properties of the emitted light will also be
studied, which will lead to the design of new light-matter interfaces for long-
range quantum communication networks. The interactions between the defects and
their environment, including the nuclear and vibrational modes, will be
calculated, and their effect on the performance of the defect will be assessed.
The PIs will also investigate new ways of controlling these quantum systems. The
outcomes of this research will contribute toward the development of silicon
carbide based systems for powerful future quantum information technologies. This
project will also contribute to educating and supporting the next generation of
researchers in quantum information science and technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical and computational research and education to use first
principles techniques to investigate the physics and dynamics of defects in
silicon carbide, including the process of spin polarization through intersystem
crossing and the coupling to electric fields for sensing and spin control
applications. A formalism for dynamic nuclear polarization calculations will be
developed to understand existing experiments and to reveal the distinct physics
of a central spin coupled to two distinct nuclear baths. The viability of
silicon carbide devices for quantum communications and repeaters will be
assessed. Specifically, this project will characterize spin-photon interfaces
for quantum information applications by taking into account mixings of states
and couplings to vibrational modes obtained from first principles calculations.
Spin control techniques beyond those for qubits will be developed to exploit the
silicon vacancy center with S=3/2. The theoretical results of this project will
be compared to experimental data and stimulate further experimental studies.
This project will also contribute to educating and supporting the next
generation of researchers in quantum information science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.