* 1737746
* ATD:   Geospatial Graphical Models of Human Response to Emergencies
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Adrian Dobra, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 250,219.00

Emergencies such as natural disasters and terrorist attacks occur frequently
around the globe and regularly cause massive destruction. The goal of this
project is to improve the ability to use publicly-available large-scale human-
generated geospatial data sources for identification of emergency events.
Currently, the largest impediment to using such data to identify emergency
events is that very little is known about spatiotemporal patterns of human
behavioral responses to these events. This project seeks to create novel machine
learning tools to identify spatiotemporal patterns of reactions in human
behavioral responses to emergency events using human-generated geospatial data
sources. The key research goals are: (1) build a corpus of geolocated emergency
and non-emergency events; (2) develop state of the art machine learning models
that detect geospatial clusters of locations with anomalous human behavior based
on aggregated geolocated human activity data, together with advanced geographic
information system visualizations; and (3) create a catalogue of behavioral
signatures characterizing emergency and non-emergency events. The project will
improve knowledge about human responses to emergency events by studying their
behavioral signatures through key social science theories on fear or violence
and crime, the social psychology of fear, threat, and risk, and the sociology of
disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geospatial graphical models will be at the core
of the machine learning tools for emergency-event identification. These novel
models generalize Gaussian graphical models to non-Gaussian multiway tensor data
with spatial and temporal dependencies across multiple dimensions, and represent
contributions to statistical and machine learning theory. Multiway tensor
geospatial graphical models have the ability to capture the uncertainty in
unknown multivariate interactions together with known dependencies (e.g.,
spatial) in a coherent manner. Non-separable spatiotemporal versions of these
models will be developed as extensions of Bayesian dynamic linear models, and of
multivariate factor models with correlated residuals. By exploiting the theory
on Markov marked point processes and multivariate birth-death processes, this
project will develop efficient, robust methods of inference and model
determination. The methodological research on geospatial graphical models has a
vast domain of applicability that encompasses all the scientific fields in which
the analysis of multivariate spatiotemporal datasets is key: public health
policy, social and political sciences, finance, electrical engineering, and
computer science. These models are directly applicable in the analysis of high-
resolution smartphone-based GPS locations datasets, which are now actively being
collected in studies that seek to characterize the relationship between
geographic and contextual attributes of the environment and human energy
balance, to study segregation, environmental exposure, and accessibility in
social science research, or to understand the relationship between health-risk
behavior in adolescents and community disorder. The patterns and cross-national
variance in response to emergency events will also inform the social sciences.