* 1737328
* Hikurangi Trench Regional Electromagnetic Survey to Image the Subduction Thrust
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Samer Naif, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 05/31/2023
* USD 1,227,163.00

The Hikurangi subduction zone (HSZ) of New Zealand is where the Pacific tectonic
plate dives beneath the crust of the North Island along its eastern coast. The
HSZ displays marked changes in seismicity and plate-slip along its length: to
the south the plates appear to be locked and have the capacity to generate great
earthquakes whereas to the north the plates are creeping and regularly host
episodic slow slip events and the occasional tsunami earthquake. The physical
conditions controlling this contrast in plate coupling is not well understood.
Recent investigations suggest fluids may play a critical role. To delineate
whether fluids act as a primary control on the style of slip expressed along the
HSZ, this study will use electromagnetic (EM) methods to image the electrical
resistivity structure of the HSZ. Our measurements will provide important
constraints on the hydrologic architecture by quantifying the along and across-
strike variations in porosity and the fluid budget of the HSZ. This project will
support a Ph.D. student and several graduate students, postdocs and early career
scientists will be involved in the field work. The PI is an early career
scientist who will gain valuable experience leading the field project and
mentoring a graduate student. Additionally, a marine EM short-course will be
given for students and unfunded collaborators to learn about marine EM theory,
applications, data processing, and inverse modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will use newly proven marine EM imaging technology to constrain the
porosity and fluid budget of the crust and mantle along both segments of the
HSZ. The survey cruise will deploy a grid of ocean-bottom EM receivers in a 400
km by 150 km area that spans the incoming plate and fore-arc margin.
Magnetotelluric (MT) response functions will be estimated from the recorded
electric and magnetic field time-series. In addition, controlled-source EM
(CSEM) data will be recorded by deep towing a horizontal electric dipole
transmitter near the seafloor along three trench-crossing transects located in
the southern, central, and northern segments of the HSZ. The MT and CSEM data
will be inverted for electrical resistivity and used to quantify the porosity
structure across the margin. The HSZ resistivity results will be interpreted in
conjunction with existing and planned geophysical and drilling data to test the
hypothesis that along-strike variations in seismicity and interplate locking are
related to the fluid budget of the incoming oceanic plate, fluid content along
the plate interface, and upper plate permeability/porosity structure. The MT
data will also image the electrical resistivity of the lithosphere and
asthenosphere, providing independent constraints on the origin of the
lithosphere-asthenosphere boundary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.