* 1737688
* Collaborative Research: A Novel Control Strategy for 3D Printing of Micro-Scale Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* David Hoelzle, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2017
* USD 55,168.00

Additive manufacturing systems, often called 3D printers, are poised to displace
conventional manufacturing operations in many meso-scale applications (parts
from 1 to 100 millimeters in size). Similarly, 3D printing at the micro-scale
(from 0.001 to 0.1 millimeters in size) has the potential to revolutionize the
way that biological and chemical sensors and integrated circuits are prototyped
and manufactured. 3D printers build up complex parts by depositing one thin
layer of material at a time. Electrohydrodynamic jet, or e-jet, printing is a
promising micro-scale version of this process. This project will add sensors to
a standard e-jet printer, and apply an innovative control law to greatly improve
the precision of the resulting parts. The control law is based on the
observation that 3D printed features typically change very little from one layer
to the next. By observing how a layer deviates from its desired shape, the
baseline e-jet control can be modified to improve the accuracy of the next
layer. In this project, an atomic force microscope will be integrated with an
e-jet printer to measure the shape of each layer. To better correct the printing
process, the electric field around each layer will also be measured. The
technical research plan is integrated with educational outreach to initiate
undergraduate "micro-maker" clubs and catalyze an open-source, bottom-up
movement based on inexpensive ink-jet printing of custom microcircuits and
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Micro-scale Additive Manufacturing, and in
particular, electrohydrodynamic jet printing, has the potential to revolutionize
3D, functional, micro-scale device fabrication. Limiting this step change in
manufacturing capabilities is the reliance of micro-scale Additive Manufacturing
systems on a process monitoring, regulation, and quality control paradigm that
is performed post-process and in an ad hoc manner. This research will break this
open-loop paradigm by generating fundamental scientific knowledge in two areas:
1) the synthesis of a controls theoretic framework to compensate for spatial
disturbances with a robust and computationally efficient learning-based
algorithm and 2) the study of interactions between charged jets of materials and
substrates in electrohydrodynamic jet printing using first principles physics
models and validated by empirical studies leveraging a novel integration of
electrohydrodynamic jet printing and atomic force microscopy. This research will
contribute the fundamental knowledge required to transform 3D micro-scale
Additive Manufacturing from a nascent, open-loop and ad hoc technology set to a
fully automated, accurate, and robust closed-loop system.