* 1737721
* I-Corps: Tissue-specific hydrogel for peripheral nerve repair
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2017,08/31/2018
* Bryan Brown, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the ability
to more effectively treat nerve injuries. Each year in the United States alone
there are about 600,000 surgical procedures performed to reconstruct peripheral
nerves, with costs of more than $1.7B. In moderate to severe cases of peripheral
nerve injury, such as those involving nerve transections, stretch, or crush,
long-term outcomes are poor. Disabilities due to nerve injury are associated
with more than $7B in costs of long-term care for those affected. Add to this
the economic costs of lost productivity of these individuals and the total costs
are in excess of $15B per year. The proposed work seeks to further develop and
validate a novel technology which can have a significant impact upon clinical
care for nerve injury by both speeding and improving nerve
repair.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based upon multiple years
of research demonstrating that peripheral nerve tissue derived hydrogels
represent an ideal environment for nerve repair. Through multiple benchtop and
preclinical tests, it has been shown that delivery of such hydrogels to a site
of nerve repair modulates the inflammatory response to injury, recruits cells
which are supportive of nerve repair, and ultimately supports the regrowth of
neurons resulting in improved functional recovery. This solution has the
potential to be used in multiple nerve injury modalities including nerve crush,
stretch, transection, and gap injuries as either a primary treatment or as an
adjunct to surgical repair and/or nerve grafting.