* 1737560
* SCC-Planning:  Using Innovations in Big Data and Technology to Address the High Rate of Infant Mortality in Greater Columbus Ohio
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,02/29/2020
* John Volakis, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 02/29/2020
* USD 100,000.00

Franklin County, Ohio, home of the state's capital at Columbus, has one of the
highest infant mortality rates in the country at 8.3 deaths per 1,000 live
births. As outlined in a recent article in the Journal of the American Medical
Association (2016), the U.S. lags behind in many important measures of
population health, including infant mortality, despite the fact that one-fifth
of our dollars are spent on healthcare. While the data needed to address these
important public health problems are available, to date we have not seen
adequate investment in informatics approaches to combine and analyze these
multilevel (e.g., individual lifestyle factors, neighborhood characteristics)
data. The current planning project represents an effort to plan (with an intent
to implement) just such an approach to address the high rate of infant mortality
in Greater Columbus and nationwide. As the recent winner of the Department of
Transportation's Smart Cities Challenge, Columbus already has a well-developed
plan to employ technology to improve local transportation options, which is
anticipated to ameliorate some contributing factors such as lack of access
prenatal and other health care. The financial support from this and follow-up
grants will permit us to expand that effort and leverage technological advances
to further identify and design interventions to address risk factors for poor
maternal and infant health outcomes. Further, by including students and other
trainees in our work, we will be training the next generation of scientists to
develop innovative solutions to address complex societal problems. The
objectives of this one-year planning project are to: 1) identify data gaps that
present local barriers to achieving optimal maternal and infant health and their
effect on proximate causes of infant mortality in the community; 2) align with
key stakeholders and partners in the community with a goal to identify
opportunities where technology, especially connectivity and mobility, could be
leveraged to address barriers and speed-up progress; and 3) utilize our
technological and content expertise to design and implement novel interventions
for improving maternal and infant health. Since 2014 there have been a number of
local efforts to address Franklin County's high rate of infant mortality to no
avail. As such, there is a dire need for a coordinated novel multidisciplinary
approach. The primary focus and intellectual contribution of this planning grant
is to work closely with stakeholders to plan strategies to identify the key
contributors of infant mortality in Franklin County (i.e., likely specific
social determinants of health) and to develop novel interventions driven by
innovations in BIGDATA technology.