* 1737673
* ATD: Collaborative Research: Algorithms and Data for High-Frequency, Real-Time Anomaly Detection
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Tyler McCormick, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 100,001.00

The rapidly burgeoning amount of digital data from Internet and mobile-enabled
communications can offer low-cost and high-resolution views into human behavior
across areas such as health and socio-economics. Personally-generated data from
Internet and mobile-connected sources offer unique insight, capturing aspects of
human behavior that would be taxing or impossible to quantify through other data
sources. Moreover, the data is often available in real time and can be linked to
specific locations. This research project addresses the statistical challenges
inherent in using such unstructured spatio-temporal data sets for detection of
anomalous events.

Such data requires new statistical approaches to pre-process and extract forms
from the data that can reliably be used for event detection. Further, the
continuous nature of the data means that what constitutes anomalous behavior
depends on the time-scale and on the type of underlying event. This project aims
to develop 1) approaches for generating relevant features from social media data
that account for the observational nature of the data and can be used in spatio-
temporal models of real-world behavior and 2) a new multi-scale approach to
modeling dependence structures that uses new information to continuously refine
the model and accurately assess anomalies. The approach in this project is both
suited to and harnesses the continuous and observational nature of social media
data. The research will be validated on empirical data sets, demonstrating
practical utility. It is anticipated that the results will be applicable to
further the use of publicly-available geospatial data sources and understand
human dynamics that are not measurable through other means.