* 1737815
* I-Corps: Bio-Inspired Predictive Engineering Analysis Tool
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Devinder Kaur, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 09/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to obtain the
benefits available from modernizing legacy processes in the made-to-order design
manufacturing industry. Traditionally the mathematical processes used to analyze
potential designs are very linear in nature, and do not offer the manufacturer a
complete picture of the overall impacts of the non-linear parts of their
designs. With the predictive engineering analysis tool developed here, a
manufacturing facility can preview the results available from using a particular
engineering design prior to the actual manufacturing and testing of the physical
parts. Design parameters and environmental conditions can also be inserted into
the tool which are then used to better predict the behavior of the part after it
is produced. This innovative virtual tool has the potential to be added to the
set of existing design and testing tools already being used and let
manufacturers predict the success or failure of a part. The impact of this tool
would be decreased time to market, eliminating the guesswork now used in certain
aspects of a design and saving valuable physical
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project defines an innovative
scalable software tool that is capable of virtually predicting the success or
failure of an engineering design prior to production. The technique is based on
the mathematical modeling of the coordinated behaviors of biological system.
This allows the tool to quickly search and intelligently predict the best
solution sets to a multi-objective problem in a given design space. This project
employs these innovative bio-inspired techniques to develop algorithms which are
applied to engineering designs to produce an ideal set of solutions based on
user defined objectives. Bio-inspired algorithms have been shown to improve upon
current standard rigid mathematical techniques. This project provides the
flexibility to implement an approach that is able to search the entire problem
space at once therefore giving better visibility to all of the possible
solutions. Since no particular parameter in isolation impacts the outcome of the
algorithm, the user is presented with the opportunity to shift the input
parameters and rerun the optimization. Further this I-Corps project attempts to
explore and define the input parameters for a variety of industries, and assist
the end user in coming up with better designs for their products.