* 1737583
* SCC-Planning: Designing an Integrated Mobile Application and Case Management Tool to Promote Behavioral Change in Criminal Populations Supervised in the Community
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Guanling Chen, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 99,408.00

The purpose of this project is to plan the design of next generation probation
and parole supervision technology. The goal is to develop a blueprint for BEACON
(Behavioral Economics Application with Correctional Opportunities
Notifications), which is intended to serve as a community-based offender
supervision system that will leverage advances in smartphone-based behavior
sensing and predictive analytics, and integrate them with evidence-based
correctional treatment and supervision practices to reduce recidivism of
criminal offenders being reintegrated into the community. BEACON advances
community supervision capabilities by promoting offender change rather than
control alone and provides efficient and effective support to enhance offender
reintegration opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The plan involves direct
engagement of stakeholders from the local criminal justice community to explore
both the technical feasibility and functional desirability of the new technology
from multiple perspectives, including correctional departments, probation
officers, offenders, and service providers. The technical innovations adapted
for the BEACON system include low-power smartphone sensing system that captures
multi-dimensional behavioral signals and predictive learning algorithms that
generate prompts to nudge offenders into appropriate behavioral adherence. When
integrated with insights from advances in correctional treatment practices and
behavior change theories for probationers and parolees, a comprehensive,
interdisciplinary supervision system emerges that offers considerable
rehabilitative value and promotes community safety. The results of the project
will provide insights and guidelines on how to deploy advanced mobile
technologies to the target community, which serves as a foundation for the
design, development, and deployment of the BEACON system in the near future.