* 1737984
* ATD:   Estimation and Anomaly Detection for high-dimensional Data, Maps and Dynamic Processes
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Mauro Maggioni, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2020
* USD 250,000.00

The project focuses on the analysis of collections of regular, hyperspectral,
LiDAR, and thermal images, and multi-modal data sets, both in terms of detection
of anomalies and classification tasks. The input data (such as images, spectra,
etc.) for many threat detection problems is typically high-dimensional,
corrupted by noise, and subject to nonlinear transformations due to
environmental conditions. Automatic threat detection problems typically face the
fundamental curse of dimensionality: to achieve a target level of accuracy, the
number of observations required is exponential in the dimension of the data.
This work focuses on the automated discovery of low-dimensional representations
of the data, or at least of those features of the data that are sufficient to
perform the task at hand. These representations will enable high statistical and
computational performance in the above tasks even with a relatively small amount
of data. The project will also focus on automatically modeling and learning
interaction rules in interacting agent systems.

This project entails an overarching program of research aimed at detecting and
exploiting intrinsic low-dimensionality and estimating low-dimensional models
for data and certain types of high-dimensional data and agent-based systems.
Low-dimensional probabilistic models for high-dimensional data, arising from
Hyper-Spectral Imaging (HSI), LiDAR, and Near-Infrad/Night-Vision cameras, will
be constructed, enabling efficient data encoding and decoding, statistical
models for detecting background noise versus signals of interest, and anomaly
detection. Novel techniques for understanding dependencies across multiple
sensor modalities by studying maps in high-dimensions between data collected by
different sensors will be developed and tested on a variety of multi-modal data
sets. Novel machine learning techniques for learning from agent systems with
unknown influence functions will be developed.