* 1737411
* Circulation, Metabolism, and Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Arctic Lakes and Ponds
* GEO,OPP
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2019
* Sally MacIntyre, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 12/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

The goals of the proposed research are to examine biological, chemical, and
physical conditions in ice-covered Arctic lakes and the associated changes in
dissolved gases by analyzing data obtained from five lakes over three years. The
data will be used to 1) determine circulation and the resulting habitat for
organisms living under the ice, and 2) how biological and physical processes
interact to cause a loss of oxygen and the production of greenhouse gases.
Despite the importance of mixing within lakes for maintaining healthy habitats,
few scientists are trained in lake physics in the United States. This project
will provide such training for a postdoctoral scholar.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arctic lakes are ice-covered for nine or more months of
the year. With harsh winter conditions, few limnological studies have been
conducted on ice-covered arctic lakes. The goal of the proposed research is to
analyze an unprecedented dataset obtained from five lakes of different sizes
from fall to spring over three years. The data will be used to describe and
quantify the lakes' physical limnology and under ice metabolism and to develop
scaling laws such that regional generalizations can be made. Analyses and
modeling will focus on questions related to the extent to which fall cooling
moderates under ice temperatures and circulation; the contribution of
respiration and related increases in solutes to circulation patterns and
development of anoxia; lake-size dependent controls on the retention of solutes
introduced at snowmelt; and lake-size dependent controls on mixing dynamics,
which moderate production of CO2 and CH4 in winter and emissions at ice off.
Results will provide a basic understanding of circulation and mixing as needed
to improve hydrodynamic models and are critical for quantifying the habitat of
organisms under the ice and for accurate inclusion of arctic lakes in regional
carbon budgets.