* 1737906
* ATD:  Collaborative Research:  Efficient sampling for real-time detection and isolation of threats in networks
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Jacob Shapiro, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 80,000.00

While modern technologies generate multiple, interconnected sources of data,
which can be observed in nearly real time, physical constraints and budget
limitations require efficient sampling of these data streams. Incorporating such
constraints in the design of threat detection systems has the potential to lead
to significant savings in resources. The goal of this project is to develop
fundamental statistical theory and methods for the efficient, real-time sampling
of networks, and the subsequent detection, identification and prevention of
threats of different nature, such as terrorist activities and credit fraud. The
developed methodologies will be tested on real-world data, where the underlying
community structure in times of crisis will be discovered using cell-phone call
records. The theoretical knowledge that will be gained in this project will be
incorporated into the material of graduate-level courses that cover adaptive
experimental design and sequential detection. Two graduate students will
contribute significantly in this research. The project will make every effort to
include qualified students of underrepresented groups in these research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will address two fundamental
research questions: 1) how to detect and identify, in real time, anomalous
clusters in network data subject to sampling constraints, and 2) how to
efficiently allocate limited resources in order to delay or prevent the
realization of threats from the identified anomalous clusters. The mathematical
formulation of these questions leads to novel problems in network-based,
adaptive experimental design and sequential detection, whose solutions require
the creative combination of tools from various fields, such as statistical
inference, sequential analysis, and information theory. The theory and methods
developed in this work will guide the development of threat detection algorithms
and will be tested in concrete applications, such as social networks in times of
crisis that will be discovered based on cell-phone call data. Overall, this is a
multidisciplinary proposal, spanning social sciences, statistics, and
engineering, whose goal is to obtain an arsenal of efficient network sampling
schemes and novel threat detection algorithms, grounded on a strong theoretical
background.