* 1737934
* EAGER:SC2:  Collaborative Intelligent Radio Network Design For Cooperative Spectrum Sharing
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Biao Chen, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 03/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

The proliferation of wireless devices and services presents an acute demand on
the radio frequency spectrum. The so-called spectrum scarcity has led to
numerous initiatives spearheaded by the Federal Communications Commission to
advance how frequency spectrum should be allocated and utilized. This project is
a complex, inter-disciplinary effort to address effective sharing of spectrum.
The effort involves both graduate and undergraduate students from a diverse
background; participation in this project will provide the students a unique and
invaluable experience and will help cultivate their long term interest in STEM
related areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a robust and run-
time adaptive radio network with built-in machine intelligence that is able to
co-exist with other unknown radio networks in the absence of any spectrum pre-
planning. A thoroughly tested software radio network will be developed to ensure
that various high level learning and networking functions will be integrated
seamlessly to attain the design objectives. Three computing platforms (CPU
Server, FPGA, and GPU) will be utilized in an optimal manner by taking into
account various computing bandwidth and latency constraints to accommodate the
various computing/learning functions. The collective development of the
collaboration protocol will help identify the most critical information
necessary in facilitating efficient spectrum usage among independent users.