* 1737876
* Collaborative Research:  ATD:  Theory and Algorithms for Discrete Curvatures on Network Data from Human Mobility and Monitoring
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Feng Luo, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2020
* USD 150,000.00

New developments in technologies of embedded systems, sensors, and wireless
communications provide great potential to improve the safety and security of the
physical and social environment we live in. These technologies can help identify
and mitigate unfortunate accidents, emergency events, and malicious attacks.
This project seeks to develop mathematical tools and algorithms based on
discrete curvatures for the purpose of understanding and detecting community
structures and anomalies in networks that can be of crucial value in many
applications. The project considers high level mobility patterns, community
structures, and anomalies as well as finer details such as who is where. The
mathematical tools to be developed will be useful in other networks (for
example, protein-protein interactions in biological networks).&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate mathematical problems arising the
analysis of real-time spatial and temporal human mobility data. The focus will
be on the community detection problem on graphs by using discrete Ricci
curvatures and discrete curvature flows on graphs. The problem is to extract
stable groups in human mobility patterns, which will serve as the traffic norm
for detecting abnormal patterns that can be tied to criminal or terroristic
events. To detect these stable groups, or communities, the main observation is
that community structures in a network resemble well known geometric phenomena
such as thick-thin decompositions in Riemannian geometry. Inspired by Riemannian
geometry and the success of Hamilton-Perelman's Ricci flow program, this work
investigates how to use discrete curvatures and discrete curvature flows to
detect community structure in a network. Preliminary investigations show that
the proposed method has great potential and can detect communities with high
accuracy. This potential prompts the PIs to examine computationally feasible
definitions of discrete Ricci curvatures on weighted networks. The important
work of Ollivier on discrete Ricci curvature is the starting point of this
investigation. The drawback of Ollivier's curvature is that it is
computationally expensive -- almost impossible to compute the proposed discrete
curvature flow on large networks containing more than a million nodes. As such,
the main task in this work is to find computationally feasible Ricci curvatures
where the discrete curvature flow can be computed in real time for large
networks. The affirmative resolution of this work will be useful in pure
mathematical research and computer science. The work will also develop software
for practical use.