* 1737719
* Meeting: FASEB Conference on Mechanisms in Plant Development, July 30 - August 4, 2017 Saxtons River, Vermont, USA
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Doris Wagner, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 04/30/2018
* USD 19,500.00

Non-technical description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will promote
interactions and information exchange between biologists who are using different
scientific approaches to resolve how plants--the major sources of our food--grow
and develop. These interactions will take place at the 15th International
meeting on Mechanisms in Plant Development, which will be held from July 30th to
August 4th 2017 in Saxtons River, Vermont, USA. This meeting is the only
regularly held international conference devoted entirely to plant developmental
biology, the study of how plants grow and make different structures, such as
leaves, fruits and grains, that are critical to our agricultural economy.
Discoveries in developmental biology may help improve crop yield, quality and
stress tolerance, as well as reducing needs for fertilizers and other inputs.
This project is special because the small size and secluded location of the
meeting make it a fantastic opportunity for discussion of new ideas and emerging
concepts, as well as for developing professional networks. Half of the meeting
time will be devoted to presentations from early career, women and
underrepresented minority scientists. The results of the conference will be
summarized by meeting participants and made available to the general public by
postings on publicly accessible websites including 'The Node'. Materials will
also be provided directly to participants to spread the exciting new findings
presented at the meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference is an important and unique
scientific meeting where the intersections of plant development, signaling,
modeling and genomics are explored through talks, poster sessions, and intensive
scientific discussion. The meeting includes outstanding researchers from around
the world, presenting cutting edge research directed towards a fundamental
understanding of how different aspects of plant growth and development are
controlled in response to intrinsic and external signals, and how such
mechanisms are modified over evolutionary time. This meeting will cover broad
areas of plant development, including sessions on local and long-range signals,
the interface between cell and developmental biology, new approaches to modeling
development and plants emerging as new models for important developmental
traits. This year includes more plant/environmental interactions (biotic and
abiotic) because plant life histories combined with new technologies make plants
especially well-suited to pioneer an understanding of the positive and negative
interactions between a complex multicellular organism and the world around it.
The conference will also promote education of a diverse group of scientists at
all career levels. Graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and young faculty
will be strongly encouraged to submit poster abstracts, and nearly half the
speakers will be chosen from these submitted abstracts. Participation by
underrepresented minority and female scientists will also be strongly
encouraged; this will be achieved by identification and encouragement of
individuals, by contacting networks and academic institutions that serve
underrepresented minorities, as well as by advertising the conference widely.
The results of the conference will be widely disseminated through a written
summary posted online and slides to be used by meeting participants to spread
the exciting new findings presented.