* 1737284
* Using Loihi Basaltic Rocks to Understand the Hawaiian Plume
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Michael Garcia, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 251,924.00

Hotspot volcanoes are thought to tap the Earth's deep mantle, and to provide
fundamental insights into understanding its composition and processes. Hawaii is
an excellent venue for studying hotspot lavas because of its distant location
from any continent or tectonic plate boundary (2500 km), and the high
temperature (&gt;1500 degrees C) and volume output (&gt;100,000 cubic
meters/year) of its hotspot. This proposal focuses on Loihi, the youngest and
still underwater Hawaiian volcano. Loihi lavas have the potential to provide
important constraints on the mantle plume beneath the islands because: 1) The
volcano's youth (preshield stage) allows for the characterization of its mantle
source before it has been extensively melted. 2) Loihi basalts are one of the
key geochemical end members for Hawaiian basalts. Thus, analyses of its lavas
(especially from previously unsampled areas) will provide a unique perspective
into melting processes and source heterogeneity within the Hawaiian hotspot, the
Earth's hottest mantle plume. Loihi lavas are especially noteworthy for their
primordial noble gas signatures. 3) Loihi's interior and early history are
exposed by major landslides on its eastern flank (&gt;1 km thick stratigraphic
section) and in ~300 m deep craters at its summit. 4) An extensive suite (196
samples) of Loihi basalts collected by submersible are available from its summit
pit craters, its dissected east flank and the full extent of its two rift zones.
Most of these samples have received limited geochemical characterization. These
samples will be made available to the Earth science community for other
geochemical studies. This project supports the training of a graduate student at
the University of Hawaii.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are: 1)
Determine the lifespan of Hawaiian shield volcanoes using Loihi lavas to
document the duration of the early stage, which is the major missing puzzle
piece for resolving this issue. Current estimates range widely. 2) Better
understand the structure of the Hawaiian plume (e.g., whether it is bilaterally
asymmetrical as currently thought). Loihi is at the young end of the LOA trend
but paradoxically, it shares geochemical features with KEA trend lavas. 3)
Evaluate whether the Hawaiian mantle plume source varies in time and space.
Lavas from Loihi deep interior and submarine flanks will provide a new
perspective on the Loihi compositional end member of the Hawaiian plume. 4)
Determine how crustal contamination works at a submarine Hawaiian volcano. Do
rift zone magmas bypass the summit magma reservoir and more faithfully preserve
mantle source signatures? Previous studies of Loihi summit lavas showed they
were extensively modified by crustal contamination, whereas rare gas
compositions of deep south rift lavas suggest they were uncontaminated. Loihi
basalts are ripe for geochemical characterization using a new generation of
geochemical instruments for determining ages, crustal and mantle processes, and
source variations. These analyses will provide fundamental insights into the
workings of the Hawaiian hotspot. The newly geochemically characterized Loihi
samples, all precisely located and collected by submersible, will be made
available to the Earth science community for other complementary future
geochemical studies (e.g., Os isotopes, platinum group elements, rare gases).