* 1737723
* Physical Oceanography Dissertation Symposia X and XI
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Christopher Measures, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 01/31/2023
* USD 330,750.00

This award supports the organization of the 10th and 11th editions of the
Physical Oceanography Dissertation Symposium (PODS) conferences in October 2018
and October 2020. These symposia were established in 2002 to bring together, for
the purposes of scientific discussion and interactions, recent or soon to be
Ph.D. graduates in physical oceanography and closely related fields. This
program is modeled after the highly successful Dissertations Symposium in
Chemical Oceanography (DISCO) meetings, which were first held in 1978, and is
formatted in a similar manner. It is anticipated that the PODS symposia will be
held in parallel with the DISCO symposia as interactions between the two groups
are an integral part of the goals of the proposed PODS symposia. A broad
international announcement of the PODS symposia will be made to physical
oceanographers working at academic and research institutions in both the US and
other countries to develop an applicant pool. From this pool, agency personnel
will select invitees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting will consist of a series
of scientific sessions grouped by research subject area that are chaired by
selected invitees. Each participant will present their dissertation research to
their professional peers, in the appropriate session, followed by a participant-
led discussion period. These activities will forge professional relationships
between the participants that will facilitate future research and academic
careers in oceanography. The symposium will also include an initial presentation
by an invited senior scientist in the field, and presentations by, and
discussion with, agency personnel explaining funding mechanisms and strategies.
Participants will form breakout groups to discuss current issues in research, as
well as obstacles and opportunities to career paths in the field, then provide
feedback to agency personnel through formal presentations. Evening discussion
sessions revolving around specific topics will be organized with participants
from both symposia (PODS and DISCO) with the goal of broadening the disciplinary
expertise of the participants, promote future inter-disciplinary collaborations,
and make connections between research and education applicable to future
generations of scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participation of early
career professionals in the field of physical oceanography from widely differing
backgrounds and geographical origins, will lead in the creation of a peer
mentoring group that could potentially be career-lasting. The attendees play a
critical role in improving our understanding of ocean and earth science
processes, which provide the scientific framework for advancing fundamental
oceanographic research. The integration with participants in DISCO promotes the
development of inter-disciplinary research. In addition, as a minority
institution, the University of Hawaii fosters interactions between traditionally
under-represented groups and minorities. Planned meeting activities include
interactions between meeting participants and students, particularly
undergraduates in the Department of Oceanography's Global Environmental Sciences
program.