* 1737409
* Protistan, prokaryotic, and viral processes at the San Pedro Ocean Time-series
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Jed Fuhrman, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,528,834.00

Planktonic marine microbial communities consist of a diverse collection of
bacteria, archaea, viruses, protists (phytoplankton and protozoa) and small
animals (metazoan). Collectively, these species are responsible for virtually
all marine pelagic primary production where they form the basis of food webs and
carry out a large fraction of respiratory processes. Microbial interactions
include the traditional role of predation, but recent research recognizes the
importance of parasitism, symbiosis and viral infection. Characterizing the
response of pelagic microbial communities and processes to environmental
influences is fundamental to understanding and modeling carbon flow and energy
utilization in the ocean, but very few studies have attempted to study all of
these assemblages in the same study. This project is comprised of long-term
(monthly) and short-term (daily) sampling at the San Pedro Ocean Time-series
(SPOT) site. Analysis of the resulting datasets investigates co-occurrence
patterns of microbial taxa (e.g. protist-virus and protist-prokaryote
interactions, both positive and negative) indicating which species consistently
co-occur and potentially interact, followed by examination gene expression to
help define the underlying mechanisms. This study augments 20 years of baseline
studies of microbial abundance, diversity, rates at the site, and will enable
detection of low-frequency changes in composition and potential ecological
interactions among microbes, and their responses to changing environmental
forcing factors. These responses have important consequences for higher trophic
levels and ocean-atmosphere feedbacks. The broader impacts of this project
include training graduate and undergraduate students, providing local high
school student with summer lab experiences, and PI presentations at local K-12
schools, museums, aquaria and informal learning centers in the region.
Additionally, the PIs advise at the local, county and state level regarding
coastal marine water quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is
unique in that it is a holistic study (including all microbes from viruses to
small metazoa) of microbial species diversity and ecological activities, carried
out at the SPOT site off the coast of southern California. In studying all
microbes simultaneously, this work aims to identify important ecological
interactions among microbial species, and identify the basis(es) for those
interactions. This research involves (1) extensive analyses of prokaryote
(archaean and bacterial) and eukaryote (protistan and micro-metazoan) diversity
via the sequencing of marker genes, (2) studies of whole-community gene
expression by eukaryotes and prokaryotes in order to identify key functional
characteristics of microorganismal groups and the detection of active viral
infections, and (3) metagenomic analysis of viruses and bacteria to aid
interpretation of transcriptomic analyses using genome-encoded information. The
project includes exploratory metatranscriptomic analysis of poorly-understood
aphotic and hypoxic-zone protists, to examine their stratification, functions
and hypothesized prokaryotic symbioses.