* 1737612
* SCC-Planning:  Defining Research and Education Challenges in IoT for Neighborhoods with Significant Numbers of Small-to-Mid-Sized Manufacturers
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2017,12/31/2018
* Kenneth Loparo, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 12/31/2018
* USD 99,987.00

Smart and connected systems are changing communities, work, and the home
profoundly.  Automation over the past few decades has radically reshaped
manufacturing, employment in manufacturing industries, and their local
communities. The Internet of Things (IoT) will likely accelerate change, opening
new opportunities and presenting new challenges. This grant brings together
academic researchers in science, engineering, and business management at two
universities, educators, community members and city leaders, and small-to-mid-
sized manufacturers (SMM), all within a neighborhood of Cleveland, Ohio, to plan
for research, education, and workforce development in their community.

This project develops action plans for research, education, and policy
recommendations to benefit SMMs and the local community.  The plans reflect an
understanding of the investment in time and resources required to leverage IoT
in order for the SMMs to transform themselves into "smart" manufacturers with
increased productivity and energy efficiency to better capitalize on new
markets.  Within the local community, the plans reflect an understanding of the
potential role of IoT in workforce education, recruitment, and retention. IoT
has the potential to improve the quality of life of a community.  This project
brings these different perspectives together, creating a new language for
engagement among stakeholders and creating new opportunities in a community for
public-private investment in IoT-enabled technologies and applications. This
project in a neighborhood of Ohio may serve as a model for small towns and
communities to work and plan with their local universities and manufacturers to
achieve the societal benefits from leveraging IoT technologies.