* 1737737
* High-resolution Imaging of the Mantle Transition Zone using EarthScope USArray
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2017,09/30/2021
* Ying Zhou, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 09/30/2021
* USD 184,067.00

The dominant tectonic process responsible for earthquakes, volcanoes and
landform evolution in the continental United States in the past 200 million
years has been the subduction of the Farallon plate beneath the North American
Plate. Understanding this subduction process has been a challenge as most of the
Farallon plate is now several hundred kilometers below the surface. This
research takes advantage of a new technique to analyze seismic data and a rich
data set collected by EarthScope USArray stations to image the subducted
Farallon slab beneath the continental United States, a process similar to the
imaging in medical CT Scan. This research aims to advance understanding of the
subduction process with focuses on the following questions: (1) How does the
older and deeper subducted Farallon plate connect with the younger plate now
subducting beneath the Pacific Northwest? (2) What is the relation between the
subduction of Farallon plate and the formation of the Yellowstone volcanic
track? (3) How does the subducted Farallon plate interact with the deeper mantle
across the US continent? High-resolution images of the Farallon slab, seismic
measurements as well as computer codes based on the new seismic theory will be
made available to the broader Geosciences community. Hands-on course projects
and labs based on this research will be developed and implemented in
undergraduate teaching. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Slab anomalies have been imaged in
wavespeed models in a broad region in North America mantle transition zone,
extending from the west coast to the eastern US. The resolutions of wavespeed
models are limited in the mantle transition zone due to data sensitivity and the
subduction process in the mid mantle remains unclear. The second unresolved
question is the role of a deep mantle plume in the formation of the Yellowstone
hotspot track. In this research, we will compute finite-frequency sensitivities
for waves generated at the 410-km and 660-km discontinuities to image high-
resolution mantle transition zone structure beneath the continental US using
seismic data recorded at USArray TA stations. The high-resolution models will
provide new insights into the dynamics of subduction, especially the relation
between subducted materials in the western and eastern US and the role of slab
fragmentation in the formation of the Yellowstone hot-spot track. This research
will provide a solid foundation for future imaging of mantle transition zone
discontinuities and allow the community to take full advantage of frequency-
dependent seismic data to tackle scientific questions on mantle convection
dynamics.