* 1737151
* Testing the fidelity of neodymium isotopes as a paleocirculation tracer in the Southeast Indian-Southern Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Chandranath Basak, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 12/31/2017
* USD 142,643.00

In the modern open ocean neodymium (Nd) isotope values of seawater are often
explained by the mixing of water masses. As such, Nd is recognized as a "quasi-
conservative" tracer. Implicit in this "quasi-conservative" behavior is the
assumption that no significant source of Nd exists along the water mass
flowpath. This is the basic principle behind using Nd isotopes archived in
marine sediments as a tracer of past ocean circulation. In recent years, several
studies of Nd sources, sinks, and biogeochemical cycling has challenged this
conventional wisdom and proposed additional sources of Nd, such as: (i) exchange
with particulates that modifies seawater Nd isotope ratios, or (ii) addition of
pore water Nd influenced by reactions with sediment. To successfully use Nd
isotopes as a water mass tracer proxy, it is essential to understand these
limitations. Therefore, this project will examine these alternative sources (and
sinks) of Nd to evaluate their impact on the quasi-conservative behavior of
seawater Nd. This research will help to constrain the limitations of Nd isotopes
as a tracer of past ocean circulation. Funding supports career development for a
postdoctoral researcher, provides field experience for a graduate student, and
provides research experience for an undergraduate
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project investigators will collect samples that
constitute the different components of modern Nd cycle (e.g., filtered seawater,
water column particulates, pore waters and concurrent down hole sediment
samples) during a cruise in the Southeast Indian-Southern Ocean (SEISO). The
SEISO cruise track will: (i) cover major water masses of Southern Ocean origin
(Antarctic Mode Water, Antarctic Intermediate Water, Upper and Lower Circumpolar
Deep Water), (ii) extensively transit over the southeast Indian Ridge, and (iii)
sample the region just north of the Subantarctic Front, where Subantarctic Mode
Water is forming today. Seawater and pore water Nd isotopes and Rare Earth
Elements will be analyzed, thereby allowing characterization of the Southern
Ocean water masses, the effects on seawater Nd isotopes from potentially
reactive ridge rocks, and the influence of pore water Nd flux on bottom water Nd
isotopes. Besides improving the understanding of Nd cycling, data from this
project will provide important information for interpreting other datasets from
the research cruise, and will be of interest to a wide range of climate
scientists as well as biogeochemical modelers, chemical and biological
oceanographers, and polar scientists.