* 1737744
* ATD:   The Foundations of Dynamic Drone-Based Threat Detection
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Guillermo Sapiro, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2022
* USD 199,850.00

Drone-based threat detection enables unprecedented coverage and flexibility in
understanding human dynamics, with applications to real-time identification of
unusual events and forecast of future threats. With these new possibilities come
unique challenges, from highly dynamic scene changes to the need for low-cost
operation. This project focuses on the foundations of video analysis technology
for such dynamic drone-based threat detection. The work ranges from mathematical
foundations in the area of learning and modeling to applications such as people
tracking and identification. In terms of data, the project includes collection
and analysis of drone-based video data, sharing data and the developed code with
the community at large. The project will not only contribute to the emerging
area of drone-based threat analysis but will also provide fundamental building
blocks for modern visual data exploitation. Components of this project will be
incorporated in online image-processing classes.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The work
investigates fundamental problems motivated by drone-based video analysis,
including orientation invariance, image hashing, multi-modality modeling, and
progressive unsupervised self-learning. The project develops and exploits
underlying mathematical foundations, such as subspace modeling and invariant
filter design. All the work has efficiency as its goal; this being manifested
from the development of memory and computationally efficient forest hashing to
the development of oriented response networks with significantly reduced deep
models for orientation invariance. To enable state-of-the-art performance, the
project utilizes successful machine learning frameworks, including deep
convolution neural networks, random forests, hashing, and latent-SVM. This is
approached with fundamental enabling redesigns and developments in the areas of
robust learning, invariant learning, unsupervised self-learning, and multimodal
hashing. The contributions are critical for data-limited learning, cross-
modality learning, and computationally/memory efficient systems. The project
aims to develop and exploit underlying mathematical foundations, such as
subspace modeling, invariant filter design and learning, robust geometry-based
learning, and information-based code aggregation. The theoretical and
computational contributions are expected to result in efficient implementations
of threat detection for dynamic environments, drone videos being a particularly
important example.