* 1737645
* SCC-Planning: Urbanism Next Network Planning Grant
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Nicolas Larco, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 01/31/2019
* USD 99,966.00

Autonomous vehicles (AVs) are a near future reality and the implications of AVs
on city development and urban form, while potentially widespread and dramatic,
are not well understood. Projected changes to the ease and cost of
transportation, the role and future of transit, parking use, and right-of-way
needs will have dramatic secondary effects on street design, development
densities, land use, and urban sprawl. These changes will have profound
implications on our nation. While there has been a deluge of research on
technological aspects of AVs, there has been a dearth of systematic exploration
of their secondary effects on city development, form, and design or potential
opportunities and unintended consequences on quality of life, including
significant equity and labor market impacts. The disruption to urban development
and related economic, social, and environmental issues caused by the
introduction of AVs has the potential to be on par with the disruptions caused
by the introduction of automobiles a century ago. This Urbanism Next Planning
Grant will leverage a multidisciplinary collection of national experts in the
academic, public, and private sectors to define and understand how the rise of
AVs will broadly impact cities beyond just technological needs or primary
transportation implications. This Planning Grant will bring together
collaborators from engineering, urban design, urban planning, economics, real
estate, labor economics, and architecture to promote our understanding of
impacts of AVs on society and advance the national health, prosperity and well-
being.

Throughout the course of the grant, the research team will engage a broad
national community of scholars from a range of disciplines, as well as a
diverse, multi-sector group of practitioners in the Portland, Oregon region.
Planning activities include monthly web-based meetings; creation of a targeted
blog and web-based clearinghouse; and a two-day workshop with collaborators and
stakeholders from across the country. The goal is to understand, conduct
research, and then plan for: 1) the immediacy of the technology; 2) the scale of
impact from these technological innovations; 3) identification of how a diverse
range of issues are connected and impacted; and 4) to delineate the important
policy and research questions we need to be asking related to city design and
municipal administration to maximize the benefits of this new technology while
minimizing the negative externalities.