* 1737173
* Autonomous Systems for the Collection, in situ Preservation and Return of Microbial Samples from Aquatic Ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,01/31/2024
* Craig Taylor, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,205,556.00

As the research community transitions away from descriptive studies of aquatic
microbes to system-level investigations of, for example, community responses to
changing geochemical conditions, toxic spills, ocean acidification, expanding
Oxygen Minimum Zones, algal bloom dynamics and food web dynamics, it is
essential that researchers have instrumentation that meets these new challenges.
Studies of labile organic molecules such as messenger RNA, proteins, and
metabolites are now routinely used to assess microbial community activities.
Instrumentation for robotic time-series or adaptive user-controlled sampling
must be capable of acquisition of samples onto the surface of a filter and
chemically preserving collected cells at the site in the environment they reside
(in situ) to minimize introduction of artifacts in the resulting data. Proposed
fabrication and testing of technical sampling platforms will add much needed
infrastructure for research in the form of flexible, multiple-application water
column sampling that will enhance collaborative research and will make possible
more comprehensive and accurate studies microbial community activity. Each
development effort will provide training opportunities for high school through
graduate students. Results will be contributed to a high-profile Scientific
Committee on Oceanic Research (SCOR) Working Group White Paper on proposed
standards of practice for studies of marine microbiology, and on Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution and Edgcomb laboratory websites. The principal
investigators will produce a freely available E-lecture submitted to Limnology
and Oceanography E-Lectures (www.aslo.org/lectures) on the advances represented
in these platforms, rationale for their use, and expected commercial
availability. The capabilities of each platform will be unique to the field of
microbial ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective will be to fabricate and
field test two complementary sampling platforms that share recent new technology
developments in our laboratories. The capabilities of the two platforms will
enable application of these advances for a wide range of sampling objectives,
and demonstration of their successes will make it possible to implement these
new technologies into commercially-available instrumentation. One platform, the
Helical Rotary Valve-Miniature Microbial Sampler (HRV-MMS) will permit
collection of at least 200 samples (up to 4-times the numbers now possible with
existing technology) within the footprint of a compact instrument that can be
quite readily implemented in Autonomous Underwater Vehicles, Remote Operated
Vehicles, Deep Submergence Vehicles, hydrocast, or mooring-based sampling
platforms. Most of the engineering design work for this platform has been
completed. The second proposed development involves an advancement of the
Microbial Sampling-Submersible Incubation Device (MS-SID) platform, which can be
deployed by hydrowire, on fixed moorings, or released on Global Positioning
System-tracked surface float systems to collect up to 48 samples (user-defined
volumes dependent on filter porosity and targeted filtration times), each
consisting of up to 6 replicates collected simultaneously (total 288 samples)
and/or conduct in situ incubation-style microbial metabolic rate measurements.
The new helical rotary valve design that will be implemented on both platforms
has significant advantages over existing valve technologies in terms of sampling
flow rates and dramatically lower flow resistances.