* 1737813
* Collaborative Research:  Improving Constraints on Tropical Climate Feedbacks with Inverse Modeling of the Stable Isotopic Composition of Atmospheric Water Vapor
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Robert Field, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2020
* USD 41,388.00

The relative humidity (RH) of air in the subtropics, meaning RH in the belts of
subsiding air found on either side of the equator, is an important factor in
determining the behavior of subtropical clouds and their effects on climate. Air
in the subtropics generally enters the region in the upper troposphere after
ascending in the deep convective clouds found in the convergence zones near the
equator. The RH of the air is largely determined by the coldest temperature it
encounters during in-cloud ascent, as condensation dries the air to the
saturation moisture value given by its temperature (lower moisture content for
colder air). But other factors also influence the RH of the subsiding
subtropical air, in particular the air can be moistened by mixing with air from
more humid levels closer to the surface. The same RH can be achieved either by a
relatively warm last saturation temperature with little mixing or a relatively
cold last saturation temperature followed by greater mixing, The two pathways to
the same RH can have different implications for cloud feedbacks and RH change in
a warming climate. However, these two pathways can be distinguished by examining
the relative concentrations of heavier isotopes of water vapor, water vapor in
which one of the hydrogen atoms is replace by deuterium or the oxygen 16 atom is
replace by oxygen 18. Roughly speaking, the heavier forms of water vapor
evaporate more sluggishly and condense more readily than ordinary H2O, an effect
which depends on the temperature at which the evaporation or condensation takes
place. Thus, heavy isotopes contain important clues to understanding the
processes which set subtropical RH and relate it to subtropical clouds and their
climate feedbacks. With this motivation the PIs examine the isotopic
concentration of water vapor in the subtropical mid-troposphere using satellite
and ground-based observations as well as climate model simulations. Ground-based
observations include measurements taken by the lead PI on the Chajnantor Plateau
in Chile (see AGS-1158582). Much of the work is performed using an inverse
modeling technique in which an optimal set of parameters (including last
saturation temperature and vertical mixing, among others) is determined using a
machine learning algorithm that mimics natural selection. The inverse technique
is advantageous in that it is computationally inexpensive and can be applied
equally well to both observations and model output. The work has societal
relevance as it can lead to a better understanding of the role of subtropical
clouds in climate change, a central issue in efforts to anticipate the amount of
warming caused by greenhouse gas increases. In addition, the project includes an
extensive education and outreach effort through the New Mexico Museum of Natural
History and Science in Albuquerque. The museum serves a large Hispanic and
Native American population including both inner city and rural communities. The
effort engages elementary school students through a summer camp program, middle
and high school students through a "junior docent" summer program, and middle
and high school teachers through a professional development workshop. In
addition, the project provides support and training for a graduate student,
thereby providing for the future workforce in this research area.