* 1737237
* Unraveling the complex interactions of host-virus interactions on marine microbial physiology
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Alison Buchan, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2023
* USD 739,515.00

Viruses influence the number and types of organism that compose microbial
communities, biogeochemical cycles and the flux and chemical character of carbon
and nutrients in marine surface waters. Though it is increasingly feasible to
make quantitative measures of the impact of virus activity on microbial
processes, our understanding of the interplay between the multitude of host-
virus interactions that give rise to ecological scale properties remains in its
infancy. This is especially true for lysogenic (temperate) viruses, i.e.,
viruses with the ability to integrate into their host's genome and remain
"dormant" until prompted, by external or internal cues, to initiate a lytic
cycle leading to cell rupture and virus release. Recent evidence suggests
lysogenic viruses are the dominate type of marine viruses. Thus, indicating that
the decision to "lyse or not to lyse" is a prevalent, but poorly understood,
process in marine microbial communities. Despite the recognized and profound
influence of viruses on marine systems, relatively little effort has been placed
on characterizing host-virus interactions of environmental relevance. This
project will study the lysogenic viruses that infect members of the ecologically
important Roseobacter clade of heterotrophic marine bacteria. Roseobacter
abundance is greatest in coastal environments, phytoplankton blooms and in
association with organic particles, where these microbes frequently grow in a
gel-like matrix, called biofilms, with multiple other species. Indeed, biofilms
are hot spots for both microbial and virus activity, and provide an opportunity
to better define the impact that viruses have on host physiology and function.
This research will address how genome-integrated viruses influence host
metabolism and behavior and, in turn, how these host-viruses interactions
influence marine microbial biofilm structure and function. The described project
will directly support the interdisciplinary training of four graduates, one of
which will be involved in training by international scientists. Training
opportunities described under currently funded REU programs in both Microbiology
and Chemistry at the University of Tennessee will be leveraged and extended to
undergraduates participating in the research presented here. All PIs will
continue to disseminate their research results in presentations, papers and
other forms on a timely basis and data will be shared using public repositories.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan is organized into three objectives: (i)
Characterize the role of growth conditions on the lysogenic-lytic switch, (ii)
identify genetic determinants that dictate the lysogenic-lytic switch, (iii)
quantify the effect of host-virus interactions on microbial biofilm development
and function in single and mixed species biofilms. To achieve these objectives,
the investigators will use mass spectrometry based high-throughput metabolomics
and lipidomics approaches to test the hypothesis that growth substrate will
differentially influence host metabolism, particularly intracellular cAMP
concentrations, and result in different rates of lysis vs. lysogeny. The project
will use a classic, yet highly effective, technique to isolate random mutations
in phage (clear plaque mutants) that render them incapable of integration into
the host genome (i.e., they will be fixed in the lytic state). Phage mutants
will be confirmed by physiological studies and characterized by sequence
analysis. To better understand the influence of host-virus interactions on
microbial activities that are relevant to ocean carbon cycling vis-a-vis the
Biological Pump, the investigators will perform a series of experiments with our
host lysogens in single and mixed species biofilms grown on lysate from the
phytoplankton species Emiliana huxleyi. The investigators will quantify
differences in biofilm biomass, morphological structure, microbial activity and
chemical composition of the extracellular matrix. The results from this research
will provide the foundational steps necessary to develop a broader understanding
of virus effects on an ecologically relevant component of oceanic bacterial
communities. From this, it will be possible to begin to extrapolate and quantify
the role of this interaction in regional scale carbon cycling.