* 1737989
* EAGER: SC2: Efficient, Collaborative Spectrum Sharing through a Systems and Optimal Control Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Bernd-Peter Paris, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 99,999.00

Currently radio spectrum is partitioned into fixed bands that are available only
to licensed users. The low utilization of these bands, coupled with
exponentially increasing demand, has led to the problem of spectrum scarcity for
wireless access. Work on this award is expected to yield paradigm-shifting
innovations that will achieve significantly higher spectrum utilization by
facilitating dynamic sharing of spectrum among different wireless networks and
users. The research will inform public policy on spectrum allocation, lead to
better quality of service and faster Internet access for wireless users, and
enable new multimedia applications. Students, particularly those from
underrepresented groups, will acquire hands-on experience with cutting edge
wireless technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work on this award has two
unique research directions that are expected to have significant impact. First,
a systems and optimal control approach to collaborative spectrum sharing will be
developed. This approach relies on cooperative decision making among all
components of the solution (e.g., spectrum sensing, communication, reasoning,
and control); all decisions made within the system are mindful of the overall
system objective. In order to achieve broadly cooperative decision making, new
ideas from event-triggered and self-triggered control will be used. Rather than
periodically updating control signals, these control frameworks introduce
decision making when signals should be updated and when new information should
be obtained, respectively. Second, the use of trust establishment schemes will
be investigated, with the explicit goal of incentivizing collaboration among
networks. As part of this research task, a trust, or reputation, metric will
developed, along with tunable algorithms that maximize the balanced score
between internal network performance and global network performance. The
proposed research on spectrally efficient communications and radio environment
understanding will also be critically important for enabling collaboration in
the spectrum domain.