* 1737436
* Proposal for Partial Funding of the 9th U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar on Nanoscale Transport Phenomena, Tokyo, Japan, July 2-5, 2017
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Jonathan Malen, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 06/30/2018
* USD 14,700.00

This 9th U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar on Nanoscale Transport Phenomena, to take
place in Tokyo, Japan, is a premier meeting in thermal transport now in its 9th
version, providind a specialized international forum for exchange of new
interdisciplinary ideas in nanoscale transport phenomena. The focused
characteristic of this is an additional attractive point, especially to young
researchers interested in nanoscale thermal transport processes. A broad range
of participants are expected to attend the meeting, including scientists from
academia, national laboratories and industry. Graduate students, post-doctoral
fellows, and young faculty, with special consideration given to minorities and
women, who are engaged in research efforts in nanoscale thermal transport will
be invited to attend the meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The topics covered in the
meeting are related to nanoscale thermophysics and energy conversion, including
thermal transport in emergent energy applications, thermal transport in novel
material systems, advanced instrumentation for probing thermal transport at
small time or size scales, first principles calculations of thermal transport
properties, radiative heat transport at the nanoscale, and phase-change heat
transfer. Technical information presented at the meeting will be disseminated
broadly, not only through the publication of selected papers in top-quality
journals, but also through the recording of the talks to be made publicly
available in audio and/or video format via the internet.