* 1737366
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Southern Ocean's Contribution to Cenozoic Deep-Water Circulation
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Niall Slowey, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 596,007.00

Ocean circulation plays an important role in the transport of heat around the
planet and the cycling of carbon and nutrients in the ocean, directly affecting
life and climate. This project aims to better understand the histories of two of
the largest and most important sets of deep ocean currents. Ocean water masses
that originate from both the Southern Ocean and North Atlantic Ocean intersect
the continental margin of Argentina and records of how the circulation of these
waters changed over time are preserved by the marine sediments that accumulate
along this margin. An integrated program of seismic imaging, seafloor sediment
sampling, and seawater property measurements will be used to investigate the
southern Argentine margin and its sedimentary records of past ocean circulation.
Seismic techniques will be used to image the surface of the seafloor and the
underlying sediments down to 1 km. This imaging will enable better understanding
of the large-scale oceanographic/geological processes that affected the margin
over the Cenozoic (the past 65 million years). Sediment cores along with ocean
water property data will be collected from a range of water depths to
reconstruct the temporal evolution of the compositions and geometries of the
water masses during the late Pleistocene. The seismic survey will also provide
the requisite information to locate sites for future scientific drilling
programs. The project includes student training, public education through museum
exhibits, and at-sea activities potentially including a teacher-at-sea. The
field component will provide opportunities to train graduate students in
professionally relevant data acquisition and interpretation
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Southern Ocean is the engine for today's
deep- to intermediate-water circulation, supplying about half of the energy for
deep ocean mixing; yet, most understanding of late Pleistocene thermohaline
circulation changes derives from the North Atlantic. Understanding of the role
of Southern Ocean water masses is limited by a paucity of deep-sea sedimentary
records of these water masses. Sediments deposited along the continental slope
of the Argentine margin offer a unique opportunity to reconstruct comprehensive
histories of Southern Ocean sourced intermediate and deep waters close to their
origin, and to better understand their fundamental connections to global ocean
circulation and climate during the late Pleistocene. During a 43-day
oceanographic cruise to the margin, the research team will collect seismic data
(multibeam-mapping, high-resolution subbottom profiling, and multichannel
seismic surveying) and sediment cores (multicores and piston cores) from water
depths of ~500 to ~5000 meters, a range that spans the depths where all major
intermediate and deep waters in the South Atlantic occur today. Ship- and shore-
based analyses of a broad suite of physical and geochemical proxies will allow
the researchers to reconstruct the temporal evolution of the compositions and
geometries of the water masses during the late Pleistocene. The seismic and
sediment data combined will enable better understanding of the nature of the
sediments that comprise the southern Argentine margin and the
oceanographic/geological processes that influenced the margin during both the
late Pleistocene and the Cenozoic. The latter will provide a broad regional and
temporal context to better understand the interaction between sediments and
bottom currents that can be further exploited with scientific ocean drilling;
moreover, the multichannel seismic data will be used to situate proposed
drilling sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.