* 1737351
* Collaborative Proposal:   Chicxulub impact effects and the recovery of life using scientific drilling investigations at ground zero
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Sean Gulick, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2020
* USD 566,407.00

The latest of Earth?s five largest mass extinction events occurred coeval with
the impact of a ~14 km asteroid into the Yucatan Peninsula (Mexico), ending the
Mesozoic Era. In April-May 2016, the International Ocean Discovery Program
(IODP), with co-funding from the International Continental Scientific Drilling
Program (ICDP), successfully cored with nearly 100% recovery from 505-1337 m
below seafloor into the resulting 200 km-wide Chicxulub impact crater. These
cores record an extraordinary sequence of impact and post-impact events. This
project will investigate these unique cores further to understand the local and
global effects of the only impact conclusively linked to a mass extinction
event. This research is part of a larger international effort, including ~40
scientists from 14 countries, and also supports education and mentoring at the
graduate and post-graduate level. Project researchers will continue to engage in
outreach and education through media interviews, museum displays, and other
activities to highlight the research to the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent IODP-ICDP drilling expedition at Chicxulub
recovered the first-ever samples of an unequivocal peak ring. A peak ring is a
discontinuous ring of mountains observed within the central basin of all large
impact craters on rocky planets. The discovery that Chicxulub?s peak ring
consists of largely granitic crust uplifted by ~10 km calibrates impact models,
allows for observation of impact processes, and for a first-order assessment of
the environmental consequences of the impact (?kill mechanisms?). Newly
recovered cores include the uplifted target rocks: melt-rich impact generated
rock types, hydrothermal deposits, a tsunami bed coupled with a settling layer,
and the resumption of carbonate sedimentation. These lithologies record
processes spanning from minutes to millions of years post-impact. The proposed
work will: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Reconstruct thermal history of the peak ring
and the duration of the impact-induced hydrothermal system to determine how
these processes affected the return of life to the crater.&lt;br/&gt;2. Compare
rock fragments in the impact rocks to pre-impact stratigraphy to quantify the
volatiles released and constrain models of impact-induced climate change and
extinction. &lt;br/&gt;3. Find the first conclusive evidence of the asteroid
within the crater to tie to global K-Pg boundary records and identify the
possible influence of metal toxicity.&lt;br/&gt;4. Investigate the fossil record
of the boundary sequence, in concert with the sedimentology, stratigraphy, and
environmental chemistry, to illuminate possible killing mechanisms and determine
the pace and timing of the recovery within the crater from the weeks after the
impact through the early Paleocene.