* 1737943
* ATD: Multimode Machine Learning and Deep GeoNetworks for Anomaly Detection
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Thomas Strohmer, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 03/31/2021
* USD 415,536.00

This research effort creates mathematical concepts and numerical methods for the
analysis of spatiotemporal datasets with a special emphasis on anomaly
detection. Early and accurate detection of unusual events and forecasts of
future threats are critical in designing an effective response to them. Current
algorithms for threat detection are often unable to keep up with the numerous
demands, changing environments, and the huge amounts of spatiotemporal data that
need to be processed and analyzed to accomplish these tasks. Uncertainty, scale,
non-stationarity, noise, and heterogeneity are fundamental issues impeding
progress at all phases of the pipeline that creates knowledge from data. The
goal of this research effort is to develop novel mathematical concepts and
computational methods that can detect anomalies in heterogenous, large-scale,
spatiotemporal datasets. Beyond the project's broad technological impact, it
serves as a model for the kind of cross-disciplinary activity critical for
research and education at the mathematics/engineering
frontier.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will devise efficient, robust, and
scalable algorithms for unsupervised and semi-supervised learning. In
particular, the PI will focus on the development of two approaches: (i) A
multimodal diffusion framework for unsupervised prediction of anomalies from
spatiotemporal data. Here, multimode refers to the fact that data may have
different modalities, such as text, images, geolocations, etc. (ii) A scalable
framework for semi-supervised learning on graph-structured data, based on the
aforementioned multimodal diffusion framework and on a novel variant of deep
convolutional networks specifically designed to operate on spatiotemporal data.
The expected success of this project is based on existing achievements by the
investigator in developing advanced mathematical concepts and turning them into
real-world applications.