* 1737459
* Student Mentoring and Travel Support for the 5th International Conference on Ambulatory Monitoring of Physical Activity and Movement 2017
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2018
* Shivayogi Hiremath, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 03/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

This project is to support doctoral student travel and participation for student
travel support and participation in the 5th International Conference on
Ambulatory Monitoring of Physical Activity and Movement 2017 (ICAMPAM) in
Bethesda, MD from June 21-23, 2017. The ICAMPAM conference provides a supportive
scientific forum for students focusing on computing, health informatics and
engineering in the area of human activity monitoring. ICAMPAM provides a forum
for expert and peer critique of students' research with the goal of improving
their science. Student participants will also have the opportunity to receive
networking support and career advice from internationally-recognized experts.
Overall, the travel support brings together students with experts who might not
otherwise engage with one another and engage in multidisciplinary targeting
science the area of human activity monitoring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal supports doctoral students by providing a doctoral forum focused on
encouraging students to learn from peers and experts from multiple perspectives
to understand how innovative computing and informatics combine to make the most
impact in the area of human activity monitoring. In addition, student
participation in rapid talks and roundtable provided at the conference enables
students to explore their science and see different career paths for researchers
in this area. The ICAMPAM conference exposes participants to different
scientific disciplinary approaches, supports networking with conference
attendees and is designed to support the development of the next generation of
scholars in this area and create a bridge between the scientific and health
disciplines.