* 1737749
* Coupling of carbonate cycling and redox reactions in the bioturbated zone of marine sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2017,01/31/2023
* Josephine Aller, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 01/31/2023
* USD 906,000.00

The top meter of sediment, called the bioturbation zone, is impacted by the
variety of biological activities that occur on the seafloor. Marine animals such
as worms or plant-like creatures often burrow in and out of, or grow roots into
sediment, respectively. Because of this, the bioturbation zone is an area of
constant sediment exchange between deep water and surface sediment. Every
centimeter of sediment on the ocean floor can have unique chemical properties
from the centimeter of sediment above and below it, but in the bioturbation
zone, the activity of marine animals mixes these layers. Usually, oceanographers
hoping to study what the past chemistry of the ocean was use the chemistry of
sediment because, if one knows how fast it takes a centimeter of sediment to
settle on part of the seafloor, then a piece of sediment at a defined depth
corresponds to a time in the past; however, in the bioturbation zone this is
impossible because very old (deep) sediment may have been transferred by a
marine animal upward to be mixed in with newly settled (shallow) sediment.
Because of this, the bioturbation zone is less studied and generally disregarded
in studies of past ocean chemistry, which means there is little, if any,
information on ocean processes from the last few decades. The researchers of
this project plan to change that by making field measurements, performing
laboratory experiments, and developing new sensor technology to advance our
understanding of bioturbation zone effects on sediment chemistry. This will be a
significant advancement for chemical oceanographers and geologists who hope to
understand the ocean chemistry of approximately the last 50 years. Also, the
sensors developed by these investigators will be a fantastic new tool for
oceanographers, and these researchers are also dedicated to supporting
broadening participation in ocean sciences by mentoring students from a wide
variety of diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists from the State
University of New York, Stony Brook propose to advance oceanographers' technical
capabilities and abilities to model redox and acid-base reactions within the
bioturbation zone. They plan to determine the impact of bioturbation on the
dissolution, precipitation, and burial of carbonate minerals, as well as
determine net alkalinity fluxes at the sediment-water interface. In past
research, this team has developed optical sensors to get qualitative, 2-D images
of surface sediment properties. With the progression of their work, the
investigators plan to develop sensors that build on their past work to create
3-D images. By developing this 3-D image capability and making extensive field
measurements and conducting laboratory experiments, they will be able to use
their data to analyze the images created by the sensors quantitatively. This
will advance oceanographers' ability to model the effects of bioturbation on
carbon cycling in surface sediment, which will, in turn, significantly constrain
a missing component of the oceanic flux of inorganic carbon.