* 1737096
* Collaborative Research: RUI:  Building a mechanistic understanding of water column chemistry alteration by kelp forests:  emerging contributions of foundation species
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Robert Dunbar, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2021
* USD 203,157.00

Kelp forest ecosystems are of ecological and economic importance globally and
provide habitat for a diversity of fish, invertebrates, and other algal species.
In addition, they may also modify the chemistry of surrounding waters. Uptake of
carbon dioxide (CO2) by giant kelp, Macrocystis pyrifera, may play a role in
ameliorating the effects of increasing ocean acidity on nearshore marine
communities driven by rising atmospheric CO2. Predicting the capacity for kelp
forests to alter seawater chemistry requires understanding of the oceanographic
and biological mechanisms that drive variability in seawater chemistry. The
project will identify specific conditions that could lead to decreases in
seawater CO2 by studying 4 sites within the southern Monterey Bay in Central
California. An interdisciplinary team will examine variations in ocean chemistry
in the context of the oceanographic and ecological characteristics of kelp
forest habitats. This project will support an early career researcher, as well
as train and support a postdoctoral researcher, PhD student, thesis master's
student, and up to six undergraduate students. The PIs will actively recruit
students from underrepresented groups to participate in this project through
Stanford University's Summer Research in Geosciences and Engineering (SURGE)
program and the Society for Advancement of Hispanics/Chicanos and Native
Americans in Science (SACNAS). In addition, the PIs and students will actively
engage with the management community (Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary and
California Department of Fish and Wildlife) to advance products based on project
data that will assist the development of management strategies for kelp forest
habitats in a changing ocean. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds upon an
extensive preliminary data set and will link kelp forest community attributes
and hydrodynamic properties to kelp forest biogeochemistry (including the carbon
system and dissolved oxygen) to understand mechanistically how giant kelp
modifies surrounding waters and affects water chemistry using unique high-
resolution measurement capabilities that have provided important insights in
coral reef biogeochemistry. The project sites are characterized by different
oceanographic settings and kelp forest characteristics that will allow
examination of relationships between kelp forest inhabitants and water column
chemistry. Continuous measurements of water column velocity, temperature,
dissolved oxygen, pH, and photosynthetically active radiation will be augmented
by twice-weekly measurements of dissolved inorganic carbon, total alkalinity,
and nutrients as well as periods of high frequency sampling of all carbonate
system parameters. Quantifying vertical gradients in carbonate system chemistry
within kelp forests will lead to understanding of its dependence on seawater
residence time and water column stratification. Additional biological sampling
of kelp, benthic communities, and phytoplankton will be used to 1) determine
contributions of understory algae and calcifying species to bottom water
chemistry, 2) determine contributions of kelp canopy growth and phytoplankton to
surface water chemistry and 3) quantify the spatial extent of surface chemistry
alteration by kelp forests. The physical, biological, and chemical data
collected across multiple forests will allow development of a statistical model
for predictions of kelp forest carbonate system chemistry alteration in
different locations and under future climate scenarios. Threshold values of
oceanographic conditions and kelp forest characteristics that lead to alteration
of water column chemistry will be identified for use by managers in mitigation
strategies such as targeted protection or restoration.