* 1737778
* Dimensions: Collaborative Research: Biotic and abiotic drivers of Neotropical plant speciation
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Carlos Garcia-Robledo, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 07/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Plants are the foundation for terrestrial biodiversity, and the forests of
Central and South America are home to more types of plants than anywhere else in
the world. Over very long time periods, this diversity of plants is produced by
speciation, the complicated process whereby one species becomes two. This
project will test ideas about how speciation happens in tropical forests. It
will also greatly increase basic knowledge of how plants cope with different
environments and how they interact with insects that pollinate their flowers and
eat their leaves. Many undergraduate and graduate students, especially those
from underrepresented groups in science, will participate in the project,
gaining research experience and career training. The team will work to increase
international capacity in biodiversity science by helping with field courses in
Latin America, involving local research assistants at each tropical field site,
and organizing an international research symposium in Costa Rica. Finally,
investigators will broadly communicate their experiences and scientific findings
to the general public. Results will help guide conservation and management of
tropical forests, which are rapidly changing due to human
influences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two evolutionary hypotheses for high tropical
speciation rates have been proposed. First, because tropical climates are
relatively stable year-round, organisms may not evolve the ability to tolerate a
wide range of climates and therefore may not disperse widely. Local populations
will then become isolated from their relatives and gradually become new species.
Alternatively, interactions between plants and other organisms, such as
pollinators and herbivores, may vary from place to place, such that a population
adapted to one biological community will grow and reproduce poorly when it
spreads to another community. In this way, there may be natural selection for
plants in different locations to become different species. This research uses
spiral gingers in the monocot genus Costus in Costa Rica and Panama to test
these hypotheses about tropical speciation. Spiral gingers occupy a wide range
of habitats, extending from lowlands to montane forests and from dense
understory to forest edges, with different temperature, water, and soil
conditions. They interact with many different orchid bee and hummingbird
pollinators, highly specialized beetles that feed on young leaves, and ants that
provide protection from herbivores in exchange for nectar. This work integrates
phylogenetic studies, broad scale observational approaches, focused field
experiments (reciprocal transplants and direct manipulations of interacting
organisms and abiotic factors), and genetic mapping. It will determine how
plants interact with and adapt to pollinators, herbivores, ant protectors, and
climatic conditions across their geographic ranges. It will evaluate whether
speciation is caused by traits and genes that have positive effects in one
environment and negative effects in other
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.