* 1737483
* SCC-RCN: One Bridge at a Time: Bridging the Digital Divide for the Well-Being of Aging Populations in Smart and Connected Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Walter Boot, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 499,999.00

To achieve truly smart and connected communities and improve the quality of life
for citizens, it is crucial to understand not only the needs of all community
segments but also the devices necessary to respond to those needs in order to
improve quality of life and provide mobility and access. Community
characteristics (e.g., demographics, socioeconomic factors including income
level) and urban density (i.e., urban vs. rural) influence the required services
and necessary connectedness for a community's economic, social and physical
health. Smart-ness and connected-ness of communities rely heavily on
technological developments and tools which are mostly emergent in nature, evolve
rapidly, and often disrupt the existing practices. In addition, for the aging
population, mobility restrictions (physical, cognitive, and/or perceptual) can
deter movement, and result in individuals' loss of accessibility to crucial
services (i.e., health services) and activities needed for a good quality of
life (i.e., meeting with friends). In case of such mobility restrictions, the
movement of services (and goods) to the individuals should be established for
their well-being. Smart and Connected Communities (S&amp;CC) have such a
significant potential to help solve these problems and improve the lives of the
aging population through satisfying their crucial needs in an efficient manner.
However, the aging population also faces physical, cognitive and economic
challenges to adopting technologies which would enable the aforementioned
improvements in their lives and lead to comprehensive implementation of S&amp;CC
strategies. The objective of this Research Coordination Network (RCN) is to
develop a collaborative, multidisciplinary research platform and to study the
relationship between S&amp;CC and the built environment (e.g., varying urban
densities and demographics), centered on creating S&amp;CC that incorporate the
aging population to improve the welfare of growing aging population in the U.S.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RCN will focus on three thrusts related to the aging
population: 1) transportation, 2) public safety/emergency services, and 3)
housing. These focus areas will all serve the RCN's main objective of
maintaining mobility and access to services for the aging population. The RCN
advances the S&amp;CC research by (a) integrating and coordinating research on
S&amp;CC across the social sciences and engineering, (b) connecting national and
international researchers and community organizations, who otherwise carry out
studies in their respective fields with limited interaction, and tackling
S&amp;CC challenges within a network which is true to the interdisciplinary
nature of S&amp;CC, (c) introducing the discussion of urban density impacts on
S&amp;CC with a geographically diverse group of institutions and communities,
which can be scalable to rural locations, (d) identifying the mobility
challenges and needs with the current transportation options in both urban and
rural older communities, (e) incorporating the relatively ignored disadvantaged
populations, both in urban and rural settings, into the S&amp;CC context and
providing a comprehensive S&amp;CC framework which serves the population as a
whole, (f) approaching the concept of the digital divide in a comprehensive
manner under S&amp;CC, (g) creating a collaborative platform to discuss,
document and share theoretical and practical approaches as well as necessary
data sources for the aging population, and (h) establishing avenues to
investigate S&amp;CC implementations for the aging population on a national and
international scale, and informing policy makers of the scalability and
transferability of successful practices. The RCN has a unique composition of
researchers and community organizations from various localities. This special
mix of backgrounds creates a fertile interdisciplinary environment which has the
potential to advance S&amp;CC research as a whole along multiple frontiers. The
young researchers, including not only undergraduate and graduate students but
also high school students, who are nurtured within the multidisciplinary RCN
environment, are expected to be the future leaders in S&amp;CC research. The
RCN's scope of varying national urban density, as well as the international
reach, lead to a high potential to inform policy makers and city governments
with the best practices, as well as best strategies for the adoption, education
and integration with respect to the emerging S&amp;CC technologies.