* 1737752
* Dimensions: Tropical niche conservatism in Drosophila: testing the genetic and functional constraints on diversification
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Daniel Matute, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,946,771.00

A general macroecological pattern that natural historians have observed and
quantified is that tropical regions harbor more biodiversity than temperate
regions. This pattern holds across all taxonomic groups. This difference in
levels of biodiversity has fascinated biologists for hundreds of years. Despite
this widespread interest, biologists still debate why there are so many species
in the tropics and why most tropical groups of organisms rarely diversify into
temperate areas of the planet. Two of the leading hypotheses for the striking
difference in biodiversity between tropical and temperate habitats is that
tropical climates have been stable for a long time (~30-40 million years),
allowing sufficient time for speciation and more species to accumulate, and that
the evolution of cold tolerance is inherently difficult and has happened
relatively rarely. The latter idea is known as the tropical niche conservatism
hypothesis. Even though the idea of niche conservatism makes intuitive sense,
the hypothesis has little direct support. This research will provide an explicit
test of the factors underlying differences in biodiversity between tropical and
temperate regions. This is an important and timely test because it will help us
understand how biodiversity evolves, and how we can best conserve that
biodiversity. In addition, multiple students at all levels (undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral) will be trained in evolutionary biology, and the
work will support a beginning Latino investigator. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tests
of the topical niche conservatism hypothesis have been only correlative in
nature. Unfortunately, evolutionary processes other than niche conservatism can
also explain these patterns. This research will integrate phenotypic,
phylogenetic, genetic, and genomic data to provide the most comprehensive test
of the role of niche conservatism, and the ability of organisms to adapt to
novel thermal environments, in generating the latitudinal species gradient. The
researchers will leverage the species rich, and globally distributed genus
Drosophila, to conduct these tests. The project involves (1) the generation of a
new genus-wide phylogeny of Drosophila, (2) the analysis of the evolution of
thermal performance traits for hundreds of species across the genus, (3)
experimental tests of the evolvabilty of the thermal niche in both tropical and
temperate Drosophila clades, and (4) the identification and testing of the genes
controlling thermal niche evolution. Ultimately, the integration of these data
will allow the researchers to make the strongest possible inferences about
whether and how tropical niche conservatism is responsible for global diversity
gradients, and how species evolve under changing thermal environments.