* 1737282
* Collaborative Research: Combining Theory and Observations to Constrain Global Ocean Deoxygenation
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Curtis Deutsch, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 06/30/2022
* USD 334,044.00

This project will use a combination of ocean observations and modeling to
understand why the dissolved oxygen concentration in the ocean changes on
timescales of years to decades. As oceans absorb heat, its oxygen content is
expected to decline which will affect marine ecosystems and oxygen-sensitive
biochemical reactions. In turn, biochemical processes can affect the oxygen
level. Understanding why oceanic oxygen changes remains limited due to sparse
data and the fact that it naturally fluctuates. Furthermore, state-of-the-art
Earth System Models, used to develop future projections, struggle to skillfully
simulate present-day oxygen distributions. Given model biases, there is a clear
need to re-calibrate model-based projections based on informed interpretations
of available observations. The intellectual merit of this study is to perform a
series of computational simulations to quantify linkages between the patterns of
climate variability, ocean heating, and oxygen content for different regions. In
conjunction with a novel synthesis of available observational data, this
modeling study will develop a more comprehensive model for evaluating oxygen
variability and change, thereby reducing uncertainty in future projections under
climate forcing scenarios. Broader impacts of this study includes education and
outreach about decreasing ocean concentrations in the ocean and its disruptive
impacts on ocean biogeochemical cycles and marine ecosystems. Two Ph.D. students
and a postdoctoral scientist will be trained under the supervision of the PIs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ocean deoxygenation is a direct consequence of
ocean heat uptake; as ocean waters warm, dissolved oxygen (O2) concentrations
decline, with profound influences on marine ecosystem and redox-sensitive
biogeochemical cycling. Existing observations are characterized by significant
interannual to decadal fluctuations. Natural variability challenges detection
and attribution of human-driven trends; however, it can also be interrogated to
provide mechanistic insight. State-of-the-art Earth System Models still struggle
to skillfully simulate present-day O2 distributions but these models are useful
because they invoke mechanistic representations of key processes. The objective
of this project is to improve our understanding of the mechanisms behind
interannual and decadal variability of O2 globally and regionally. Low- and
high-latitude regions exhibit distinct patterns in dissolved oxygen and ocean
heat content. In order to isolate the impact of physical and biological controls
on O2 variability, a suite of numerical simulations will be conducted, including
some with a global eddy-resolving configuration. Combining observational and
model-based analyses will enable quantitative assessments about the relation
between ocean heat uptake and deoxygenation, and linkages to climate variability
and trends.