* 1737424
* SCC-IRG Track 2: Resilient Water Systems: Integrating Environmental Sensor Networks and Real-Time Forecasting to Adaptively Manage Drinking Water Quality and Build Social Trust
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Madeline Schreiber, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2021
* USD 999,998.00

1737424 (Carey). The freshwater lakes and reservoirs that provide the majority
of Americans with their drinking water face increasing threats to water quality.
Nutrient pollution, contaminants, and land use change can lead to low oxygen
concentrations and algal blooms, which can result in elevated metal
concentrations, fish and bird kills, thick algal scums, noxious odors, and
overall toxic water unsafe for drinking. These adverse outcomes may be prevented
if drinking water managers have the information needed to act preemptively. To
increase the resilience of water supplies, this project will develop a smart
water system that integrates smart and connected (S&amp;C) technology and
adaptive management to ensure safe drinking water for communities. The smart
water system will consist of sensor networks embedded in a drinking water
reservoir to reduce delays and enhance feedbacks between the detection of water
quality degradation and decisive management action to mitigate such threats.
This increased capacity to ensure sustained water quality can in turn build both
public confidence and meaningful engagement with drinking water institutions.
This project will connect the networks of high-frequency sensors with secure
cyberinfrastructure to develop innovative, real-time water quality prediction
models and tools for more effective management. Finally, these models will be
used to educate local residents and students about the use of S&amp;CC
technology to manage their drinking water.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;By embedding an
integrated sensor network in a drinking water reservoir, this project integrates
expertise from nine disciplines to study the complete feedback loop of how
S&amp;C technologies can improve drinking water management, water quality, and
ultimately community well-being. The project will use novel sensor technology to
monitor a drinking water supply reservoir and its catchment, and to develop and
evaluate a new model-data fusion approach that will advance the field of
environmental forecasting. These forecasts will be used to create decision-
making tools for reservoir managers that will be evaluated for their usability.
In addition, teaching materials will be developed to create a curriculum that
exposes high school students to data emerging from S&amp;C technology and
increase their interest in and preparedness for careers in STEM. Finally, the
project will assess public perception of the adoption and use of S&amp;CC
technologies by utilities to improve drinking water quality as well as the
relationship between this perception, trust in the utility, and acceptance of
the S&amp;CC technology. This enhanced understanding and confidence may lead to
increased social capital, permitting an evaluation of the degree to which
S&amp;CC technologies can increase both ecosystem resilience of drinking water
quality in supply reservoirs and community resilience by increasing the public's
trust in their water systems.