* 1737885
* ATD:  A Statistical Geo-Enabled Dynamic Human Network Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Huiyan Sang, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

Recently, new tracking and sensor technologies such as the Global Positioning
System (GPS) have been deployed on mobile objects to collect their tracking
position with high spatio-temporal resolution. The availability of these massive
amounts of tracking data brings great opportunities to many application fields
that rely on human movement knowledge. However, the size and the complex spatial
temporal dynamic nature of the data also impose challenges for statistical
modeling and computation. There is a pressing need to develop computationally
efficient quantitative models to handle massive spatial temporal human
trajectory data. This project combines theoretical methods and computational
approaches to develop novel statistical models, along with efficient algorithms,
to meet the increasing demand of efficient analytical tools for massive human
trajectory data. The project has broad impact on multiple interdisciplinary
fields. The results can be applied to a wide range of practical and important
problems including military and national security operations, urban planning,
transportation management, traffic forecasting, public health, and social
behavioral studies.

The increasing use of GPS and other location-aware devices has led to an
increasing amount of available human trajectory data at high spatial temporal
resolution. Analysis of such data provides invaluable information for many
important research problems in different fields. This project will focus on the
following research thrusts. First, a new class of trajectory models at the
individual level will be developed to describe individual movement behavior in
both space and time. With the use of this method, trajectory data is denoised
and compressed by a segmented representation with different homogeneous movement
states within each segment. In addition, a spatio-temporal point process model
is developed to recognize important and complex movement patterns from the
segmented trajectories. Extensions beyond the individual trajectory model are
then pursued to develop a new class of population level trajectory models that
involve a latent dynamic network to describe interactions among individual
movements in space and time. Both individual and population trajectory models
are carefully designed to allow scalable parallel and online inference
algorithms for near real time efficient computations. Finally, the developed
methods are used to solve a problem in urban planning with human movement data
collected from GPS.