* 1737592
* SCC-Planning:  Smart &amp; Connected Rural Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Pamela Obiomon, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 05/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

"Smart technologies" have been developed in urban areas; however, those products
do not easily adapt to help rural communities that lack much of the
infrastructure and "connectivity" of more densely populated cities. This
planning grant seeks to assess and develop technology and targeted training to
advance a small rural population in Eastern Texas. The program will integrate
engineering, computer science and social science expertise to engage community
stakeholders. The leadership will work with the city government to improve the
quality of life through advancing the use of smart technology. Surveys and focus
groups will be used to identify technology priorities of the region. This
adaptive structure and plan could be used as a model for other rural communities
to engage in similar programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A lack of communication, low
income, an aging population and infrastructure are just some of the challenges
facing the rural community that is the target of this planning grant. This
project seeks to engage the community in order to complete an extensive needs
and capability assessment that can be used to inform smart technology
researchers as to the best way to implement smart technologies. Approach: Focus
groups and surveys will be used in order to collect qualitative and quantitative
data. Technology researchers will work alongside educational and social
behavioral specialists to integrate an appropriate educational plan into the
implementation timeline. Intellectual Merit: This project seeks to enable smart
technologies to address concerns that are specific to rural communities. The
largest potential benefit from this proposal will come from enhancing rural
residents' quality of life though the exploration of smart technology. In
addition, government and other stakeholders will learn about how to use smart
technologies to manage a rural town with aged infrastructure and limited
capacity efficiently. Broader Impacts: This project will engage students and
faculty in the research and development areas and provide training to students
and community members. This project provides a unique opportunity to train two
student researchers.