* 1737357
* Democratizing access to ocean observing technology with emerging low-cost embedded systems
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Brian Glazer, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2021
* USD 782,070.00

Technological advancements have exploded in the last decade and the costs of
emerging electronic components have decreased. Many of these advancements have
not yet been applied to the oceans, providing a timely opportunity to match
highest priority marine science research questions with enabling techniques over
unprecedented geochemically and biologically relevant spatial and temporal
scales (thus empowering observationalists, modelers, and directly engaging
public interest in oceanographic processes). Here, we apply emergent
technologies to coastal biogeochemical processes on scales capable of exciting
researchers and local citizens groups by targeting development of an affordable
coastal observatory platform and affordable new sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We
have prioritized fundamental oceanographic research questions rooted in
hypothesis-driven science that is poised to benefit from sensor,
instrumentation, and technology transfer advancements and developments that can
address the problems of an undersampled marine environment. This research will
build upon a new, but proven, technology that uses open-source hardware
components and custom software scripts that can be assembled, tested, deployed,
and maintained by high school and undergraduate students, environmental
management organizations, or the technologically-savvy citizen scientist,
catalyzing interest in STEM fields. The work will improve, expand, and
accelerate development and deployment of a low-cost wireless coastal observation
platform, specifically scaling up to target parameters important for monitoring
and assessing processes most applicable to public interest: coastal inundation,
tidal variability, nuisance flooding, temperature, salinity, dissolved oxygen,
chlorophyll, turbidity, and meteorological data. Deployments will focus upon the
most robust affordable research-grade instruments and low-cost sensors to expand
the network and engage a larger community base.