* 1737585
* SCC-IRG Track 2: Real-Time Algorithms and Software Systems for Heterogeneous Data Driven Policing of Social Harm
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Rajeev Raje, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 02/28/2022
* USD 791,513.00

Communities are adversely affected by social harm events such as crime, traffic
crashes, medical emergencies, and drug usages. This proposal aims to develop
algorithms and software systems for the collection, analysis, and dynamic
prediction of social harm events to facilitate appropriate government
interventions to improve the quality of life in communities. The project has a
significant community engagement component and software developed through the
research will be used by the Indianapolis Metropolitan Police Department (IMPD),
Indianapolis Emergency Medical Services (EMS), National Alliance of Mental
Illness, the Indiana prosecutor's office, and individual citizens for sharing of
social harm analytics and collaboration in social harm intervention. This
objective will be achieved by: i) creating software systems for cross-agency
social harm data integration, ii) developing mathematical models for capturing
social harm event dynamics along with public trust and grievance towards police,
and iii) conducting a field trial of the developed software system in
Indianapolis. The methods developed in the project will also be applicable to
other smart and connected communities across the country and could be used for
data analytics integration and allocation of resources across government
departments. Graduate students from both social science and computing
disciplines will be trained in interdisciplinary research methods that span
criminal justice, statistics, and computer science. Research interests in the
domain of algorithms for heterogeneous data in smart cities will be encouraged
through a workshop hosted by the investigators at Indiana University-Purdue
University Indianapolis (IUPUI). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social harm data resides
within a disconnected set of community databases and current methodologies for
modeling social harm neglect space-time dynamics altogether or focus on a small
related subset of event types. Furthermore, interventions are designated in
spatial locations for several weeks or months at a time, failing to account for
the daily changes in risk of social harm events where crime, traffic crashes,
and medical emergencies cluster in different times and locations in communities.
Current policing interventions that focus on spatial risk (i.e., hotspots) are
often too narrow and seek only to optimize crime reductions. In order to address
some of these limitations, this project will develop: i) software systems for
heterogeneous social harm data integration, ii) new marked point processes for
modeling heterogeneous social harm event dynamics including trust and grievances
towards police, iii) optimal control methods for space-time point processes that
are lacking in current point process research, and iv) near real time software-
human systems for deploying hourly interventions to dynamically changing risk.
During phases one and two, the project team will work collaboratively with
IMPD's community policing unit and leverage this unit's relationships with local
neighborhood watch, faith-based, juvenile diversion, and volunteer groups that
are predominantly comprised of minority community members serving largely
minority neighborhoods. This collaboration will facilitate broad community buy-
in for phase three and enable communication with and recruitment of community
groups disproportionately exposed to social harm risk. The last phase of the
project will include a randomized controlled trial of heterogeneous data driven
policing in Indianapolis in collaboration with IMPD, Indianapolis EMS,
Indianapolis Mayor's Office, National Alliance of Mental Illness, Marion County
Prosecutor's Office, the Indy Public Safety Foundation, and the general public
who will be encouraged to download a version of the application through a press
release prior to the trial launch. In the trial, the extent to which police in
partnership with community stakeholders can respond to dynamic, heterogeneous
social harm hotspots will be investigated and the impact across four types of
social harm (crime, traffic crashes, EMS calls for service, and community trust
in police within high risk communities) will be measured.