* 1737633
* S&amp;CC-IRG Track 1: Connecting the Smart-City Paradigm with a Sustainable Urban Infrastructure Systems Framework to Advance Equity in Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Tian Tang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,500,000.00

This project will investigate a smart urban infrastructure systems framework for
advancing access and wellbeing in cities. With transformative new
infrastructures (e.g., smart electricity grid, urban farms) on the horizon, this
research will provide new perspectives on how the future spatial deployment of
these new infrastructures in cities will shape wellbeing, health, and the
environmental sustainability of outcomes in the different areas of cities. The
project advances basic research in multiple disciplines including environmental
and civil engineering, computer science, urban planning and public policy. It
will create a unique public database, establish citizen science protocols, and
advance the science of smart sustainable urban systems through knowledge co-
production with cities engaged in infrastructure planning. The project will
engage in educational activities through interdisciplinary training for graduate
students and professionals in urban planning, policy and sustainability.
Furthermore, a strong component of citizen science engagement is involved
through K-12 teachers and students, particularly in schools with
underrepresented populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental sustainability,
human health and wellbeing outcomes in cities are significantly shaped by key
physical infrastructure provisions of water, energy, food, shelter,
transportation-communications, sanitation waste management and public spaces, as
well as their interactions with the social, environmental and urban form
parameters. The investigators will conduct an interdisciplinary, community-
engaged research project in the cities of Minneapolis, St Paul, and Tallahassee.
The research will engage four themes: (a) Develop the first comprehensive fine-
scale intra-urban database of over 100 social-ecological-health and well-being
parameters via novel citizen science/crowdsourcing campaigns using low cost
sensors; (b) Develop advanced computational algorithms to uncover hotspots and
spatial correlations in the data and evaluate data-driven as well as discipline-
inspired access and wellbeing hypotheses; (c) Using outcomes from (a) and (b)
develop connected multi-infrastructure futures scenario models with new
infrastructures through shared scenario visioning exercises, and evaluate policy
learning and value of information; (d) Focus on education and workforce
development for middle-high schoolers, graduate students and sustainability
professionals. Outcomes from this research will be useful for informing citizens
and policymakers about smart infrastructure transition being planned in cities.