* 1737846
* Establishing a ground truth for focus placement in naturally-occurring speech
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Jonathan Howell, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 06/30/2022
* USD 121,894.00

By emphasizing words acoustically, people can convey the information about which
concepts they wish to contrast. This feature of speech, known as focus, is
pervasive in English, yet is inadequately modeled in state-of-the-art speech
technologies. The challenge, which this Early Grant for Exploratory Research
addresses, is that it is often difficult to identify phonetic emphasis
independently of semantic contrast: words whose meanings are focused are usually
realized with increased acoustic prominence, but not all cases of increased
acoustic prominence are due to focus. The project is innovative in its use both
of speech that has been recorded in a laboratory under controlled conditions,
and also of speech that occurs naturally, such as in podcasts and videos.
Judgments of focus location in laboratory speech and in naturally-occurring
speech are collected from ordinary, non-expert listeners using online crowd-
sourcing. Using the comparative construction (for example, "He liked it better
than I did" or "I like it better now than I did") in which focus can be
independently verified, computational procedures are developed to mimic the
judgment of subjects who read but do not listen to the utterance being
investigated. The findings will inform research in speech synthesis and in
automatic speech recognition. Commercial applications may include aids for the
deaf and hearing impaired, robot assistants for the elderly, language
instruction and speech therapy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a previous proof-of-
concept study, the researcher collected utterances of "than I did" in laboratory
experiments and from transcribed podcasts available on the web. Machine learning
classifiers (using linear discriminant analysis and support vector machines)
were trained to detect focus from acoustic features alone, including measures of
fundamental frequency, duration and intensity. Location of focus can be
determined independently from prosody in the comparative construction by
observing the presence or absence of co-reference between subjects in the main
and comparative clauses. This research generalizes that study to variations of
the comparative with different pronouns and auxiliaries and also introduces
updated methods of acoustic extraction and classification. Then, a verification
dataset is created in order to reject annotations from participants who annotate
non-focal prominence or who mark focus location incorrectly. Finally,
classifiers are trained to detect focus on pronouns and auxiliaries in contexts
other than the comparative, using the crowd-sourced annotation data to infer
correct location of focus independently from prosody.