* 1737714
* Triplet Photophysics in Donor-Acceptor and pi-Conjugated Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Kirk Schanze, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 448,211.00

With this award, the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program in
the Division of Chemistry is supporting Professor Kirk Schanze at the University
of Texas at San Antonio to study the interaction of light with organic and
metal-containing semiconducting molecules and polymers with the objective of
understanding the fundamental processes that occur when they absorb light
energy. A key goal is to understand the role played by electron spin on the
properties of the materials. Electron spin state is important as it relates to
the interaction of molecules with light because it determines the efficiency in
applications such as light-emitting diodes (LEDs) and in solar cells. The effect
of metals such as platinum, selenium, and tellurium on the electron spin is also
being investigated. The project is being carried out by a team including
undergraduate and graduate students with emphasis on participation by
underrepresented groups. An international collaboration is included with a group
at the King Abdulla University of Science and Technology (KAUST) in Saudi
Arabia. The project is expected to have broad impact because the organic
semiconductors that are the focus of these studies are being used to develop
plastic electronic materials used in flexible light emitting devices and
displays, solar cells, sensors and radio frequency ID tags. Thus, the basic
science being developed under this grant may have long term implications in
technology development for the national health, defense and security
sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will initially involve the chemical
synthesis of new semiconducting organic, organometallic and polymeric materials.
Second, the properties of the new materials will be characterized by various
techniques, including measurement of their light absorption and light emission
characteristics. Specifically, pulsed laser techniques will used to understand
the time evolution of the intermediate excited states that are formed upon light
absorption by these new semiconducting materials. These experiments will be
carried out on timescales ranging from picoseconds to microseconds. The results
will be interpreted within new or existing physical chemical models, enabling
the assignment of the electronic spin state characteristics of these
intermediates. This should permit the development of quantitative structure-
property relationships which relate the molecular and polymer structure to how
the systems interact with light energy. Computational chemistry will be used in
specific cases to model the electronic structure of the materials, and this
information will aid in the interpretation of the experimental results. Select
materials are to be used in prototype device applications, including organic
solar cells and field-effect transistor configurations, with the objective of
relating the physical chemical information to material device performance. The
results of the study are expected to enhance understanding of the optoelectronic
properties of donor-acceptor conjugated systems, with a particular focus on the
role played by triplet molecular excited states in such systems.