* 1737454
* SCC-Planning: Smart, Connected, Engaged Senior Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Pitu Mirchandani, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

This S&amp;CC planning grant brings together researchers from three institutions
(Arizona State University, Drexel University and University of Alabama) and
seven disciplines (system engineering and health informatics, community
development, transportation systems, computer science, mechanical engineering,
electrical engineering and architectural engineering) to understand the unique
challenges in senior communities. Fundamental research questions from six
research themes are to be studied. The six themes are: (1) community with social
connection; (2) smart transportation; (3) health mentors; (4) smart homes; (5)
smart sensors; and (6) data management and integration. With strong engagements
from senior communities, this project will enable knowledge discovery for design
and development of smart, connected and engaged senior communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project includes: (1)
Developing a fundamental understanding of the challenges facing senior
communities. This project is the precursor to design smart, connected and
engaged senior communities (SECSCs). This planning project requires
multidisciplinary efforts including social science, computer science and
engineering. A significant fraction of the planning effort will focus on
community engagement, survey development to identify seniors' needs and critical
challenges. (2) Progressive ideas from the fields of transportation, health, and
smart buildings will be explored and presented to different stakeholders in
senior communities to develop design guidelines for SCESCs. (3) To facilitate
the customized solutions for senior communities, novel sensor and data
management solutions will be studied and synthesized for developing a smart
cyberinfrastructure for SCESCs. What is targeted is an improved fundamental
understanding of senior communities, and the customization and use of smart
cyberinfrastructures and associated smart technologies to improve seniors'
physical mobility, access to information, and living environment. The baby
boomer population is reaching its peak in the next decade. While the need for
long-term senior care services increases, there will not be enough facilities to
accommodate the large number of new seniors. Going from "aging in place" to
"aging well with smart technology" will improve the overall health of seniors,
which not only directly effects their quality of life but should broadly
decrease their medical care expenses, whether provided by themselves or by the
government agencies.