* 1737898
* Dimensions: Phylogenetic and Functional Diversity of Tripartite Plant-Fungal-Bacterial Symbioses
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Bjorn Hamberger, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,769,984.00

This project investigates the diversity, evolution and ecological functions
within a diverse lineage of fungi, the Mucoromycota. These fungi are
industrially important for lipid production and as biofertilizers in
agricultural systems. They have co-evolved with plants through innovations of
their growth within plant tissues, and are implicated in the successful invasion
of land by plants. Many of the fungi in this group are plant growth promoters
and carry within their cells bacterial endosymbionts belonging to lineages of
bacteria that are known only from these fungi. Some of these bacteria produce
potent toxins. This research investigates the role of these endobacteria on
their fungal host's growth and metabolism, and the impact of endobacteria on
fungal-plant interactions. It will produce a culture collection and database of
these fungi available to other scientists. Reference DNA barcodes and genome
sequences from these collections will be integrated into sequence-based
classifiers as a resource for the broader community. A short-course on
"Computational Thinking in Biodiversity and Evolutionary Research", and studies
to determine how traditional agriculture and cultural practices impact
Mucoromycota fungi in the soil are part of the project. Overall, this research
will provide diverse and cross-disciplinary education, training, and outreach to
postdocs, graduate and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers will compare and analyze entire genomes to identify symbiosis traits
that have co-evolved in plant-fungi-bacteria partners, and will assess the
impact of bacterial endosymbionts on the function of their fungal host and its
interaction with plants through metatranscriptomics. Changes in host plant
phenotype, metabolome, transcriptome, and resilience to abiotic stress will be
studied in experiments designed to test genetic traits in the host, fungi and
bacteria. The phylogenetic dimension will integrate evolution and genomics to
provide a robust phylogenomic framework and new computational tools for
estimating co-evolutionary and horizontal gene transfer processes between
Mucoromycota and their bacterial endosymbionts. The genetic dimension will apply
genomic and metatranscriptomic studies of plant-fungal-bacterial symbionts,
selected with guidance provided by the phylogenomics, to identify critical genes
involved in symbiotic interactions. The functional component will dissect the
role of candidate genes for plant host fitness in the context of different
plant-fungal/bacterial partners and abiotic stressors. Together this integrated
research will foster interdisciplinary collaborations to provide novel insights
into the diversity, evolution and functioning of tripartite multi-kingdom
symbiosis.