* 1737598
* SCC-Planning:  Agent-based Scenario Planning for a Smart &amp; Connected Community against Sea Level Rise in Tampa Bay
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Mark Hafen, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 98,488.00

Sea-level rise and flooding pose significant risks to communities and
infrastructure in Florida and many other coastal states. The work in this
proposal seeks to engage a variety of stakeholders in the Tampa Bay region, from
citizens to businesses to government agencies, in exercises grounded in Big Data
analytics and agent-based modeling that simulates the dynamics and uncertainty
of responses to sea level change. The ultimate objective is to create a more
connected community by convening these stakeholders and having them work
together towards crafting resilient responses to the possible outcomes of sea
level rise scenarios. In addition to bringing together scientists, government
officials, and business owners, we will also inform the general public, educate
K-12 students, outreach to the minority groups about the challenges resulting
from sea level rise and coastal flooding due to extreme weather events and
natural disasters such as hurricanes and flash floods through a simplified
version of the developed software, which is fostered by attractive visual
features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The prospective research proposed in this work
will provide the much needed foundational science and technology for tackling
the potentially disastrous effects of coastal flooding. It will develop novel
Big Data analysis techniques and game-theoretic frameworks to deliver an agent
based decision-making model which will underlie a scenario planning software for
facilitating the community engagement. The proposed decision-making model will
integrate fundamental disciplines including oceanic, atmospheric, and marine
sciences, civil and environmental engineering, urban planning, and the social
sciences into the multi-disciplinary scenario planning framework. The community
engagement will be handled from an integrated systems perspective.