* 1737432
* SCC-IRG Track 1: Overcoming Social and Technical Barriers for the Broad Adoption of Smart Stormwater Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Jonathan Goodall, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,182,772.00

In the age of the self-driving car, what role can autonomous technologies play
in improving water systems? Floods are the leading cause of severe weather
fatalities across the United States. Furthermore, large quantities of metals,
nutrients, and other pollutants are washed off during storm events, making their
way via streams and rivers to lakes and costal zones. To contend with these
concerns, most communities across the United States maintain dedicated
infrastructure (pipes, ponds, basins, wetlands, etc.) to convey and treat water
during storm events. Much of this stormwater infrastructure is approaching the
end of its design life, which results in more flooding and degraded water
quality. Instead of building new and bigger stormwater infrastructure, which is
cost prohibitive for many communities, it is possible to use existing
infrastructure more effectively. The goal of this proposal is to enable the next
generation of smart and connected stormwater systems, which use sensors to
anticipate changes in weather and the urban landscape, and adapt their operation
using active flow controls (e.g., gates, valves, pumps). This will drastically
improve community resilience to floods and water quality. Equipping stormwater
systems with low-cost sensors and controllers will provide a cost-effective
solution to transform infrastructure from static to adaptive, permitting it to
be automated and instantly reconfigured to respond to changing community needs
and preferences. This research will address a truly national-scale
infrastructure challenge and will lay the foundation upon which to empower and
educate communities to adopt smart and autonomous stormwater
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research to enable "smart" stormwater
systems will be conducted by a team of engineers, social scientists, computer
scientist and environmental experts in tight collaboration with decision makers
and citizens across four communities in the United States. The team will close
fundamental knowledge gaps to explain (1) to what extent real-time control can
improve the hydraulic and water quality performance of individual stormwater
sites, (2) how to identify and overcome the barriers that public perception
poses to the adoption of smart stormwater systems, and (3) how system-level
interoperability can be achieved to guarantee safe and effective performance at
the scale of entire communities (100s to 1000s of controlled sites). This will
be achieved through three closely coupled scientific objectives, which will
include testing of laboratory models of control sites, field-scale water quality
studies, the formation of community advisory groups, the analysis of residential
surveys in each community, and the stability analysis of system-level control
algorithms under various sources of uncertainty. The approach is thus
fundamentally motivated around the goal of scalability, as the results will be
relevant to many communities across the United States, regardless of their size.
By open-sourcing the efforts on Open-Storm.org and other public forums, the
project will also support research capacity-building by reducing the overhead
required by others to deploy smart and connected stormwater systems.