* 1737170
* Collaborative Research: Testing for local adaptation and responses to multiple stressors in populations of eastern oysters inhabiting a natural salinity gradient
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Jerome La Peyre, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 12/31/2021
* USD 553,703.00

The project focuses on understanding how oysters from different regions in the
Gulf of Mexico (GOM) will be affected by ongoing changes to salinity and
temperature caused by a warming climate, altered rainfall patterns, and changes
in land use in this region. The oyster fishery in the GOM provides more than
half of the national total, and these oyster reefs provide water filtration,
shoreline stability, and critical habitat for other species. By investigating
how present-day oyster populations respond to changes in temperature and
salinity, this research will provide valuable information to ecologists,
conservation biologists, state managers, and small-scale farmers as they plan
for the effects of future changes in the environment. By identifying populations
of oysters that are the most resilient to environmental changes, this research
will identify potential source populations that may be used in future
restoration efforts aimed at declining populations. Additionally this project
will integrate research and education through a semester-long immersive research
experience. Three undergraduates, two graduate students, and a postdoctoral
scholar will be mentored. Public outreach will be conducted through development
of middle school lesson plans, public lectures, and dissemination of results to
managers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will test whether eastern oysters
(Crassotrea virginica) in the Gulf of Mexico are locally adapted to salinity,
and whether combined changes in salinity and temperature will have synergistic
effects on oyster physiology and ecology. Both temperature and salinity are
expected to change rapidly in the Gulf of Mexico over the coming century, due to
effects of climate change, altered rainfall patterns, and changes to coastal
hydrology. Oysters are a critical habitat-forming species in this region, and
while they inhabit a wide range of salinities, preliminary data indicate
substantial differences in salinity tolerances among populations. This research
will integrate genomic and physiological tools with controlled rearing
experiments to (1) quantify genomic variation among populations of C. virginica,
(2) test for local adaptation, and (3) measure physiological rates and gene
expression as a function of temperature and salinity. The investigators will
then use these data to build estuary-specific dynamic energy budget models,
linking salinity and temperature to population growth. This project will provide
critical support to ongoing restoration efforts, identifying adaptive variation
among populations targeted for supportive breeding programs and informing
management decisions in the face of ongoing ocean warming and changes to coastal
hydrology.