* 1737496
* SCC-Planning: Coordinated Autonomous Operation of UAVs in Urban First Responder Scenarios
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Gregory Madey, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2019
* USD 100,000.00

Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) are rapidly gaining in popularity and it is
expected that many millions of these devices will be in operation within the
next few years. UAVs are increasingly being considered for use in emergency
response situations, where they can reduce first responders' exposure to
unnecessary danger and enhance the effectiveness of the responders, for example
by providing additional information such as unique viewing angles or fast
deployment of specialized sensors. It is expected that most UAV operation will
occur in cities, which will require the development of infrastructure and tools
that enable safe and effective deployments of UAVs in urban settings. This
project will support a planning process to identify the specific requirements
for safe UAV operation for emergency response scenarios. Toward this end, the
project team will collaborate with fire fighters to explore the challenges and
benefits of UAV support for various rescue scenarios. Additionally, the project
will use these collaborations and various activities and meetings to initiate
fruitful discussions among the project team and potential collaborators and
stakeholders in academia, industry, and city planning. It is expected that the
planning activity will ultimately lead to the development of a proposal to fully
implement the infrastructure and tools required for safe UAV for various
application scenarios. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over 80% of the US population
reside in urban areas, which means that most UAV operation will occur in densely
populated areas that are characterized by potentially dense and fluctuating
traffic patterns, close proximity to humans and buildings, unreliable GPS,
overhead flight paths, and fluctuating environmental conditions. Enabling
independently controlled UAVs with diverse objectives, constraints, and
capabilities to operate in such an environment is a challenging proposition. The
long-term goal of this project is to develop cross-disciplinary solutions to
urban UAV flight, integrating systems design, control theory, and software
engineering research to specifically address technical aspects of urban UAV
deployment for emergency response situations. The project team will complete a
comprehensive needs assessment for the deployment of UAVs in urban emergency
response scenarios. A main goal of this planning grant is to identify various
stakeholders in the community involved in emergency response (e.g., fire,
medical, disaster planning, etc.), their specific needs that can be addressed
using UAVs, the opportunities provided by the UAVs, and the specific challenges
of urban UAV emergency response support. An additional goal is to obtain deeper
insights into the larger societal concerns with UAV operation, including ethics
and policy challenges. The project team will organize a series of hands-on
training sessions for various rescue operations, which will be used to highlight
the potential benefits of UAVs, identify the concrete needs of emergency rescue
teams, and elicit discussions among the various stakeholders that will
ultimately lead to a deeper understanding of the opportunities and challenges of
urban UAV deployments.