* 1737573
* SCC-RCN: Developing an Informational Infrastructure for Building Smart Regional Foodsheds
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Casey Hoy, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 04/30/2023
* USD 666,496.00

The goal of this project is to build a transdisciplinary research coordination
network (RCN) bringing together researchers and community stakeholders to build
a general informatics framework for understanding and optimizing the food
system. While food production currently generates enough calories to feed the
world's population, disparities and failures in the food system lead to negative
health effects within the U.S. and across the world. Mitigating these food and
nutrition failures can help to meet the goal of creating smart, connected, and
healthy sustainable communities. A key goal of this project is to allow
community members (including those from diverse populations) to inform the
research network of their needs. It will do so through work on three integrated
objectives: (1) improve understanding of the interrelated components and actors
in the food system; (2) developing prototype information technologies to capture
these relationships and to enable information sharing and analysis; and (3)
organizing and coordinating food system stakeholders in two key agricultural
regions of the United States to determine ways this information can be used to
strengthen their regional food systems (referred to hereafter as "foodsheds")
and those of other communities. The primary focus of this project is on
foodsheds in the Sacramento, California and Columbus, Ohio regions, with
subsequent efforts to expand participation in the network to other
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research undertaken through this project will
contribute to a addressing the problem of lack of information flow among
researchers, policymakers, and diverse food system stakeholders. Developing
novel methods for bringing together diverse data streams (climatic,
environmental, genetic/genomic, product composition, production, importation,
processing, distribution, marketing, food policy, health and healthcare) will
allow researchers to better characterize the food system, enabling communities
to address food system failures, inequities and other challenges. These
activities will be coordinated by a steering committee of researchers and
community members with expertise in computer science, economics, medicine, food
science, sustainable agriculture, data analytics, engineering, public policy,
and public health.