* 1737563
* SCC-RCN: Smart Civic Engagement in Rapidly Urbanizing Regions
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Helena Mitasova, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2021
* USD 499,847.00

Solutions for large-scale problems like stormwater management in urbanizing
regions require input from a variety of stakeholders and coordination between
nearby cities and towns. However, institutional barriers commonly prevent open
discussion for collaborative decision-making. The team envisions a new way to
enhance smart connections among communities and break down barriers across
geographic space, levels of governance, and types of expertise: a collaborative
platform for knowledge-sharing that suits diverse stakeholder needs, a mutually
developed environment called TomorrowNow. This Research Collaboration Network
(RCN) will unite regional stakeholders from government, industry, academia,
watershed associations, and other community groups to guide the development of
TomorrowNow, advancing the contribution of diverse perspectives to stormwater
management and decision-making. The publicly available, multi-userenvironment
conceptualized by the RCN will be transformative for crowdsourcing the opinions
of a wide range of stakeholders and local residents in the Triangle region of
North Carolina. Residents will be able to explore and visualize intervention
strategies in the very places where they live and work, to inform management
decisions regarding stormwater and improve quality of life. Ultimately, the
online game conceptualized by the RCN will not only provide an engaging,
intuitive platform in the Triangle, but will serve as a model to empower smart
and connected communities elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RCN
will collaboratively explore whether multi-user, web-based collaborative
decision making using real data and scientific models to show the connectedness
of locations could increase equitable participation in local decision-making,
elevating the voices of underprivileged groups and diverse perspectives. The RCN
will unite researchers and stakeholders to plan the design of a collaborative
decision environment, TomorrowNow, which enables people to interact with
spatially explicit models of urbanization and associated changes to stormwater
hydrology (quantity) and biogeochemistry (quality), problems of increasing
concern across urbanizing regions in the US. The RCN will convene leaders from
local and regional governments, non-governmental organizations, and research
teams specializing in natural, social, and computer sciences in the Research
Triangle region of North Carolina; these leaders will collaboratively identify
needs and approaches for improving inclusive participation and allowing a wider
range of stakeholders to explore and visualize intervention strategies in the
places where they live and work. Development of the network will advance the
science of co-producing actionable solutions among researchers, policymakers,
and residents, as well as identify research directions that advance new genres
of urbanization and stormwater models (hydrologic and biogeochemical) needed to
underlie the user-friendly interface of a serious game. TomorrowNow will enable
communities connected by shared water networks (and their associated problems of
stormwater runoff, surface water contamination, and groundwater
quantity/quality) to collaboratively design alternative futures that optimize
management of those water networks. The input of diverse communities will be
collected via surveys, semi-structured interviews, panels, discussions during
in-person workshops and symposia, and through discussion threads in an open-
source online community.