* 1737240
* Development of low Nitrogen:Phosphorus ratios in the euphotic zone - the Phosphorus side of the story
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Ajit Subramaniam, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,417,632.00

This research will study the processes that cause the relative biological
availability of nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) in the upper ocean to change as
water moves from the coast to offshore in the northern Gulf of Mexico. Both N
and P are required nutrients. Consequently, the ratio of N to P in the upper
ocean has important consequences for plant growth and the marine food web
structure. Typically, as water moves offshore bioavailable N declines faster
than bioavailable P. While processes that alter either element will affect the N
to P ratio, previous research has focused mainly on the N side of the
relationship, examining cycling and the selective removal of different forms of
N from the water by marine microorganisms. This project will focus instead on
the less-studied P side of the N to P ratio in the upper ocean. It will use
shipboard experiments to quantify microbiological processes that maintain P
availability in the upper ocean, even as N availability declines. Given that low
N availability relative to P limits plant growth in most of the ocean's sunlit
surface waters, understanding how this chemical ratio develops as water moves
offshore is of fundamental importance for the study of marine ecosystems
worldwide. Educational impact will include at least seven students' direct
participation in the research, providing hands-on and cross-disciplinary
training, as well as practical experience at sea. Two middle school teachers
will also participate in the oceanographic cruises. They will incorporate field
results and personal experiences into lesson plans and teachers' workshops. The
project will also develop public outreach activities that focus on the unique
value of marine ecosystems of the Gulf of Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will test the hypothesis that the decline in the ratio of bioavailable N
to P in surface water as it moves offshore develops from preferential phosphorus
retention as opposed to removal of biologically-available forms of nitrogen. As
part of the research associated with this central hypothesis, the project will
quantitatively compare the relative importance of different phosphorus-retention
mechanisms during two oceanographic cruises in the northern Gulf of Mexico.
Previous observations of spatial changes in N and P availability are common. The
researchers will track discrete water masses with Lagrangian drifters for time
course sampling, and use physical oceanographic measurements to quantify
potential N to P ratio changes contributed by vertical and horizontal mixing.
Shipboard incubation experiments will quantify and compare rates for the key
microbiological processes thought to affect phosphorus retention in the upper
ocean. This focus on potential P-retention processes rather than N loss as an
explanation of commonly observed declines in surface ocean N to P ratio
represents a unique contribution to the complete understanding of the complex
feedback mechanisms between nutrient cycles and marine ecosystem function.