* 1737894
* Support for Junior Investigators at the Orthopaedic Research Society Musculoskeletal Biology Workshop; Sun Valley, Idaho; August 6-9, 2017
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Alexander Robling, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 06/30/2018
* USD 12,000.00

This grant will support young investigators at the 47th annual meeting of the
Orthopaedic Research Society Musculoskeletal Biology Workshop being held in Sun
Valley, Idaho, August 6-9, 2017. The workshop emphasizes active participation of
junior faculty and students; promote interdisciplinary communication; and are
unusual in that discussion time equals or exceeds time allotted for formal
presentation. The goals of the workshop are to (1) Work toward a
multidisciplinary basic and clinical synthesis of molecular, cellular, tissue
and biomechanical processes that leads to understand the pathogenesis of
musculoskeletal diseases, prevention and treatment; (2) Apply basic science
concepts to clinical problems, developing a dialogue between basic and clinical
investigators towards interdisciplinary collaboration; (3) Identify problems in
musculoskeletal disease and experimental approaches that provide solutions to
them; (4) Provide a forum for student training and the opportunity for junior
scientists to talk with more senior scientists in a small group
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will continue the theme, "Solving
Problems, Suggesting Solutions", targeting the basic science of the rare disease
Fibrous Dysplasia and also of the chronic problem of Degenerative Disc Disease.
Four sessions will address relevant and significant current problems, including
progress in next-generation musculoskeletal therapies, imaging of
musculoskeletal tissues, limitations and solutions for engineered animal models
of disease, and finite element applications to clinical and basic science
research. A notable feature of this Workshop is that it is becoming a truly
musculoskeletal workshop, considering problems of musculoskeletal conditions
beyond bone. Many opportunities are provided for junior investigators to
interact with more senior investigators. A Career Development Workshop
specifically geared toward young investigators will be held during one
afternoon. This award will support travel awards for ten young investigators to
attend this meeting. They will participate in the full meeting and in a special
Sunday evening session devoted entirely to poster presentations, with some short
poster presentations from the podium. All of their abstracts will be posted for
public viewing on the ORS website prior to the Workshop.