* 1737858
* SHF: Small: New Frontiers in Constraint-Based Program Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Mayur Naik, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2019
* USD 425,540.00

Title: SHF:Small:New Frontiers in Constraint-Based Program
Analysis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Constraint-based analysis is a popular approach to
program analysis: it allows to separate analysis specification from analysis
implementation, it enables sophisticated implementations by leveraging advances
in off-the-shelf solvers, and it provides natural program specifications as
constraints. This project proposes Dominoes, a framework that extends the
benefits of constraint-based analysis by enabling automatic synthesis of common
and emerging use-cases of program analyses, such as finding good abstractions,
analyzing incomplete programs, and incorporating user feedback. The intellectual
merit of this project is to fundamentally advance demand-driven, compositional,
and learning-based analysis techniques. By automatically synthesizing use-cases
once and for all, Dominoes amplifies the traditional benefits of constraint-
based analysis, liberating analysis designers from having to re-implement those
use-cases for their analyses. The project's broader significance and importance
lies in enhancing the applicability and usefulness of program analyses by making
them more automated, scalable, and flexible. Artifacts embodying these analyses
will improve software quality in aspects of reliability, security, performance,
and energy efficiency. Dominoes will also improve the productivity of analysis
users by allowing them to adapt analyses to their
feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dominoes automatically synthesizes
implementations of use-cases for any program analysis expressed in Datalog, a
popular declarative logic programming language. Existing constraint-based
analysis frameworks predominantly focus on solving hard constraints, whereas
Dominoes also accommodates soft constraints that arise naturally in diverse use-
cases of program analysis, e.g., to model various tradeoffs, intuitions of
analysis users, and missing program specifications. The versatility of Dominoes
is demonstrated by applying it to three important use-cases: client-driven
analysis, summary-based analysis, and user-guided analysis. Despite their
diversity, all three use-cases entail solving instances of the maximum
satisfiability (MaxSAT) problem, which consists of a combination of hard
(inviolable) constraints and soft (violable) constraints. Solving such mixed
constraints is not only computationally hard but also poses the problem of
specifying weights or confidences of soft constraints. Dominoes develops MaxSAT
optimizations comprising demand-driven, compositional, and learning-based
methods that are general and independent of any analysis, use-case, or solver,
and aim to scale to instances well beyond the reach of existing MaxSAT solvers.