* 1737136
* Collaborative research: US GEOTRACES PMT: Trace-metal concentrations and stable isotopes in the North Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2017,01/31/2023
* Timothy Conway, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 01/31/2023
* USD 457,711.00

The goal of the international GEOTRACES program is to understand the
distributions of many chemical elements and their isotopes in the oceans. The
National Science Foundation is supporting a U.S. GEOTRACES sampling expedition
in the Pacific Ocean 2018, from Alaska to Tahiti. This award will focus on
measurement of the stable isotopes of iron (Fe), nickel (Ni), zinc (Zn), copper
(Cu), and cadmium (Cd) in seawater, filtered particles, and atmospheric aerosol
particles on this expedition. The trace metals Fe, Ni, Zn, Cu, and Cd strongly
influence marine biogeochemistry and carbon cycling. Measurements of isotope
ratios -- the relative abundance of different forms of the same chemical element
-- provide insights not possible from concentration measurements alone. The
investigators will use isotope data to learn more about the inputs and outputs
of these elements to the ocean as well as the biological processes that
influence their distributions within the oceans, leading to greater
understanding of the role these metals play in oceanic carbon cycling. The award
will also host an international inter-lab comparison exercise for Cd isotope
ratios at low concentrations in seawater. The project will support an early
career investigator, a postdoctoral researcher, and undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The investigators will measure delta-56Fe,
delta-60Ni, delta-65Cu, delta-66Zn, and delta-114Cd at high spatial resolution
along the U.S. GEOTRACES Pacific Meridional Transect (PMT). The resulting
oceanic sections of all five isotope systems will enable them to distinguish
between competing ideas about the controls on trace metal distributions. A wide
variety of hypotheses about marine biogeochemical trace metal cycling,
addressing topics of global importance will be explored and tested, including:
1) How do different sources, productivity and export regimes, coupled with
overturning circulation, control the distribution of Fe, Ni, Zn, Cu and Cd and
their isotopes in the Pacific? 2) Do oxygen minimum zones act as sinks for Cd,
Zn, Cu and Ni, while acting as sources for Fe? and 3) What sources are most
important for supplying Fe to the North Pacific Ocean? The PMT section crosses
two high nutrient-low chlorophyll (HNLC) regions and two oligotrophic gyres, as
well as transecting the oldest waters in the ocean, allowing the investigators
to use high-resolution isotope datasets to investigate competing hypotheses
about the effect of vertical, horizontal and in situ biogeochemical processes on
the distribution of all five metals and their isotopes. Aerosol dust,
volcanogenic and reducing margin sediments, and hydrothermal vents such as the
East Pacific Rise have all been hypothesized as major contributors to the
dissolved Fe cycle in the Pacific. Measurement of iron isotope signatures in
aerosols and near to oceanic sources will enable the identification and
quantification the importance of these different iron sources and processes in
supplying iron to the iron-limited surface ocean, especially important for the
two HNLC regions along the PMT section.