* 1737247
* Collaborative Research: The tropicalization of Western Atlantic seagrass beds
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Valerie Paul, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 02/29/2020
* USD 699,095.00

The warming of temperate marine communities is becoming a global phenomenon,
producing new biotic interactions that can result in a series of cascading
effects on ecosystem structure. For example, the poleward expansion of herbivore
populations can lead to the consumption of habitat-forming vegetation, which
alters the ecological services provided by coastal environments (a phenomenon
known as tropicalization). Many of the habitats at risk, such as kelp forest and
seagrass beds, provide foundational habitat that supports complex food webs.
Seagrass meadows along the Gulf of Mexico are currently experiencing an influx
of tropical grazers, however a integrated understanding of how these communities
might ultimately respond is lacking. This project describes the first experiment
to quantify the disruptive effect of tropicalization on the ecology of a widely-
distributed seagrass. A major contribution of this project will be the
development of a seagrass research collaborative network to serve as a platform
for broader scientific inquiry and future collaboration. The collaboration spans
a total of 11 institutions, and this network will foster extensive
collaborations among junior and senior scientists, as well as many undergraduate
and graduate students. Given the geographic scope of this work, the research
team will further pursue outreach opportunities across the network by hosting a
series of public lectures and science caf√© events promoting topics in marine
ecology and conservation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will develop a large-
scale manipulative experiment across the Caribbean, premised upon a comparative
network of 15 marine sites, which will quantify how temperature and light
interact with grazer effects on the dominant tropical seagrass, Thalassia
testudinum. Sites have been selected along a latitudinal gradient (from Bermuda
to Panama), such that light and temperature vary, allowing the investigators to
test for the effects of abiotic factors on the ecological effects of increased
grazing (tropicalization simulated via artificial leaf clipping). At each of the
15 marine sites, grazing treatments will be crossed with nutrient manipulations
in a factorial design for 18 weeks, after which seagrass structure and
functioning will be assessed via measurements of areal productivity, shoot
density, aboveground biomass, and carbohydrate storage. Experiments will be
conducted both in the summer and winter seasons, when abiotic gradients are at
their weakest and strongest, respectively. Emerging statistical techniques in
hierarchical mixed modeling and structural equation modeling will further allow
for integration of experimental and observational data.