* 1737017
* Microbial activity in the crustal deep biosphere
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Beth Orcutt, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 541,778.00

The marine deep biosphere is the habitat for life existing under the sea floor.
The zone has remarkably low energy sources creating a paradox of how life can
persist there. Resolving this energy paradox is a grand challenge in deep
biosphere research. The Juan de Fuca Ridge flank off the coast of Washington,
USA, is an accessible, low energy environment making it an attractive location
for addressing this challenge. A series of experiments will be conducted on the
seafloor at the Juan de Fuca Ridge flank, using established subseafloor
observatories that access the crustal deep biosphere, to provide the first
direct in situ measurement of microbial activity in the crustal subsurface. This
project will provide essential information about the ability of life to survive
under conditions that we are not able to replicate in the laboratory, but that
are increasingly important for understanding microbial community interaction in
the environment. This information can then be used in models of global microbial
activity for estimating the impact of this biosphere on elemental cycling,
transforming our understanding of microbial processes within this vast
subseafloor habitat. To communicate these discoveries to the public, the project
will include a ship-to-shore outreach program during the cruise. In addition
public lectures will be presented, and an interactive display of deep-sea video
footage will be set up for the annual public Open House at the Bigelow
Laboratory for Ocean Sciences in Maine. Diverse undergraduate students and a
postdoctoral researcher will be recruited to participate in the research and
public outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to
leverage existing subsurface infrastructure on the eastern flank of the Juan de
Fuca Ridge with advances in single-cell based molecular and geochemical
approaches to make fundamental new discoveries about the activity of life in the
deep crustal biosphere. During a two-week research cruise, the research team
will incubate crustal fluids in situ and in the laboratory with labeled
substrates for tracking single-cell activity, coupled with radioisotope tracer
activity and potentiostat measurements, with the objective of determining in
situ and potential rates of activity and cellular physiology. The research will
also identify which metabolisms active microorganisms utilize under in situ and
laboratory conditions, the rates of these processes, and the microorganisms
involved. The results are expected to provide explicit hypothesis testing of
microbial activity and in situ microbial growth rates from the crustal deep
biosphere to transform understanding of microbial activity in the crustal deep
biosphere and generate critical information about the ability of life to survive
under low energy conditions.