* 1737925
* ATD:  Collaborative Research:  Point Process Algorithms for Threat Detection from Heterogeneous Human Mobility and Activity Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Martin Short, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

This project aims to develop new algorithms and models for analyzing human-
generated, space-time marked event data in order to quickly identify anomalous
patterns that may represent active threats or threats about to occur. The
general motivating principle behind the work is that such events, especially
when intimately tied to human mobility, generally display robust patterning,
such that significant deviations from the typical patterns, either on an
individual or collective level, are cause for suspicion and should be treated as
potentially dangerous. Thus, this project will better enable authorities to
quickly determine when threatening situations arise, so that they can react to
them rapidly, mitigating potentially devastating consequences. To achieve this
overarching objective, several sub-objectives will be met: 1) constructing
models to integrate disparate datasets on human events at varying levels of
granularity, from individual-based to neighborhood-based to region-based; 2)
developing a framework that ties this integrated data together with models of
human mobility; 3) creating methods for detecting sudden changes within the data
given the framework, at varying scales, including individuals, groups of
individuals, or spatial regions.

This project will construct a framework for analyzing human spatio-temporal
event data arising from heterogeneous sources, based on the mathematics of
stochastic point processes, but specifically tailored to represent events whose
underlying structure is intimately tied to human mobility. Several ideas will be
united in this framework, such that the resulting algorithms are able to
identify anomalous behavior or events that may represent ongoing or emerging
threats. First, new methods will be explored for pre-processing high frequency
human mobility data -- eg., gps trace data -- to reduce dimensionality and
better fit within the marked point process framework. Next, new classes of
marked point processes will be developed that are better able to handle the
detailed geometric structure often underlying spatial human event data, given
the regularity of human motion upon which such events are often layered; high-
order Hawkes processes geometrically embedding human mobility motifs are
proposed specifically for this task. New methods will be developed for
clustering data subject to these point processes at varying levels of
abstraction and physical relevance, from individuals, to linked social groups,
to neighborhoods, in order to better identify geographic regions or subsets of
individuals that may be displaying or reacting to anomalous behavior. To go
along with this, new ways will be developed to quickly detect anomalies within
the data as compared to the expected point process through goodness of fit
measures, again at differing levels of clustering; proposed here is a Bayesian
method to detect emerging patterns for even very limited datasets using transfer
learning. The end result with be a suite of tools that are all individually
useful, and that combined will serve as a powerful new method of organizing and
analyzing large datasets of human events to detect threatening behavior.