* 1737620
* HBCU DCL: EAGER: Engineering A Sustainable Bio-based Nano Composite from Biomass Using A Bottom-up Synthesis and Characterization Approach
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,04/30/2019
* Elham Fini, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 04/30/2019
* USD 299,998.00

CBET - 1737620 (Fini, Elham).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a green engineering
project that targets the enablement of the production of a bio-nanocomposite.
The bio-nanocomposite is to be composed of montmorillonite clay and a bio-
modifier made from swine manure. Use of such bio-based modifier can help reduce
worldwide reliance on shrinking petroleum reserves while reducing CO2 emissions
associated with the manufacture of petroleum-based products and the uncontrolled
bio-waste decay in landfills and open lagoons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
hypothesis to be tested is that that montmorillonite clay can be exfoliated
using an amide-enriched bio-modifier made from swine manure to produce organo-
clay containing individual silica nano-platelets. While the exfoliated clay can
be used in multiple applications, this project aims to evaluate sustainability
and technical feasibility of producing bio-based nano composite for use as
construction materials. Accordingly, a secondary hypothesis is that introduction
of the aforementioned bio-based nanocomposite into construction materials for
outdoor applications such as roofing, sealing, building facades, roads and drive
ways will have enhanced resistance to oxidative aging due to clay nano-particles
playing as air barrier as well as carrier for certain bio-molecules with anti-
aging properties. Accordingly, the project will examine environmental aspects of
such outdoor applications along with technical feasibility. To do so, special
attention will be given to study quality and quantity of the emissions during
processing of bio-based nano composites as well as leachates during their
application. Therefore, resulting material will be evaluated in terms of both
associated thermo-mechanical properties and environmental aspects.