* 1737312
* Barriers to cross-shelf coral connectivity in the Florida Keys
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Mikhail Matz, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2021
* USD 745,820.00

Coral reefs in the Florida Keys are in severe decline, which is the most
prominent along the offshore reef tract while many nearshore reefs retain high
coral cover. Why then coral larvae produced from surviving nearshore patches do
not recolonize offshore reefs? The investigators hypothesize that such cross-
shelf migrants do not survive in the new habitat due to genetic specialization
for different environmental conditions, specific to their reef of origin. This
project will analyze genetic diversity of coral populations to quantify the
severity of this barrier in three common coral species. This will be the first
study to assess the strength of ecological barriers to coral dispersal across
the seascape, which will fill an important knowledge gap that currently
precludes informed assessment of threats to Florida reefs and development of
accurate models to forecast their future. The project includes a variety of
broader impact activities. Public outreach: This project is very well poised to
raise public awareness of ongoing biodiversity loss. The investigators regularly
give public lectures at diverse Austin venues, such as Science Under the Stars,
Science in the Pub, and Nerd Nite. The progress of the project will be followed
by press releases, materials on the University of Texas public outreach web page
Know and in The Daily Texan. K-12 outreach: Two interns from Crockett High
School and will be involved in the research. Graduate education: The project
will be the main PhD theme for one full-time graduate student. Undergraduate
education: The primary investigator regularly employs undergraduates. In this
project they will participate in field experiments and sample processing, and
later assigned individual sub-projects. Promotion of rapid data sharing: All
sequencing data will be made available for unconditional use prior to
publication. Specifically, the investigators will rapidly share new coral genome
data, as well as data on genome-wide variation in coral
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of four parts, each of
which is designed to demonstrate the action of divergent selection among
nearshore and offshore reefs and to obtain quantitative estimate of its
demographic impact. (1) To look for genomic signatures of ongoing selection
between inshore and offshore habitats. The research team will perform genome-
wide genotyping in three coral species representing alternative life histories
and replicate the nearshore-offshore population comparison along the Florida
Reef Tract. (2) To confirm continuous action of selection by comparing the
extent of inshore-offshore divergence among juveniles and adults. Juveniles are
presumed to have experienced local selection for shorter time and hence should
show less cross-shelf divergence at the candidate loci. (3) To demonstrate
association of genotypes at the candidate loci with local fitness by quantifying
in situ growth and survival of genotyped juveniles. This part as well as part 2
is expected to provide quantitative estimates of the strength of selection
against cross-shelf immigrants. (4) To verify the obtained estimates by
simulating genome evolution under divergent selection and confirming that the
proposed selection scenario is compatible with the observed genomic signatures.