* 1737165
* Barium/calcium ratios in non-spinose planktic foraminifera: a novel proxy for reconstructing paleo-productivity
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Jennifer Fehrenbacher, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 07/31/2023
* USD 563,426.00

This project will test a novel hypothesis that deeper dwelling planktic
foraminiferal barium-to-calcium ratios record surface-ocean productivity. The
research will quantify the link between the barium geochemistry of deeper-
dwelling planktic foraminifera (N. dutertrei and P. obliquiloculata) and
established paleoproductivity proxies in marine sediments. Because export
productivity is directly linked to carbon sequestration from the atmosphere and
varies with climate cycles such as the El Nino-Southern Oscillation, it is a key
parameter required to establish carbon cycle variability in the past ocean. A
planktic foraminiferal derived productivity proxy will be particularly useful in
areas where other productivity proxies are less reliable or compromised, such as
in areas with low sediment accumulation rates and/or low preservation of
biogenic minerals, or in coastal settings where sediments become anoxic and
organic carbon accumulation rates can be biased by terrestrial sources. The
broader impacts of this research include improved utility of foraminiferal
calcite based climate reconstructions and the establishment of a new proxy for
export productivity. The project will provide support for an early career female
researcher, a graduate student, and two undergraduate students. The principal
investigator (PI) will utilize her position as a Science Communication Fellow at
the Oregon Museum of Science and Industry to provide public
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laboratory culture experiments confirm that N.
dutertrei record seawater Ba/Ca ratios during calcification. Yet, published
records show that Ba/Ca is unusually high in fossil specimens of the deeper
dwelling planktic foraminifera species, including N. dutertrei. The Ba/Ca ratio
in fossil specimens far exceeds that which can be explained by seawater Ba/Ca
ratios alone and may be due to calcification in microenvironments enriched in
Ba, such as marine snow. The PI will evaluate the hypothesis that Ba/Ca in deep
dwelling taxa is related to export production from surface waters by generating
downcore Ba/Ca data in a suite of sediment cores that span a productivity
gradient across the equatorial Pacific, compare the Ba/Ca records to existing
paleo-productivity data spanning the time interval from the last glacial maximum
to present from the same cores, and assess the fidelity of the proxy by
completing reconstructions in well-preserved and poorly-preserved sediments.
While preliminary data indicate that fossil foraminifer Ba/Ca ratios are lowered
by dissolution, these data suggest that Ba/Ca ratios still reflect productivity
even in the samples most heavily affected by dissolution. In addition to
generating downcore Ba/Ca records, the PI will generate Mg/Ca records and stable
isotope records (oxygen and carbon) from the same samples. The Mg/Ca data for N.
dutertrei will be used to test a newly developed Mg-based temperature
calibration for N. dutertrei. This research seeks to expand the utility of the
paleoceanographically important, but underutilized, non-spinose planktic
foraminifera species Neogloboquadrina dutertrei and Pulleniatina obliquiloculata
and develop a new foraminifer-based proxy for productivity. High-resolution
analytical techniques (laser ablation-ICP-MS, isotope ratio mass spectrometry,
and solution based-ICP-MS) will be used to generate the downcore trace element
and stable isotope records in this study.