* 1737221
* Collaborative Research: Fate of Irrawaddy and Salween River Sediment: Relative Importance of Oceanographic and Tectonic Controls
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Steven Kuehl, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 07/31/2020
* USD 308,695.00

Half a billion humans live on river deltas, and many of these areas are now
considered at risk as a result of increasing land subsidence, decreasing growth
rate, and accelerating sea-level rise. Sinking land in these coastal areas
greatly increases the threat from storm surge and flooding. For example, Cyclone
Nargis tracked across the Irrawaddy delta in Myanmar in 2008 resulting in over
138,000 fatalities, and heavy monsoon rains in this same area in 2015 displaced
200,000 people as a result of flooding in low lying areas. To understand and
predict the future evolution of river deltas, it is necessary to know how
sediment from the river is transported and delivered to the onshore and offshore
regions of the delta, as this is the material from which deltas arise. This
project will provide an understanding of the Irrawaddy-Salween (I-S) delta in
Myanmar, perhaps the Earth's last remaining major delta system for which we lack
a complete picture. Specifically, the project will examine the tectonic and
oceanographic factors that control the delivery of sediment, and the present
pattern and rates of delta growth. This results of this study will inform the
future development of a sensitive deltaic setting home to &gt;50 million people,
and add to our general knowledge of deltas worldwide. The project will also
involve the mentoring and training of US undergraduate and graduate students,
and will engage Myanmar scientists and students, providing opportunities for
training and collaboration with US counterparts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of
the estimated 600 Mt of river sediment carried by the I-S system annually is
delivered to a wide continental shelf in the northern Andaman Sea that is
influenced by strong tides, monsoon conditions, and periodic cyclones; however
the fate of this material is unknown. Existing bathymetric data and sparse
initial surveys hint at a mode of subaqueous delta development on the shelf
which contrasts markedly from other previously studied major deltas. In
particular, the shelf exhibits a dramatic bilateral (east-west) asymmetry of the
surface morphology and sediment texture: a gently sloping sandy ramp off the
eastern mouths of the Irrawaddy, and a muddy inner- to mid-shelf clinoform in
the adjacent western Gulf of Martaban. Field- and modeling-based experiments
will enable the research team to contrast the relative roles of oceanographic
sorting, transport processes, and underlying tectonics in creating this unusual
deltaic expression. Geophysical observations, coring and laboratory studies will
detail the architecture and quantify the amounts, source, and distribution of
Holocene and recent sediment accumulating on the shelf. To explore transport
pathways of sediment from the fluvial source to depositional sinks, a numerical
model will be used to account for the effects of river input, waves, tidal- and
wind-driven currents on the dispersal of river sediment within the coastal
ocean. Model runs will represent conditions during the SE and NW monsoons, and
during times of high discharge. The model will also be used to explore the
potential for enhanced transport during large storms using representations of
the cyclone-generated wave and wind field.