* 1737557
* SCC-Planning:  Promoting Smart Technologies in Public Safety and Transportation to Improve Social and Economic Outcomes in a US EDA-Designated Critical Manufacturing Region
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Jagannathan Ramanujam, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 99,932.00

The U.S. Economic Development Administration, through its Investing in
Manufacturing Communities Partnership (IMCP) initiative, recently named the
entire east-west, 200-mile span of South Louisiana centered around Baton Rouge
(BR) as one of the nation's strategic manufacturing regions. This "chemical
corridor" is the home of hundreds of chemical manufacturing facilities and
refineries worth billions of dollars. Despite the major economic significance of
this region, the BR area suffers from critical problems including i) crippling
transportation issues, and (ii) high levels of crime. Heavy traffic congestion
is one of the main reasons why manufacturing industry in BR is reluctant to
build new plants and hire more people in this region; it is also a key factor in
making the region unattractive for new investments from elsewhere in the U.S.
The violent crime rate is substantially higher than that of similarly- sized
regions, further affecting economic development in this important region. The
goal of this S&amp;CC planning proposal is to build a partnership between
community stakeholders and a multidisciplinary team of academic researchers. By
considering economic and social issues in a holistic manner, this partnership
will develop research concepts that will promote and employ S&amp;CC
technologies to help stakeholders tackle the major factors affecting the
region's economic progress. Through multidisciplinary team- building and strong
community engagement, a proposed integrative S&amp;CC research concept will have
significant impacts on various disciplines and communities for planning and
developing smarter cities. In particular, the research concept will be directly
aligned with the strategic plans determined by the city's Smart City Committee
and Subcommittees. Through the proposed Web portal, PIs will share the developed
outcomes and information collected from the project with researchers from other
higher education including Southern University , a local HBCU. The most
significant impact will be seen through quality of life measures pre- and post-
project implementations. Building community-wide tools to help stakeholders of
all missions addressing crime- and traffic-related challenges for all citizens
in the region has real impact on quality of life and economic health, making the
region more attractive for growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a
technical perspective, this project proposes to build a multidisciplinary
research team by integrating different research groups with significant research
strength in the areas of High Performance Computing (LSU CCT), Big Data Analysis
and Cybersecurity (Computer Science), Sensors (Electrical Engineering), Violence
Prevention (Social Work and Sociology), and Transportation (Civil Engineering).
The intellectual goal is to define challenging problems and develop research
concepts via offline workshops, tutorials, and an online Web portal, which
allows an easy access to integrative cyberinfrastructure for computing, storage,
and software tools. The software tools we plan to develop will enable predictive
analyses on heterogeneous data collected from city infrastructure, public open
data from the city of Baton Rouge, and relevant social network data. The
developed research concepts will increase the research capacity of every
individual research group, enhance the understanding of cross-disciplinary
demands, and advance state-of-art technologies for the design of smart and
connected communities.