* 1737433
* SCC-Planning:  CityGuide: Beacon-Based Community-Driven Inclusive Wayfinding
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Barbara Chaparro, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

Wayfinding has always remained a challenge for people with disabilities in our
communities. There remain indoor and many outdoor areas within a city where the
effectiveness of current satellite-based systems is limited or non-existent. The
long-term goal of the proposed project is to leverage technology to make cities
more accessible and safer for people with disabilities and those who may need
the extra assistance. A first step to be taken in this project towards this goal
is the design and deployment of a community-wide wayfinding system called
CityGuide in the city of Wichita that relies on a strategically deployed
infrastructure of Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) wireless information emitters.
CityGuide is proposed to be developed as a partnership between the City of
Wichita, Wichita State University (WSU), an urban-serving, research university,
and Envision, a local not-for-profit serving the blind and visually impaired.
The objective of this project is to lay the foundation to meet the three long-
term CityGuide needs: integrative and fundamental research contributions,
research-capacity building, and community engagement. To this end, this project
proposes activities to identify research priorities and set in motion a plan for
realizing the CityGuide vision. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader societal impacts
from this project include (i) the development of wayfinding technologies for
persons with special needs, and (ii) creation of tools for the general
population that enable various geofencing applications. Broader educational
impacts include (i) the offering of a multi-disciplinary graduate class with a
focus on solving societal challenges posed by disabilities through mobile
technologies, and (ii) the incorporation of aspects of accessibility in
undergraduate student research. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The envisioned
CityGuide application proposes to (i) supplement outdoor GPS systems (in an
integrated smartphone app) to provide fine-grained, customized, turn-by-turn
navigation within or across indoor and outdoor spaces for those with visual or
physical impairments, and those from the general population, (ii) complement
existing signage and provide customized information about features of interest
in the community. The multi-disciplinary team working on the project will
collaborate on activities that lay the foundation for addressing the research
question of how to design and deploy effective and usable wayfinding systems for
those with special needs in our communities. Answering this question would make
the following fundamental interdisciplinary research contributions along the
way: (i) how can large-scale low-cost wireless embedded devices be deployed and
configured in indoor and outdoor spaces for effective wayfinding?, (ii) how can
(and what) information from these embedded devices in the environment be
leveraged to simultaneously meet the varying special needs of citizens within
the community?, and (iii) how can we build usable human-computer interfaces for
wayfinding that can simultaneously meet the various human constraints posed by
disabilities?