* 1737384
* HerStory is Our Story: Creating a Legacy Through Engineering and Other STEM Entrepreneurship
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2017,12/31/2018
* Ji Mi Choi, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 12/31/2018
* USD 49,999.00

Within most engineering fields of study, women of color are underrepresented in
higher education. They also tend to be underrepresented throughout the
engineering workforce. A past report from the U.S. Small Business Administration
illustrated that female STEM PhD recipients are less likely to participate in
entrepreneurial activity, such as owning a business. The project's
investigators, comprising the support of the Center for Gender Equity in Science
and Technology and Office of Entrepreneurship + Innovation at Arizona State
University, will organize a 2 1/2-day, Women of Color Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) Entrepreneurship Conference to share
different STEM entrepreneurial opportunities available to women of color and
showcase the successes of women of color entrepreneurs in engineering and other
STEM fields. Focused on three major strands (i.e., entrepreneurship,
intrapreneurship, and implicit bias), the conference will comprise six plenary
sessions, four breakout sessions featuring seminars and group dialogues, and
networking and mentorship opportunities. The conference will offer women of
color attendees important information that shatter myths and highlight important
pitfalls that often stifle STEM entrepreneurship among women of color.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three objectives will shape the conference: (a) increasing
the participation of women of color in STEM entrepreneurial experiences and
small business enterprise; (b) advancing entrepreneurship education and
entrepreneurial student engagement; and (c) transforming the ways that
entrepreneurship, in general, and engineering entrepreneurship, in particular,
are viewed, taught and experienced in higher education. Qualitative data will be
collected and analyzed to determine the impact of the conference on attendees
and gauge if the conference achieved the intended objectives. From the
qualitative data collection findings, strategies will be developed and
disseminated to help institutions of higher learning and the STEM industry with
encouraging and supporting women of color, especially with their entrepreneurial
endeavors.