* 1737093
* Text Recycling in Scientific Research Writing
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Cary Moskovitz, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 08/31/2023
* USD 574,866.00

Often called "self-plagiarism," text recycling occurs frequently in scientific
writing. Over the past decade, increasing numbers of scientific journals have
begun using plagiarism detection software to screen submitted manuscripts. As a
result, large numbers of cases of text recycling are being identified, yet there
is no consensus on what constitutes ethically acceptable practice. Text
recycling is thus an increasingly important and controversial ethical issue in
scientific communication. However, little actual research has been conducted on
text recycling and it is rarely addressed in the ethical training of researchers
or in scientific writing textbooks or websites. To promote the ethical and
appropriate use of text recycling, this project will be conducted in two phases:
In Phase 1, the researchers will investigate the ethical, practical, and legal
aspects of text recycling as relevant for professional researchers, students,
and publishers. In Phase 2, the investigators will produce educational materials
and develop model language for text recycling guidelines and author-publisher
contracts that can be adapted by educational institutions, research
organizations, and publishers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a multi-
institutional, multidisciplinary investigation of text recycling, the reuse of
material from one?s previous work in a new manuscript. In Phase 1, the
researchers will investigate questions such as these: What do expert
researchers, students, and others involved in scientific communication believe
to be appropriate practice, and why? Where is there a clear consensus among
experts and where is there substantive disagreement? How often do professional
scientists actually recycle material, and in what ways? Under what circumstances
does text recycling violate publisher contracts or copyright laws? One facet of
this research will involve interviewing and surveying experienced STEM faculty,
students, journal editors, and others regarding the ethics of text recycling. A
second facet will analyze a corpus of published scientific papers to investigate
how researchers recycle text in practice and how this has changed over time. The
third facet involves analyzing publisher contracts to better understand the
rights of publishers and authors regarding text recycling and to assess their
legal validity. In Phase 2, the investigators will use findings from Phase 1 to
develop, test, and disseminate two kinds of materials: The first are web and
print based instructional materials for STEM students (and others new to STEM
research) explaining the ethical, legal, and practical issues involved with text
recycling, as well as accompanying documents for faculty, administrators, and
librarians. The second are model policies and guidelines for text recycling that
address appropriate practice in both academic and professional settings. The
investigators will obtain feedback on drafts of these materials from potential
users and revise them accordingly, after which they will be disseminated.