* 1737795
* ATD:   Spatio-Temporal Model for the Propagation of Internet Traffic Anomalies
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Piotr Kokoszka, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 199,997.00

This project seeks to develop a statistical model for the propagation of
internet traffic anomalies. The model will serve as a tool in an on-going,
multidirectional effort aimed at increasing the security of the backbone
internet network in the United States and the detection of threats to its
operation caused either by suboptimal design or malicious attacks. The model
will be constructed using a large publicly available data set of various
internet traffic measurements. The work will involve statistical analysis of the
data, probabilistic modeling, and simulation. The research will combine
expertise of statistics and computer science researchers. By involving Ph.D.
students in the field at the nexus of statistics and computer networks, it will
train highly educated personnel in an area of national
importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While modeling normal network traffic has
received a great deal of attention in the last twenty years, only certain local
aspects of stochastic modeling of anomalous behavior have been addressed. Normal
traffic models have been used to extract anomalies, but they do not provide
information on the statistical properties of the propagation and size of
anomalies, nor do they imply a stochastic mechanism that may be used to simulate
the flow of anomalies. Developing a stochastic model for the propagation of
network anomalies requires a new synthesis of statistical spatio-temporal
modeling and discrete event simulation techniques. Spatio-temporal models
currently used in various applications including industrial mining, geophysical,
climate and environmental research, and public health are not transferable to
the setting of internet traffic, where physical distances play no role, while
network topology and link utilization become prominent. This research aims to
create a new class of mathematical models that will open up new directions of
research on network anomaly propagation. The models will be based on state-of-
the-art statistical analysis applied to practically-relevant anomaly traffic
attributes. The work will also stimulate research in the mathematical sciences
on models of this type.