* 1737073
* Along Strike Variation of Seismic Moment Release and Coupling Along Oceanic Transform Faults
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Glenn Thompson, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 07/31/2021
* USD 186,667.00

Earth's tectonic plates that are created at mid ocean ridge spreading centers
are dissected by a global network of oceanic transform faults that offset the
mid-ocean ridge segments. The motion along these oceanic transform faults is
lateral and they are analogs to continental transform faults. Continental
transform faults, such as the San Andreas Fault in California, pose a serious
risk to population centers and a better understanding of their seismic behavior
would considerably aid hazard estimation in high-risk population centers near
these faults. While oceanic transforms are remote making it difficult to study
their seismological behavior, the material properties of oceanic crust and
mantle are much more homogenous than continental lithosphere. Furthermore, large
earthquakes that periodically rupture the same fault patches have recently been
identified on some oceanic transform faults. These repeating fault patches could
be considered a laboratory for studying earthquake nucleation and rupture. In
this project, we will study a global set of oceanic transforms to find out how
common repeating rupture patches are. The project will characterize their size
and distribution, and identify parameters such as plate rate, temperature or
geometrical fault zone complexity that might affect fault behavior. On broader
impacts, it is anticipated that results from oceanic transforms will lead to
improved seismic hazard estimates of continental transforms. Results from the
project will also guide selection of which oceanic transform faults to study in
the future including the placement of ocean bottom seismometers. The project
will support two early career researchers and a female graduate
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The remoteness of oceanic transform faults has
hindered a systematic, detailed study of their along strike seismic behavior.
Prior studies estimated the average behavior over entire oceanic transforms and
found that a considerable amount of the plate motions is accommodated by
aseismic creep. However, recent studies reveal spatially highly variable seismic
moment release and identify fault patches where large earthquakes occur with
quasi-periodic recurrence times. Large earthquakes account for the full plate
motion and fault patches on which they occur are termed fully coupled. Fully
coupled patches seem to be surrounded by regions of low coupling, where fault
motion is accommodated mainly by aseismic creep. This project will study a
global set of 30 oceanic transform faults spanning a wide range of plate motion
rates, fault length and morphological complexity to determine the ubiquity of
repeating rupture patches and along-strike variations of seismic coupling. Data
for the project will be drawn from readily available global earthquake catalogs,
seismic waveforms and high-resolution bathymetry to relate the spatial seismic
moment release pattern to seismicity and fault zone geometry. The project will
provide a first order characterization of parameters that affect size and
likelihood of occurrence of fully coupled patches such as plate rate, thermal
structure and fault zone geometrical and material complexity. The existence of
strong fault patches with repeating earthquakes would indicate that strong and
weak parts of a fault zone remain in place over many seismic cycles. The
boundaries between strong and weak patches may control rupture nucleation and
arrest and knowing their location would allow targeted studies to search for
potential changes in seismicity and fault zone properties preceding large
ruptures. Overall, results from this project will lead to a better understanding
of different modes of seismic energy release and earthquake ruptures and are
potentially transferrable to the structurally more complex continental transform
faults.