* 1737368
* Ecosystem-scale responses of coupled carbon and nutrient cycles to dramatic shifts in benthic communities: The Upper Great Lakes
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Sergei Katsev, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2022
* USD 625,448.00

This project will study the effects of invasive zebra and quagga mussels on the
biology and chemistry of the Great Lakes. These mussels have caused
unprecedented changes to lake ecosystems, including large shifts in water
quality, altered fisheries and diminished recreational opportunities. The
mechanisms by which the invasion has affected ecologically important aspects of
lake chemistry remain uncertain, making it difficult to predict future changes.
This project will quantify how mussels affect sediment and water nutrient
chemistry in Lakes Michigan and Huron. Important missing data on altered
chemical exchange between sediments and water will be collected to quantify the
processes controlling nutrient cycles in the Great Lakes as water moves to the
coastal ocean. Development of improved numerical models from this work will
allow evaluation of other freshwater and marine systems affected by similar
mussel invasions and other stressors. The project will train a post-doctoral
researcher and several graduate and undergraduate students in highly
interdisciplinary research. Educators and the public at large will be served
through creation of freely available, online multimedia content, as well as
outreach events at the Duluth Great Lakes Aquarium, the Shedd Aquarium in
Chicago, and the Discovery World Science Museum in Milwaukee.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Benthic communities can have large impacts on benthic-
pelagic chemical exchanges, but the ecosystem-scale effects of benthos on
coupled transformations of carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus (C-N-P) are rarely
addressed and virtually unquantified in freshwaters. The recent invasion of the
Laurentian Great Lakes, the world's largest freshwater ecosystem, by dreissenid
(zebra and quagga) mussels coincided with massive changes to ecology and water
chemistry. Consequences of the invasion include a large and unexplained decline
in phosphorus levels, enigmatic reversal of past trends in nitrate levels, and
the near-disappearance of native bioturbating Diporeia amphipods. Modeling
suggests that nutrient fluxes from sediments could have been strongly affected
by shifts in benthic community. Mechanisms explaining these changes, however,
remain obscure and thus hamper model predictions of future ecosystem
trajectories. Researchers from the Large Lakes Observatory - University of
Minnesota Duluth will determine the effects of established dreissenid
populations on sediment geochemistry and nutrient dynamics in the Great Lakes by
conducting detailed studies in dreissenid-invaded Lakes Michigan and Huron and
dreissenid-free Lake Superior. A team of biologists and geochemists will (1)
obtain field data to characterize sediment geochemistry of C-N-P, asses rates of
biogeochemical processes, and dreissenid effects on chemical and physical
properties of sediments, (2) conduct lab experiments to determine how functional
traits of sessile dreissenids vs. burrowing Diporeia affect sediment
characteristics and chemical fluxes, and (3) use reactive-transport and mass-
balance models to understand the whole-lake geochemistry of carbon and nutrients
in dreissenid-invaded lakes. This work will advance understanding of the ecology
of the great lakes and generally improve models of sediment - water column
interactions in aquatic ecosystems.