* 1737951
* Dimensions: Collaborative Research: Genome structure and adaptive evolution in peatmosses (Sphagnum): ecosystem engineers
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* David Hanson, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 423,798.00

Peatmosses comprise a diverse group of plants with over 300 species distributed
throughout the world. In northern parts of the Northern Hemisphere, they
dominate wetlands and form extensive peatlands that harbor a broad diversity of
microbes, other plants, and animals. Because of the build-up of peat (partially
decomposed plant material), these peatlands have profound impacts on regional
patterns of water movement, and the global cycling of atmospheric nitrogen,
carbon dioxide, and methane. It is estimated that almost one third of the
earth's soil carbon is bound up in peatlands even though these habitats account
for only about 10% of the land surface area. The goals of this research are to
use peatmosses as a model to better understand the connections between DNA
sequence variation, plant traits, and ecological function. This research
provides a unique opportunity to connect gene composition and variation to the
plant traits encoded by those genes, and investigate how these plant traits
affect ecosystem function. Undergraduates, graduate students and post-doctoral
researchers will be trained in diverse genomic, evolutionary, computational, and
ecological methods and analysis, including laboratory exchanges among the
collaborating institutions. Results will be disseminated broadly to the public
via field courses and an illustrated publically accessible, online database
about peatmosses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research integrates broad-level
phylogenetics, common garden experiments of a widely-distributed Sphagnum
species, and genus-wide comparative genomic studies to understand how adaptive
processes occurring within species scale up to and explain diversification of
the genus on a worldwide scale. Whole genome DNA sequences will be assembled for
96 Sphagnum species representing the worldwide range of the genus. These data
will then be used to reconstruct phylogenetic relationships among species and
assess genus-wide genomic variation. Analyses of these data will then test for
correlations among phylogenetic patterns, distributional range, ecological
breadth, and variation in ecologically important phenotypic traits. Plants of
Sphagnum magellanicum, which occurs from arctic to tropical regions, will be
collected across a latitudinal gradient and grown under experimental conditions
to assess photosynthetic responses to environmental factors including day length
and temperature, and population differentiation in physiological response. Gene
expression responses in experimental plants will be measured using RNA
sequencing to better understand the genetic basis of local physiological
adaptation. Whole genome DNA sequences of different S. magellanicum populations
will be assembled to assess variation in gene content within a single species
(Pan genome structure). Comparing these population-level data with whole genome
sequence data from species spanning the Sphagnum genus will identify how many of
these genes are shared with other peatmoss species. One specific prediction
these data will be used to test is whether inducible physiological responses in
tropical plants of a widespread species have become fixed and constitutive in
tropical Sphagnum species.