* 1737790
* SusChEM: CAREER: Ketone Alkylation Using Simple Olefins: A Sustainable Chemistry Approach
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Guangbin Dong, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2018
* USD 632,086.00

The Chemical Catalysis Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry supports the
research efforts of Professor Guangbin Dong of the University of Texas at Austin
to explore new catalytic reactions for the formation of carbon-carbon (C-C)
bonds through ketone alkylation reactions. Professor Dong's group uses a
transition metal catalyzed enamine-mediated carbon-hydrogen (C-H)
functionalization strategy to transform simple, unactivated olefins. This new
reaction offers a number of advantages over the classical ketone-akylation
methods, including the substitution of expensive or toxic halide reactants with
more environmentally benign and less costly olefins, the use of neutral
catalytic conditions rather than stoichiometric amounts of strong bases, and the
development of a by-product free process. Professor Dong is actively engaged in
the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) IMPACT Program for
undergraduate mentoring, the Welch Summer Scholar Program for high school
student training, and the "Shadow a Scientist" program for the early education
of middle school and home-schooled students. Professor Dong is also
collaborating with UT Austin's Student Veteran Services to create research
opportunities for veterans and pre-veterans by providing training in Green
Chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As one of the oldest and most-utilized carbon-
carbon bond formation reactions, ketone alkylation, has not been an economical
or environmentally-friendly process. This CAREER project utilizes transition
metal-based catalytic processes to avoid the need for corrosive bases and/or
toxic and expensive reagents. The improved reactions are expected to have impact
in the preparation of pharmaceutical agents, polymers, fine chemicals, and
flavoring reactions. Professor Dong stresses the environment and the use of
sustainable processes in his work with middle and high school students as well
as in the home-school environment. These activities involved participants from
diverse age groups and backgrounds. His outreach and education efforts also
involve creating research opportunities for veterans and students readying for
deployment so that they can be employed by the chemical industry after their
military service.