* 1737728
* International Solar Fuels II - Young: A Conference for Scientific and Professional Development of the Next-Generation of Solar Fuel Researchers
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2017
* David Fenning, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 11/30/2017
* USD 9,069.00

The award will provide funding in support of participation by U.S. graduate
students, post-doctoral scholars, and early-career researchers at the 2nd
International Solar Fuels Young meeting immediately preceding the second
convening of the International Solar Fuels conference (ISF2). The "Young"
meeting (ISF2-Young) will take place July-5-6, 2017 at the University of
California - San Diego in La Jolla, California. ISF2-Young will expose a new
generation of scientists and engineers to the latest international research
advances in the area of solar fuel science and engineering. International
exchanges of this type are essential for ensuring that U.S. scientists and
engineers maintain leadership in areas of critical importance to the
environment, sustainability, and manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ISF2-Young meeting (together with the follow-on ISF-2 conference) brings
together researchers to share latest research advances in the cross-disciplinary
area of solar fuels. Emphasis is placed on technologies that utilize solar
energy (either directly or indirectly) to convert abundant feedstocks such as
water and CO2 to liquid chemical fuels. The disciplines needed to carry out
these transformations are highly diverse and encompass many different areas
including materials science, molecular catalysis, synthetic biology, metabolic
engineering, photovoltaics, and electrochemistry. The ISF2-Young meeting
provides an opportunity for young researchers to present their work in the form
of poster presentations and engage in related research discussions with both
their young colleagues and senior researchers in the field. Participation by
young researchers will aid in developing the next generation of academic and
industrial scientists and engineers needed to ensure a sustainable energy future
based on energy from the sun rather than from fossil fuels.