* 1737732
* EAGER: SC2: Load Prediction and Collision Coordination for Collaboration Channel
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2017,01/31/2018
* Joseph Camp, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 01/31/2018
* USD 36,144.00

The demand for wireless bandwidth has grown exponentially in the past decade,
motivating the need for novel spectrum access techniques. In this project, a
hierarchical testing and implementation approach is used to generate and
evaluate innovative spectral access techniques. To do so, the team is equipped
with a broad range of backgrounds from FPGA development and machine learning to
3GPP standardization and extensive in-field experimentation. There are four
particular areas of focus for the team: (i) network management including control
structure and topology discovery, (ii) network discovery including modulation
recognition and network recognition, (iii) spectrum access including channel
selection, access mechanism design, and decision metrics, and (iv) link design
including waveform selection, channel coding, and channel estimation. A central
concept hinges on the role of the collaboration channel, on which the role of
periodic and uniform levels of information exchange is studied related to
channel availability across networks from no, partial, and full knowledge
scenarios. Using machine learning and on-the-fly training with observations of
network decisions and resulting performance, the focus then shifts to designing
for robustness with respect to greater levels of latency and heterogeneity that
result from non-standard protocols and algorithms across a diverse set of
radios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scope of the project includes the following
three aspects. First, an agile research approach is employed using a hierarchy
of implementation complexity to evaluate multiple design ideas, progressing
through simulation tools, software-defined platforms, and FPGA hardware
implementations and weighting the time spent according to the measured success
of each design idea. Second, the role of the collaboration channel is
extensively studied and evaluated in terms of spectral efficiency and
coordination across teams by attempting to predict spectral availability of all
users across the relevant spectrum in a homogeneous network context and select
the channel availability update rate and size to attempt to maximize performance
of these two metrics. Third, these findings develop the basis for extension to
networks with high levels of latency and heterogeneity across the network stack
where flexibility of information exchange across the collaboration channel is
far more critical, forcing on-the-fly training that are built into the nodes to
observe and reinforce machine-based decision making.