* 1737071
* The Role of Temperature in Regulating Herbivory and Algal Biomass in Upwelling Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* John Bruno, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 07/31/2022
* USD 733,602.00

A well-known pattern in coastal marine systems is a positive association between
the biomass of primary producers and the occurrence or intensity of upwelling.
This is assumed to be caused by the increase in nutrient concentration
associated with upwelling, enabling higher primary production and thus greater
standing algal biomass. However, upwelling also causes large, rapid declines in
water temperature. Because the metabolism of fish and invertebrate herbivores is
temperature-dependent, cooler upwelled water could reduce consumer metabolism
and grazing intensity. This could in turn lead to increased standing algal
biomass. Thus upwelling could influence both bottom-up and top-down control of
populations and communities of primary producers. The purpose of this study is
to test the hypothesis that grazing intensity and algal biomass are, in part,
regulated by temperature via the temperature-dependence of metabolic rates.
Broader impacts include the training and retention of minority students through
UNC's Course Based Undergraduate Research program, support of undergraduate
research, teacher training, and various outreach activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will take advantage of the uniquely
strong spatiotemporal variance in water temperature in the Gal√°pagos Islands to
compare grazing intensity and primary production across a natural temperature
gradient. They will combine field monitoring, statistical modeling, grazing
assays, populations-specific metabolic measurements, and in situ herbivore
exclusion and nutrient addition to measure the effects of temperature on pattern
and process in shallow subtidal communities. The researchers will also test the
hypothesis that grazer populations at warmer sites and/or during warmer seasons
are less thermally sensitive, potentially due to acclimatization or adaptation.
Finally, the investigators will perform a series of mesocosm experiments to
measure the effect of near-future temperatures on herbivores, algae, and
herbivory. This work could change the way we view upwelling systems,
particularly how primary production is regulated and the temperature-dependence
of energy transfer across trophic levels.