* 1737691
* Collaborative Research: Knowledge Co-production: communities and scientists working together to explore nature, culture, and Alaska Native well-being in a changing Alaska.
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* David Bond, Bennington College
* Continuing Grant
* Erica Hill
* 08/31/2023
* USD 150,277.00

This project brings together Alaska Native community partners and university
researchers to develop shared research priorities, guide collaborative data
collection, and interpret findings about issues of broad public and theoretical
concern. Specifically, this project prompts collaborative engagements with the
increasing challenges to fossil fuel development in northern Alaska, including:
eroding coastlines, petroleum-dependent subsistence activities, plans for new
offshore drilling, dwindling dividends,and unprecedented environmental shifts.
Seeking to involve Native communities within wider conversations across research
and policy around these concerns, this project is inspired by innovative
community efforts to secure subsistence, insure wellbeing, and create viable
cultural futures in a context of rapid change. By building a unique regional
research alliance around these insights, the project also aims to revise common
understandings about some of the most pressing topics of our times, including
health and wellness, inequality, changing ecosystems, and the prospects of a
petroleum-based social contract in Alaska. This project will directly benefit
partner communities, science and scientific communities, policy-makers and
efforts to strengthen American democracy.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project
makes three primary contributions to publicly relevant social science research
focused on Arctic futures. First, it develops a collaborative method that
empowers Alaska Native community research partners to design, coordinate, and
implement research questions and activities within their own communities. 
Second, a decolonizing methodology endeavors to rethink the analytic lexicons of
Arctic social science research, and thus to revise scholarly approaches to some
of the biggest issues of the present, including the ways that knowledge about
Arctic futures is negotiated and co-produced. Finally, this project maximizes
the broader impacts of this knowledge by laying the foundation for a wider
research network that brings Indigenous and scientific insights to bear on the
most critical public problems in northern Alaska today. Findings from the study
will also advance conversations in several bodies of scholarship concerned with
decolonizing methodologies, shifting Arctic ecologies and economies, and
Indigenous wellbeing.  In such ways, the project will engage current debates by
creating a more inclusive exploration of the Arctic and its open-ended futures.