* 1737707
* I-Corps: Dynamic Real-Time Energy Management System
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2017
* Bing Dong, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 09/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is reducing
energy cost in future buildings and communities, and improving grid operations.
Specifically, this project can benefit society by providing: 1) a software and
hardware packaged solution for future smart buildings and communities; 2) the
opportunity to save energy and money by reducing utility bills; 3) enabling
technology for the next generation of proactive buildings. With the increasing
penetration of distributed energy resources such as photovoltaic systems,
electric vehicles, and battery energy storage systems at the individual building
level, electrical load patterns becomes uncertain and variable, contributing to
grid instability and energy waste. At the grid level, the introduction of
renewable energy also makes the power system status more uncertain and variable,
which requires more ancillary services to ensure system supply adequacy and
reliability. Thus, the need for ancillary service provisions will increase
substantially, and utility will require more flexible
loads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will 1) conduct customer and
user interviews and investigate the broader needs of the technology to verify
product value proposition; 2) conduct analysis based on customer needs through
face to face meetings with customers and users in 1); and 3) develop business
plan based on customer interviews and value proposition validation. The proposed
technology is an innovative hardware and software solution for buildings that
includes modeling of occupancy behavior patterns, forecasting solar energy
generation and building energy demand, and predictive controlling smart energy
devices through the incorporation of dynamic grid signals. These innovative
energy-efficient technologies show a clear application to both residential and
commercial buildings in the future. Based on previous research outcomes, a
software platform has been developed that demonstrated significant energy cost
saving capability in both residential and commercial buildings.