* 1737680
* EAGER: Importance of bacterial phenotypic plasticity relative to changes in community composition as responses to disturbance.
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Vincent Denef, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 06/30/2020
* USD 199,999.00

Bacteria are responsible for some of the most basic and essential of ecosystem
functions, from providing nutrients to crop plants, to generating oxygen in the
air we breathe. Bacterial species form complex communities composed of many
different functional types, and which types are present and how they behave and
interact affects the overall functions produced by the ecosystem. Disturbances
in ecosystems caused by things like antibiotic treatments, fertilizer runoff, or
invasion by non-native species, can change the species composition of bacterial
communities. Even if many of the same bacterial species remain after a
disturbance, the functions they provide can be altered by the disturbance, and
result in a large impact on the entire ecosystem. This project will examine how
lake bacterial communities respond to a widespread disturbance impacting many
waterbodies in North American - invasion by zebra and quagga mussels. These non-
native mussel species have spread to lakes and rivers in over 30 US states and
have had major impacts on the food webs and fisheries. Results from this project
will help us understand how the ecosystem effects of these mussels is manifest
through their impact on the bacterial communities. The results will help us
predict how other types of disturbance will change the ecosystem services
provided by the bacteria. The project will also integrate incoming undergraduate
students interested in science and technology fields through an intensive summer
program focused on increasing retention and diversity in science and technology
majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to study the
responses of bacterial communities to short and medium term biological
disturbance, in order to separate the roles of bacterial physiological responses
caused by phenotypic plasticity from ecological responses mediated by shifts in
bacterial community composition. This work will explore effects of dreissenid
mussel invasion in freshwater lakes on resident bacterial communities, and will
employ a combination of laboratory and field experiments. The project relies on
a recently developed method based on flow cytometric analysis of bacterial
diversity that, when combined with sequencing based analyses, will allow the
researchers to distinguish phenotypic from genotypic responses of bacterial
communities. It holds promise to establish direct connections between high-
throughput measurements of in situ plasticity of microbial phenotypic traits and
the underlying molecular mechanism (changes in gene expression). This will not
only allow the researchers to address the project's central biological question,
but will also establish a new approach to tackling the importance of phenotypic
plasticity more broadly in the field of microbial ecology, which currently is
primarily focused on community composition shifts.