* 1737617
* SCC-Planning:   Building Capacity for Smart and Connected Management of Thermal Extremes
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Ariane Middel, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Meghan Houghton
* 12/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

As the nation's leading cause of weather-related deaths, extreme heat and cold
substantially impact human well-being in the United States. The impacts of heat
and cold are unevenly distributed in urban areas as a result of variability in
infrastructure and social factors that influence risk. Many different agencies,
organizations, and individuals are involved in the management of extreme heat
and cold events through a wide range of preparedness and response activities.
Improved coordination of actions and utilization of data resources would
increase the return on public and private investments made to minimize adverse
impacts of heat and cold and lead to reduced instances of weather-related
mortality, morbidity, discomfort, and lost productivity. This research project
will examine existing practices related to the management of heat and cold in
the cities of Buffalo, New York, and Tempe, Arizona. The project involves
assessment of community partner practices, goals, and needs in these two cities
with an emphasis on learning about how partners use and seek data related to
weather, health, energy, transit, and other relevant factors. Examination of
these two cities will lay the groundwork for a more comprehensive assessment of
gaps and opportunities for reducing the impact of thermal extremes in
municipalities across the United States, in future
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this planning grant are to work
collaboratively with city stakeholders to examine how select cities in the
United States are measuring exposure and impacts of thermal extremes on urban
residents; document current approaches to and barriers of using existing thermal
and related data streams to inform local government strategies and programs; and
collaborate with agencies in Tempe and Buffalo, to design a linked research-
action approach that integrates social and technological infrastructure to build
capacity for communities to manage the impacts of thermal extremes. The scope of
the planning grant includes three main outcomes. First, project investigators
will work with city stakeholders to pilot an integrated assessment of thermal
extremes management in Buffalo and Tempe, which were chosen to represent diverse
environmental and social conditions. Second, the investigators and city
stakeholders will co-develop a semi-structured interview instrument that can be
used for national assessment of thermal extremes management among municipal
governments. Finally, the team will co-develop a Smart and Connected Thermal
Management integrated conceptual framework. This framework will serve as the
basis for future research activities continuing beyond the planning grant
period, as well as an organizational tool for municipalities and researchers.
The planning grant activity will provide tools for connecting researchers with
practice-based approaches for management of thermal extremes. This effort will
also provide generalizable approaches and guidance to help city operations
become more effective and coordinated overall in managing complex and sometimes
competing priorities. The proposed activity will benefit society by advancing
our understanding of social-technological approaches to reduce thermal mortality
and morbidity while enhancing thermal comfort and well-being.