* 1737495
* SCC-Planning:  How Can Investments In Smart Cities Technologies Improve The Lives Of Low-Income, Inner-City Residents
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Gerrit Knaap, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

New "smart cities"technologies are poised to radically alter the form and
function of cities. Free public Wi-Fi, the Internet of things, autonomous
vehicles, web-based curricula, personal health monitors and smart transit hubs
have the potential to radically change how transportation, education, public
health, and economic development are organized and delivered. In the past,
unfortunately, the adoption of new technologies has often created what is known
as the "digital divide" and exacerbated disparities in income and wealth. The
extent to which free access to the Internet, greater transit mobility, and other
smart cities technologies can increase access to opportunity, enhance social
mobility, and mitigate the digital divide-especially for the young-is an
important yet unexplored research question. To understand whether and how smart
cities investments can improve the lives of low-income residents the project
team will: engage with residents and business owners to assess the needs of low-
income residents; develop plans for technical research on how to design
interventions that meet the needs of low-income residents; and develop plans for
integrated research on what effects smart cities investments actually have on
low-income communities. Such understanding is critical for the effective and
equitable deployment of smart cities technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop a strategic plan for addressing the question: how can
investments in smart cities technologies improve the lives of low-income, inner-
city residents. To address both technological and social science questions the
research team includes a broad array of technical and social scientists from
five Baltimore-area universities, a team of smart city technology providers, and
leaders of local governments, neighborhood associations, and community
development corporations. The planning process will involve extensive
communication between and among these three groups: meetings of researchers,
workshops among technology providers, community engagement events with local
residents, and participation in all these events by key project leaders. The
effort will produce alternative strategies for smart cities investments in west
Baltimore; a network of multidisciplinary researchers prepared to undertake
integrated research projects; the design of a shared research and data
infrastructure; and build trust between researchers and community stakeholders.