* 1737186
* Effects of paleoseawater composition on chemical and isotopic exchange at mid-ocean ridges
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Donald DePaolo, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 07/31/2019
* USD 327,163.00

The chemical composition of the oceans holds clues to important aspects of the
history of climate, life, and mountain building on the Earth. Although we now
know that the amount in seawater of certain elements like calcium, magnesium and
sulfur, which are minor, but significant, constituents of seawater, have changed
by large amounts and cyclically over many millions of years, we still do not
know what causes these changes. One process that can contribute to, and also be
affected by, the changes is the circulation of seawater through the fractured
oceanic crust near mid-ocean ridges. This research is aimed at understanding how
changes in dissolved S, Mg, and Ca in seawater affect the large geothermal
systems that stretch around the globe on the ocean floor. Better understanding
of could lead to breakthroughs in our understanding of why Earth's climate
oscillates over long time periods and how mid-ocean ridge geothermal systems
transfer chemical elements between the deep Earth and the oceans. The research
involves laboratory experiments that reproduce the conditions and processes deep
within hot oceanic crust and models how seawater circulates through the rocks
and changes as chemical reactions occur. In terms of broader impacts, the
experiments will provide thermodynamic and kinetic data that can be used in
geothermal resource development and in studies of water-rock interaction that
occur in other contexts, such as nuclear waste storage. New data on Sr
partitioning in secondary minerals could have broad applicability to studies of
hydrothermal/geothermal systems. Additional impacts include support of
analytical and experimental research facilities at that benefit students at the
University of California and many other scientists and students from other
institutions. The educational value of the project is substantial in that it
connects geological processes with oceanography and climate, and integrated
knowledge of chemistry, hydrology and geology.

Mid-ocean ridge hydrothermal systems are a major contributor to the ocean's
geochemical cycle. The chemical exchange that occurs as seawater circulates
through basalt and gabbro of varying temperatures affects the balance of ions in
seawater and influences the carbon cycle through the coupling of dissolved Ca
and Mg and carbonate sedimentation. Understanding the geologic history of the
oceans and the relationships between seawater chemistry and climate requires
that chemical exchange between seawater and oceanic crust at and near mid-ocean
ridges be understood, not only at present, but back in time through Earth's
history. Differences in the chemical composition of seawater in the geologic
past could have had a significant effect on the seawater-basalt exchange in
seafloor hydrothermal systems, especially at times when seawater Mg and SO4 were
lower, and Ca and Sr were higher than at present. Consideration of these
differences could cause major changes in the way we interpret records from past
oceans, in particular the Sr isotopic evolution of seawater. It may also change
how we view the causes and consequences of changes in seawater composition
through Earth history. There is evidence that Sr isotopic exchange between
seawater and ocean floor rocks changed substantially during periods when the
Mg/Ca and Ca/SO4 ratios of the ocean were different than they are today. Hence
modern seafloor hydrothermal systems may not be representative of most of the
Phanerozoic. To better understand how seawater Mg-Ca-SO4 chemistry affects MOR
hydrothermal experiments using reactors and mineral/fluid compositions that
mimic seafloor hydrothermal systems will be run at varying fluid compositions.
Run products will be analyzed geochemically and the results will be incorporated
into the water-rock interaction modeling code TOUGHREACT, a hydrological
modeling code that will be modified to accommodate conditions of seafloor
hydrothermal systems.