* 1737626
* SCC-Planning:  Building resilient coastal cities through smart and connected communities
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Mathieu Feagan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 99,867.00

Coastal communities are particularly vulnerable to increased risk from sea-level
rise and coastal, riverine, and urban flooding. An aging urban infrastructure is
proving inadequate for protecting communities from the impacts of these events.
Disasters make evident that failures take place not just in the built
infrastructure, but also in the information infrastructure that engineers and
decision-makers use to prepare and respond. Limitations in information and data
systems constrain the ability of cities to learn, adapt, and reduce the
vulnerability of their populations to various extreme events. Civic leaders,
data scientists, entrepreneurs, and nonprofit organizations increasingly are
interested in using "smart city" technologies to optimize city operations;
however, their effectiveness depends on multiple technological, cognitive,
social, and institutional factors. This SCC Planning Grant will be used to
design a research program that advances understanding of the socio-political,
ecological, and technological conditions for S&amp;CC that promote coastal
resilience and transformation. The team will nurture new, integrative, and
interdisciplinary research collaborations, develop research capacity-building
activities, and undertake meaningful community engagement in the coastal
communities of Miami, San Juan, and Baltimore. Collectively, these coastal
communities cover a population of more than a million people that will benefit
from this project. Specific objectives are to: 1) develop a diverse research
community to advance fundamental understanding of smart and connected
communities; 2) engage multiple practitioners and stakeholders to contribute to
planning and establishing direction of the research program; and 3) develop and
foster research-practitioner interactions and research capacity through
Innovation Webinars, Dialogues, and Labs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
strategy of this SCC Planning Grant consists of bringing together small groups
of researchers, subject matter experts, and community stakeholders in a variety
of innovative and collaborative activities in each of three coastal cities:
Miami, San Juan, and Baltimore. A transdisciplinary team will be assembled that
encompasses social science, natural science, and engineering fields, including
risk communication, science and technology studies, data and computation
science, and communication. Data resources and outputs from the three coastal
cities will be used to advance fundamental understanding of smart and connected
communities from a social-ecological-technological systems approach. Innovative
tools for virtual communication, data sharing, idea nurturing, and product
generation will facilitate interaction and underpin communication. Strategies
for maximizing participation of students and early-career scientists in each
city will be employed to enhance their research capacities on social and
technical aspects of the cities' information and technology needs. Researchers
and communities will co-develop a vision for an integrated research program for
a smart city framework of the future that includes: 1) advances in theories of
knowledge co-production by examining social practices that institutions use to
produce, share, and use information for envisioning and implementing strategies
in their communities; 2) novel methodologies for collecting, managing,
analyzing, and visualizing more diverse data to assist communities in exploring
their resilience and envisioning sustainable futures from an integrative
perspective; 3) understanding of the social, political, ecological, and ethical
implications of smart and connected technologies; and, 4) new approaches in the
modeling and design of complex infrastructures that take into account the
dynamic nature of climate systems and cities.