* 1737435
* Workshop: Recent Advances and Future Research Directions in RF Technologies from MHz to THz;  Honolulu, Hawaii, June 8th, 2017.
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2017,10/31/2017
* Yuanxun Wang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 10/31/2017
* USD 9,845.00

The IEEE International Microwave Symposium, sponsored by IEEE Microwave Theory
and Techniques Society, is the annual flagship conference covering radio
frequency (RF) technologies for communications and sensing from megahertz (MHz)
to terahertz (THz) including microwave and millimeter-wave. This proposed
workshop will be part of the 2017 IEEE International Microwave Symposium in
Honolulu, Hawaii from June 4 to June 9, 2017. The workshop will review recent
advances in RF communication and sensing technologies from MHz to THz, and
discuss future research challenges and applications of these technologies. RF
technologies are key elements of both wireless and wireline communication
systems and networks, and are critical to the United States broadband
communications infrastructures, satellite communications and Global Positioning
System (GPS), as well as military radar and communication equipment. In
addition, RF technologies are actively used for sensing and medical
applications. While magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) operating in MHz range has
been widely used, new millimeter-wave and THz medical imaging technologies are
being developed. Based on the conference history, there are about 3,000
technical program attendees in various technical sessions. As part of the
conference program, this workshop is expected to draw 100 participants from
conference attendees. The workshop will start with the introduction of
Communications, Circuits, and Sensing Systems (CCSS) programs in NSF Electrical,
Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS) Division, and include five invited
presentations by recent NSF awardees in CCSS programs. The NSF grant will
provide the support of workshop expenses. The presentations and discussions in
this workshop will stimulate the exchange of ideas and research collaborations,
and lead to future innovations and economic growth to benefit our nation.