* 1737940
* 2017 Mixed Integer Programming Workshop; Montreal, Quebec, Canada; June 19-22, 2017
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Fatma Kilinc-Karzan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 04/30/2018
* USD 5,000.00

The Mixed Integer Programming (MIP) workshop is an annual event with the goal of
encouraging participation of junior researchers in integer programming and
related areas. A primary focus of this workshop is to showcase young
researchers; to increase the visibility for accomplished students at an early
stage in their career; and to provide an opportunity for graduate students to
network with the world's top researchers. This award will provide funds for 10
graduate students to attend the 14th MIP workshop, each of whom will be
presenting his or her poster at the workshop. MIP student poster sessions
provide students with an opportunity to highlight their ongoing work and network
with other researchers from industry and academia. During the workshop, student
posters are also judged by a workshop committee and outstanding posters are
recognized. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2017 MIP workshop will be held from June
19th to June 22nd, 2017 at the HEC Montréal (École des hautes études
commerciales de Montréal) in Québec, Canada. The solicitation for the posters
will be sent to a variety of mailing lists, including those that serve
underrepresented groups in an effort to broaden participation: INFORMS Computing
Society, INFORMS Optimization Society, SIAM, Women in OR/MS (WORMS), and INFORMS
Junior Faculty Interest Group. By providing travel funds for graduate students,
NSF will help to decrease the cost of attendance to encourage participation of
students and will support the engagement of STEM students in emerging research
in the field of MIP.