* 1737448
* A Family of Asteroids Created from the Large Asteroid (6) Hebe
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Sherry Fieber-Beyer, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 08/31/2020
* USD 152,940.00

When an asteroid is hit by another large solar system object, it can break apart
and become many asteroids all of which have similar orbits. These smaller
asteroids that were formed during the break-ups are the rocks that fall to
Earth: smaller pieces of the asteroids are meteorites, and larger pieces become
those asteroids that could threaten Earth with a big impact. Those asteroids
that all come from one original asteroid are called a "family." Astronomers use
telescopes and instruments to look at the types of rocks on the asteroids in the
families we find today to see if they have similar compositions. Comparing the
orbits and the compositions in an asteroid family gives us information on how
long ago the break-up of the asteroid parent happened. The Principal
Investigator will observe about 35 asteroids near the large asteroid (6) Hebe to
learn their compositions and, from that, their possible family beginning. This
research serves the national interest by promoting the progress of planetary
astronomy, as well as providing information to secure national defense and
welfare when Earth is threatened by the possible impact of a large asteroid. The
project will include students, aiming especially to identify female and disabled
students as possible, to teach them how a scientific study is conducted.

Asteroid families are a collection of objects formed during the collisional
breakup of a parent asteroid or as the ejecta from a large impact onto a parent
body. These events are major sources of the meteoroids that fall to Earth as
meteorites, and of the Earth-approaching objects which constitute a potential
impact hazard. Asteroid families eventually diffuse orbitally to become the
background asteroid population; as such, the time scale of diffusion constrains
the ages of families and the collisional rate in the asteroid belt. The
H-chondrite meteorites exhibit a range of metamorphism suggesting deep
excavation from their parent body, and spectral properties similar to asteroid
(6) Hebe. This research seeks a spectroscopic investigation of 35 asteroids in
the dynamical region near Hebe to test for the presence of a small dynamical
family of H-chondrite composition. Detection or non-detection of such a family
would place constraints on the formation of impact-generated families by
providing data to the modeling community to test orbital diffusion models in
regions proximate to resonances, as well as provide an explanation for the
diverse thermal histories of the H-chondrites. The proposed research effort
would also provide a strong test of spectroscopic and dynamical predictions
regarding asteroid family identification. The PI will also focus on recruiting
and teaching students, emphasizing female and disabled individuals as possible,
the specific scientific investigation and writing techniques that would prepare
them to become strong, diverse scientists and educators in the globally
competitive STEM workforce.