* 1737770
* ATD: Sparsity Models for Forecasting Spatio-Temporal Human Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Andrea Bertozzi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 603,944.00

The US continued achievement at the forefront of science and technology requires
a significant investment in new research in information technology to tackle the
most challenging problems created by the vast data footprint created by digital
recording of human activity. This project develops novel models and methods for
forecasting human activity in time and space using sparse, heterogeneous data.
The goals are very general and are focused on predicting and filling in missing
data. An example of the type of data this project addresses would be a year's
worth of geotagged Twitter data from a major city along with other informative
geospatial information from that region. This project combines expertise of
senior scientists in both Mathematics and Anthropology. The project develops
analytical tools for understanding a diverse array of cyber-geospatial-temporal
datasets. While focused on basic research, the project has tremendous potential
to impact national security. This three-year project trains postdocs, graduate
students, and undergraduate researchers. The mentees will be trained in
research, in presentation of their work in written and spoken formats, with an
emphasis on refereed journal publications and conference presentations. They
will also be connected to future employers and will be given career advice
throughout the length of their training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
focuses on information technology at the interface between large-scale cultural,
social and behavioral processes and the situational conditions that lead to the
expression of specific behaviors. This work extends a general conceptualization
of text-based topic modeling to handle diverse collections of data types. The
project develops methods to detect situational probabilistic effects through
spatially-explicit topic modeling. One goal is to organize situational effects
into different categories: (a) relatively stationary (e.g., the spatially
discrete, but temporally stable role that the physical airport plays in driving
airport related topics), (b) intermittent (e.g., discrete holidays) and (c)
ephemeral (e.g., Foursquare). Another goal is temporal forecasting while a third
goal is filling in missing information from a latent space. The research
approach focuses on algorithms that are flexible enough to extend to a variety
of datasets. The work interweaves several very useful models and algorithms for
large data including self-exciting point process models for temporal
information, soft topic modeling such as nonnegative matrix factorization and
latent Dirichlet allocation for linear mixture models of data, hard clustering
methods built around total variation minimization on graphs and graph
Laplacians, and data fusion methods to combine these ideas in which latent space
information is studied for forecasting and filling in missing information.