* 1737716
* Collaborative Research:  Ecosystem Response to a Warming Arctic: Deciphering the Past to Inform The Future.
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Elizabeth Thomas, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 12/31/2023
* USD 627,149.00

The Arctic is currently warming twice as fast as the global average and this is
expected to result in a northward shift in plant ranges. An increase in woody
vegetation would reduce surface reflection of light and heat (albedo), and
increase atmospheric water vapor, a positive feedback that is currently poorly
included in climate models. In the Eastern Canadian Arctic (ECA) stratified
sediment in lakes spanning the current interglacial and the warmer previous
interglacial, preserve sedimentary ancient DNA (sedaDNA) and organic molecules
that can be used for reconstruction of past ecosystems and their dependence on
temperature and hydroclimate. By combining data from these sediments with modern
vegetation studies and climate monitoring, an empirically based ecosystem-
climate model will be developed to predict the likely evolution of Arctic
ecosystems by 2100 under a range of climate trajectory scenarios.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This will be the first integration of sedaDNA-based
vegetation records with biomarker-based climate records in lake sediment
containing records of a much warmer Arctic. There are few ecosystem studies for
the thin soils on crystalline terrain of the ECA. Floristic studies and
vegetation-environment analyses around targeted lakes across a strong climate
gradient establish the current relation between plant assemblages and summer
temperature and define the relation between sedaDNA and nearby plant
communities. Temperature loggers in soils, air, and lake- water, and analyzes of
DNA and biomarkers in modern soils and lake surface sediment will enhance
understanding of promising new molecular proxies and facilitate the development
of regional training sets. The project brings together experts and state-of-
the-art facilities in Arctic plant ecology, Paleoclimate, sedaDNA, and Organic
Geochemistry to derive transformative new insight into the complex interplay
between climate and biogeography at high latitudes, and will lead to a robust
perspective on the potential response of ecosystems to anticipated future
warming across the ECA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team is committed to
sharing research results with the broader public through outreach among local
communities in the Canadian Arctic as well as at home. The team will work
closely with Inuit guides and assistants during fieldwork, much of which is near
traditional hunting and fishing lands, and will share results with nearby Inuit
communities through displays at Parks Canada offices. A strong partnership with
Nunavut Research Institute and its affiliated Arctic College has been developed
over several decades, and this partnership will be expanded by establishing an
interactive lake-monitoring program in collaboration with the Environment
Technology Program students and staff of Arctic College. In Boulder, Colorado, a
scholarship-supported summer field and lab course for underrepresented high
school students will be developed based on paleoecological and paleoclimatic
perspectives on climate change. This project will help launch two early-career
scientists, one female and one Latino, as well as a career scientist and two
postdocs, two of whom are female, and two new graduate students. The laboratory
component will support several graduate and undergraduate assistants, who will
gain valuable research experience and have the opportunity to complete theses
based on their research activities.