* 1737581
* SCC-RCN: Polycentric Development Toward the Vision of 21st Century Main Street in Virginia
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* T. Donna Chen, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 08/31/2023
* USD 495,280.00

Cities and communities in the U.S. and around the world are entering a new era
of transformational change, in which their inhabitants and the surrounding built
and natural environments are increasingly connected by smart technologies,
leading to new opportunities for innovation, improved services, and enhanced
quality of life. The Smart and Connected Communities (SCC) program supports
strongly interdisciplinary, integrative research and research capacity-building
activities that will improve understanding of smart and connected communities
and lead to discoveries that enable sustainable change to enhance community
functioning. This project is a Research Coordination Network (RCN) that focuses
on achieving SCC for medium/small size, remote, and rural communities through a
polycentric (multiple centers) integrated policy, design, and technology
approach. The communities served by the RCN have higher barriers to information,
resources, and services than larger urban communities. To reduce this gap, the
PIs propose to develop need-based R&amp;D pipelines to select solutions with the
highest potential impacts to the communities. Instead of trying to connect
under-connected communities to nearby large cities, this proposal aims to
develop economic opportunities within the communities themselves. This topic
aligns well with the vision of the SCC program, and the proposed RCN consists of
a diverse group of researchers, communities, industry, government, and non-
profit partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support the development of
an RCN within the Commonwealth of Virginia which will coordinate multiple
partners in developing innovations utilizing smart and connected technologies.
The goal of the research coordination network is to enable researchers and
citizens to collaborate on research supporting enhanced quality of life for
medium, small, and rural communities which frequently lack the communication and
other infrastructure available in cities. The research coordination network will
be led by the University of Virginia. There are 14 partner organizations
including six research center partners in transportation, environment,
architecture and urban planning, and engineering and technology; two State and
Industry partners (Virginia Municipal League and Virginia Center for Innovative
Technology); four community partners representing health services (UVA Center
for Telemedicine), small and remote communities (Weldon Cooper Center),
neighborhood communities (Charlottesville Neighborhood Development), and urban
communities (Thriving Cities); and two national partners which support high
speed networking (US-Ignite) and city-university hubs (MetroLab). Examples of
research coordination include telemedicine services, transportation services,
and user-centric and community-centric utilization and deployment of sensor
technologies.