* 1737772
* Broadening Participation: An Alaska Native Science &amp; Engineering Program Dissemination Conference
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Herb Schroeder, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 08/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

The investigators outline a plan to host a dissemination conference on the
campus of the University of Alaska Anchorage to share and scale exemplary
practices that broaden participation among Native Alaskans and other
traditionally underrepresented groups. The project is based on an emerging
successful broadening participant program that aims to increase the
representation of Alaska Natives in engineering. The Alaska Native Science &amp;
Engineering Program (ANSEP) is comprehensive model program that currently works
with 2,000 students. A quantitative and qualitative evaluation of the program
was completed in 2015 by the Urban Institute. They found that the ANSEP model
offers important lessons for other science, technology, engineering and
mathematics education programs for underrepresented minorities, especially in
its engagement of students from middle school through graduate school. Alaska
has one of the most expensive K12 education systems in the nation and
consistently ranks at the bottom for performance at all levels. Many of the
conditions and student outcomes are similar to those found in under-served
communities across the nation including inner cities, the Mississippi Delta,
rural America, Appalachia, and Indian reservations. ANSEP has catalyzed a change
in the educational paradigm and established a comprehensive set of components
that extend from 6th grade to graduate school. The aim is effecting systemic
change to improve the recruitment, progression, and advancement of Alaska
Natives in the engineering workforce. The program has leveraged NSF support to
sustain and institutionalize the various programmatic components through
partnerships with more than 100 industrial firms, philanthropic organizations,
federal and state agencies, schools, colleges, and universities who provide
resources, advocacy, research opportunities, and internships.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seven teams from a variety of institutional types will be
selected to participate in the dissemination conference. Teams will include a
cross-section of higher education, secondary school, industry and philanthropic
partners. Participants will be solicited from targeted institutions where a
replication of the work will have the greatest impact and highest likelihood of
success. The conference is designed to be hands-on and experiential. Teams will
learn from panels of ANSEP partners, students, and alumni, and will participate
in and observe activities associated with the ANSEP programmatic components.
Each team will develop a customized program based on the nuances of their local
contexts.