* 1737861
* ATD:   An Integrated Framework of Network Theory, Data Mining and Partial Differential Equation for Early Detection of Epidemic Outbreaks
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Kuai Xu, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2020
* USD 171,570.00

Despite advancements in medical technology and vaccines, emerging and reemerging
epidemics such as SARS, influenza A (H1N1), avian influenza, Ebola, and Zika
continue to pose tremendous threats. Early detection and immediate response are
essential to avoid societal repercussions. However, in many cases, current
methods and algorithms for epidemic detection cannot account for the wealth of
social media data available today. This data provides an opportunity to develop
improved surveillance systems. This project will develop a novel integrated
framework for early detection of epidemic outbreaks based on real-time geo-
tagged Twitter data. The work combines the expertise of scientists in both
mathematics and computer science and will develop new algorithms for faster
detection (near real-time and localized) of epidemic outbreaks. Effective early
detection of epidemics in localized regions will greatly increase governmental
agency and health organization awareness, prompting appropriate actions to
control and treat epidemics. This project will significantly enhance public
health awareness and preparedness against epidemic
outbreaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop new methodologies and
algorithms for early and accurate detection of epidemic outbreaks with social
media data. To this end, the project will introduce new algorithms in community
detection/clustering and hot topic analysis of geo-tagged Twitter data. The work
will also define effective distance metrics that combine the structure of
underlying social networks, physical proximity, and travel information to
capture the pattern of epidemic spread. As a result, solutions of partial
differential equation models, which describe spatio-temporal patterns of
epidemic spread, are used to provide an early warning indicator for predicting
imminence of an outbreak. In addition, new algorithms and theorems from partial
differential equations will reveal epidemic spread mechanisms. The project will
produce a new trans-disciplinary framework of network theory, data mining, and
partial differential equations for epidemic detection with geo-tagged Twitter
data.