* 1737258
* Alteration of carbon fluxes by intense phytoplankton blooms in a microtidal estuary
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2022
* Iris Anderson, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,051,200.00

Estuaries, coastal water bodies where rivers mix with ocean water, are hotspots
for the processing of carbon and nutrients moving from land to the coastal
ocean. Within estuaries land-based nutrient inputs can cause intense blooms of
single-celled algae called phytoplankton, which can have significant impacts on
the ecosystem. As blooms move down-estuary some of the phytoplankton material is
buried on the bottom, and some is decomposed, resulting in low oxygen conditions
(hypoxia), harmful to marine life, and production of carbon dioxide (CO2), the
major greenhouse gas, which can exchange with the atmosphere. The remaining
phytoplankton material can be exported to the ocean. The type and amount of
carbon exported from the estuary depend both on its biological activity and
physical factors such as fresh water discharge, temperature, and light
availability. If phytoplankton production is greater than decomposition, the
estuary will take up atmospheric CO2 and export phytoplankton carbon to the
coastal ocean. On the other hand, if decomposition is greater than production
the estuary will be a source of CO2 to the atmosphere and dissolved CO2 to the
coastal ocean. The investigators expect that intense phytoplankton blooms will
greatly amplify carbon exchanges with the atmosphere, coastal ocean, and bottom
sediments. As intense phytoplankton blooms increase in the future due to
increased nutrient inputs and temperature, low oxygen events may become more
frequent with potential negative impacts on fisheries and increased export of
carbon to the coastal ocean and atmosphere. This study will fill critical gaps
identified by the Coastal Carbon Synthesis Program in knowledge of how
microtidal estuaries transform and export C to the atmosphere, benthos, and
coastal ocean. In addition, there will be a strong teaching and training
component to this project, with support for graduate and undergraduate students.
The graduate student will be partnered with secondary teachers to gain teaching
experience and enrich the middle school educational programs. Summer
undergraduate interns will be recruited for a summer program from Hampton
University, a historically Black college. There will be public outreach through
participation in existing programs at VIMS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Estuaries
serve as critical hotspots for the processing of carbon (C) as it transits from
land to the coastal ocean. Recent attempts to synthesize what is known about
sources and fates of C in estuaries have noted large data gaps; thus, the role
of estuaries, especially those that are microtidal, as important sources of
carbon dioxide (CO2) to the atmosphere and total organic carbon (TOC) and
dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) to the coastal ocean, or as a C sink in bottom
sediments, remains uncertain. Intensive phytoplankton blooms are becoming
increasingly frequent in many estuaries and are likely to have important and yet
unknown impacts on the C cycle. The trophic status of an estuary will determine
in large part the species of C exported to the atmosphere, bottom sediments, and
coastal ocean. The overarching objective of this project is to identify the
impacts of intense phytoplankton blooms on C speciation, net C fluxes and
exchanges in the Lower York River Estuary (LYRE), a representative mesotrophic,
microtidal mid-Atlantic estuary. Metabolic processes are hypothesized to be
spatially and temporally dynamic, driving the speciation, abundance, and fates
of C in the LYRE. High spatiotemporal resolution sampling in the LYRE will
capture rates of C cycling under both baseline conditions throughout most of the
year, and during periods when the estuary is perturbed by widespread and
intense, but patchy, late summer phytoplankton blooms. The short-term effects of
physical drivers (wind, temperature, salinity, fresh water discharge, nutrient
and organic carbon loads) and biological drivers (metabolic rates, bacterial and
phytoplankton abundances and composition) on C transformations, speciation, and
exchanges will be assessed. Expected longer term variations in the C cycle due
to anthropogenic and natural disturbances will be predicted through use of
modeling. In addition, laboratory manipulations will examine the impacts of
specific organisms dominating intensive phytoplankton blooms on benthic
metabolism, processing of organic C by the microbial community, and C fluxes to
the water column.