* 1737325
* Synthesis of Internal Wave and Turbulence Observations Across the Antarctic Circumpolar Current
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Andreas Thurnherr, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 158,499.00

This project uses a new method to reanalyze and synthesize internal-wave and
turbulence data already collected from different areas of the Antarctic
Circumpolar Current (ACC) region. The research will determine the main patterns
of small scale flow (i.e., internal waves, turbulence and mixing) in the ocean
and how these differ from location to location. These processes are important
because they control the behavior of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current, which in
turn affects global ocean circulation. ACC provides a direct connection between
the Pacific, Atlantic and Indian Oceans and affects the transport of water,
heat, salt, nutrients and other material from the surface to the deep ocean
(global overturning circulation). This reanalysis, based on a new method, will
reveal common flow characteristics and identify differences that are attributed
to the environment itself. The results of such analysis is very valuable in
improving our understanding of ocean circulation in the Southern Ocean and it
will have significant and broad application on our understanding of ocean
circulation and fine scale processes. This study will provide the US
oceanographic community with a tested method and software for deriving
turbulence parameters from observations thus advancing science but also improve
our knowledge on how the oceans operate benefiting
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analysis focuses on a large amount of
oceanographic data, mainly Lowered Acoustic Doppler Current Profiler (LADCP) and
CTD profiles, that have been collected in the ACC region during the last decade
or so in the context of multiple projects. Prior analyses of fine and
microstructure data have been primarily project-specific, and have emphasized
regional dynamical processes. While these analyses reveal some common
observations, including dependence of turbulence on topographic roughness and
near-bottom currents, there are also inconsistencies, regarding the relationship
between internal-wave energy and turbulence levels. In this study, a new, bias-
free fine structure parameterization method will be used to estimate turbulence
dissipation. This new method is based on Vertical Kinetic Energy (VKE) estimates
derived from LADCP/CTD profiles. The project will provide context for some of
the existing process studies that are difficult to compare. The turbulence and
mixing coefficients that will be estimated, as part of this project, are the
first step toward the development of a climatology of turbulence and mixing for
the Southern Ocean. These coefficients, which are expected to be useful in many
different scientific contexts, will be made publicly available. Improvements to
the VKE methodology/software implemented in the context of this project will
become part of the public reference implementation and available for use by
other scientists.