* 1737303
* CCE STEM Standard:  Understanding and Evaluating Ethical Engineering Practice
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Carla Zoltowski, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 08/31/2021
* USD 246,908.00

This project will investigate the variation in ways engineers experience and
understand engineering ethics within research and practice activities in the
health products industry. The project will facilitate the alignment between
ethics education with the needs of engineers in industry practice. The goal of
this research is to explore the variation in ways engineers understand ethics
within real-world practice. The research team will interview practicing
engineers and student engineering interns then analyze and compare their
understanding of ethics with the current strategies for teaching ethics to
engineers and determine the gaps and strengths within the health products
industry. The findings of this project will help educators, engineers, policy
makers and administrators to evaluate current methods for teaching ethics to
engineers and to determine which strategies will best prepare engineers to
respond to ethical issues effectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this 3-year
project, the research team will systematically investigate the range and
complexity of ways that engineers experience ethics in the cultural and
institutional contexts of everyday engineering research and practice in the
health products industry. The team will apply phenomenography, a qualitative
research approach, to explore and categorize the variation in ways engineers
experience and understand engineering ethics within research and practice
activities in the health products industry. The data will be analyzed and
developed into an ?outcome space? describing a comprehensive understanding of
ethical engineering practice. From this, factors that are efficacious in the
formation of ethical engineering practice will be identified. The study will
develop and validate current frameworks in ethics education and to determine
which pedagogical and assessment strategies will cultivate comprehensive levels
of ethical engineering research and practice, particularly within the context of
the health products industry.