* 1737100
* Determining the geographical extent and radiometric age of the Paleocene-Eocene boundary ejecta strewn field
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Morgan Schaller, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 349,976.00

Extraterrestrial impacts have played a substantial role in shaping the evolution
of life on this planet. In 2016, evidence was discovered of an impact event that
coincided with a major climatic event 56 million years ago at the Paleocene-
Eocene (P-E) boundary. Evidence includes characteristic glass spherules and
shocked mineral grains (known as ejecta) that were thrown from the impact site.
The first solid evidence of an extraterrestrial impact at the P-E boundary
raises many questions about the potential location of the source crater, the
extent of the strewn field and exact age of the material. This project will
determine the global geographic extent and the absolute age of the ejecta
through an extensive search of sediments at known localities where the P-E
boundary is complete and by radiometrically dating the material. The P-E climate
event is marked by a rapid increase in atmospheric carbon accompanied by 5-8
degrees C global warming. It is important to understand the conditions
surrounding this event because it is the best geologic analog to our current
anthropogenic carbon release and climate change, and regardless of the
triggering mechanism, gives us a roadmap for what to expect in the future. This
time period also marks the origination of the primate lineage that ultimately
resulted in the evolution of humans. Understanding the circumstances of the
impact event at the P-E boundary will significantly advance our scientific
understanding of the evolution of life and climate over the past 56 million
years. Broader impacts of the project include the support of a postdoctoral
scholar, several undergraduate students and two principal investigators, one of
whom is early career. High school science teachers will also engage in the study
during the summer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research builds on recent findings
of extraterrestrial impact ejecta at the P-E boundary in the Atlantic coastal
plain and in sediments from the Blake Nose section offshore Florida. Ejecta
material was found within the onset of the negative Carbon Isotope Excursion
(CIE) that marks the P-E boundary globally. This study's research approach is
similar to the search for the Cretaceous-Paleogene (K-Pg) boundary impact crater
that eventually led to the discovery of the Chicxulub impact site. The project
aims to provide the first radiometrically dated and potentially global fiducial
marker for the P-E boundary. Anticipated results include: 1) strewn field map
and location of P-E impact region; 2) radiometric age of P-E boundary using
40Ar/39Ar methods; 3) establishment of P-E ejecta as a precise temporal horizon
and correlation tool; and 4) framework for future research (a) to address any
causal linkages between the P-E impact and the P-E climate perturbation and (b)
to assess the precise timing of the P-E biotic and climatic changes and the
globally observed CIE. The climatic and biotic changes that occur at the P-E
boundary are substantial; for instance, the primate lineage that eventually led
to humans arose at this boundary, and deep ocean changes resulted in mass
extinction in benthic marine microfauna. Hence, if an extraterrestrial impact
played a role in this chapter of Earth History, the record and circumstances of
such an event are crucial observations.