* 1737538
* SCC-Planning: ZER0H: Zero Energy Ready Homes
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Rajesh Kavasseri, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2019
* USD 99,122.00

An estimated 1.2 billion people do not have access to electricity due to
economic and environmental barriers that arise in conventional electrification.
This project brings together electrical engineers, architects, community
planners and artists to envision the development of an ensemble of tools and
technologies for low cost, non-toxic, off-grid capable future household energy
delivery systems. The research will integrate concepts from passive home design
to develop a primarily-DC energy delivery system (unlike primarily AC systems,
currently) while integrating photovoltaic (PV) and energy storage systems using
next-generation low-cost, high efficiency, earth-abundant materials. If
successful, the concept can help support the design of cheaper stand- off-grid
residential systems in communities without access to transmission, improve the
survivability of existing off-grid microgrids in the wake of natural or system
disasters, and engage Native American communities from the Dakotas in the
development of technologies and educational materials that deeply resonate with
their inherent conservationist ideals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this planning grant is to formulate a research package integrating passive
house design, next-generation PV materials, and novel power-electronic
interfaces for Zero Energy-Ready Homes suitable for off-grid deployment, with
specific emphasis on the Native American community in North Dakota. The
project's central research concept is in the development of culturally informed,
zero-energy ready systems integrating traditional academic research in
Electrical Engineering with architecture- especially, using passive home design
principles, and landscape architecture with environmental and land-use issues
provided through community engagement with the three tribal institutions. Unlike
primarily AC systems used currently, the project will attempt the development of
a primarily-DC delivery system using next-generation low-cost, high efficiency
PV materials (Cu-Zn-Sn-S), advanced harsh-weather resistant batteries (capable
of low-temperature operation), multi-level DC conversion systems, and the
necessary systems integration-including control and protection elements while
guided by architectural and environmental design constraints. The three-pronged
research plan will involve: 1) energy minimization using passive house design
principles, 2) design of primarily-DC architectures with PV integration and
storage and 3) development of bi-linear state-space models to optimize control
performance. The team will also seek partnerships with leading research
laboratories engaged in the development of new technologies for cost-effective,
grid independent Zero Energy Homes and next-generation PV materials. The
research will engage three tribal institutions in North Dakota and seek the
community?s inputs to understand how cultural factors translate to residential
energy usage and efficiency. The team will work closely with representatives
from these institutions to develop a set of specifications subject to energy
usage and environmental constraints aligned with the community's cultural
values. This will help ensure that techno-centric tools developed in the project
are respectful and inclusive of the community's cultural, environmental and
ethical dimensions.