* 1737533
* SCC-Planning:  Towards Smart and Accessible Transportation Hub - Research Capacity Building and Community Engagement
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Jie Gong, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

This SCC-Planning project will be design a human-centered service system, using
the existing cyber infrastructure of a transportation hub. Users will be
assisted by an "app" for navigating complicated buildings and urban spaces. With
this app, the visually impaired, whose numbers exceed 6 million individuals
today, will find using public transportation services more convenient and
efficient. There are significant hurdles to be overcome to realize this design,
called the Smart and Accessible Transportation Hub (SAT-Hub), which will extend
an individual's mobility, offer greater freedom of movement, and open new
possibilities for daily living and community engagement. In addition, the SAT-
Hub will provide unique, interdisciplinary training opportunities for students,
including under-represented populations in STEM at CUNY City College, CUNY
Borough of Manhattan Community College and Rutgers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
planning for the SAT-Hub will bring together several technical areas: smart
infrastructures and sensing and computing with transportation planning and
accessibility and mobility. The project has three main objectives: (1) design a
smart transportation hub framework for experimenting, debugging, and refining
the smart service, (2) strengthen partnerships with community stakeholders by
exploring the unique needs of their user communities through regular community
engagement, and (3) identify cross-disciplinary, integrative research themes to
enable the successful deployment of a solution. The City University of New York
and Rutgers University will work to meet these objectives with our partners from
local government in NY and in NJ, the regional transit agencies, and the service
institutions for underserved users.