* 1737153
* CAREER: Karrikin and strigolactone signaling mechanisms in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 12/02/2016,01/31/2020
* David Nelson, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 01/31/2020
* USD 535,487.00

DAVID C NELSON&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL IOS-1350561&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Karrikin and
strigolactone signaling mechanisms in Arabidopsis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Karrikins
are a recently discovered class of compounds found in smoke that activate
germination of many plant species after fire. Strigolactones comprise a family
of plant hormones that regulate shoot branching, root architecture, and cambial
growth. Strigolactones also trigger germination of the highly destructive
parasitic weeds, broomrape and witchweed, and promote symbiotic associations
with arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi. Understanding the molecular mechanisms by
which karrikins and strigolactones control plant growth may enable a new wave of
innovation in crop development and weed control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants
recognize both karrikins and strigolactones through a genetic pathway that
requires the F-box protein MAX2. F-box proteins have central roles in several
plant hormone signaling systems, and act by targeting specific protein
substrates for degradation. The targets of MAX2 have long remained elusive and
as such represent a critical roadblock to understanding the mechanism of
karrikin and strigolactone signaling. A genetic screen has now led to the
identification of a candidate target, SUPPRESSOR OF MAX2 1 (SMAX1), which
regulates seed germination and seedling growth. SMAX1 is a member of an
uncharacterized family of eight genes in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana.
In this project genetic and biochemical approaches will be used to determine 1)
how other genes in the SMAX1 family contribute to plant development; 2) the
molecular function and regulation of SMAX1 protein; and 3) the protein
interacting partners of SMAX1 and MAX2. These experiments will reveal how the
SMAX1 family acts in karrikin and strigolactone signaling and whether SMAX1 is a
target of MAX2. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A postdoctoral researcher,graduate
student, and several undergraduates will be trained for careers in science-
related fields. Two projects will be initiated to improve undergraduate
retention in science-related careers and enhance K-12 STEM education. The
discoveries from this project will be disseminated through publications in peer-
reviewed journals and presentations at scientific conferences.