* 1737157
* Institutional Transformation: Enhancing IUPUI STEM Curriculum through the Community-Engaged Learning and Ethical Reflection Framework (I-CELER)
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Brandon Sorge, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 642,000.00

This project will facilitate and research the institutional transformation of
two Indiana University-Purdue University at Indianapolis (IUPUI) departments,
Biomedical Engineering and Earth Sciences. Specifically, it will (i) promote the
Integration of Community-Engaged Learning and Ethical Reflection (I-CELER) in
these STEM curricula, (ii) explore the organizational impact of the project on
institutional change, and (iii) analyze individual changes associated with
students' and educators' ethical development. This project will increase
faculty's ability to integrate philosophical reflection and community engagement
within their departmental curriculum through their participation in Faculty
Learning Community (FLC) meetings designed to explore the I-CELER framework. In
turn, this will improve their undergraduate students' learning outcomes related
to ethical development. Through a research to practice cycle, investigators will
promote, explore, and iterate on techniques for embedding and teaching STEM
ethics in community-engaged environments. This will provide the context in which
undergraduates will design potential solutions, establish empathic relationships
with community members, and simultaneously reflect upon the meanings and values
affecting those relationships through the philosophical lenses of John Dewey's
moral philosophy and an ethic of care. By integrating community-engaged ethical
instruction into departmental curricula and investigating these effects, STEM
ethics education at the investigators' institution will be infused with a new
vitality leading to ethically-literate, civic-minded, and empathic cohorts of
undergraduate students, educators who are confident about integrating ethics and
community-engaged pedagogy in their courses, and transformed departments that
incorporate ethics instruction throughout their curriculum.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a theoretical level, this project will inform a largely
lacking ontological discourse about the ethical development of STEM students and
faculty. Many prominent pedagogies in STEM ethics focus on ethical reasoning or
sensitivity of students, but rarely have scholars investigated how the enactment
of care practices and an authentic engagement with diversity influences the
ethical subjectivities of STEM students and educators. By utilizing the I-CELER
framework, Earth Sciences and Biomedical Engineering faculty will integrate
ethical reflection and community engagement in their courses, thereby
transforming the way disciplinary ethics are taught across the curricula.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be researched using a convergent mixed
methods design and will use multiple surveys, including the DIT2 and the Civic-
Minded Graduate and Professional scales, along with data derived from
ethnographic methods. By situating this design within an educational research
and practice cycle, annual research insights will improve the next year's
intervention, which will inform refined questions and hypotheses. In sum, this
project will create a tested model for transforming the teaching and learning of
STEM ethics.