* 1737230
* BSF: 2016257:  Building Models for Reading Comprehension in Specialized Domains from Scratch
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Vivek Srikumar, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2020
* USD 35,039.00

Machine learning algorithms are increasingly allowing people to search,
structure, and access the textual information created daily in every possible
domain. In areas with abundant annotated data, where supervised learning
algorithms can be applied, algorithms for text understanding have had success in
structuring text and providing natural language interfaces. When building a
system in a new domain for which there is little to no data, however, data
collection and annotation data can be prohibitively expensive. This project
explores a protocol for developing text understanding systems that read text and
provide a natural language interface in a particular domain (such as biology or
history) -- this can allow specialized communities to have digital access to
data that is otherwise locked in text. The project also trains students as part
of an international collaboration -- this award supports travel of the US-based
researchers to collaborate in a project funded by the US-Israel Binational
Science Foundation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project encompasses both data
collection and model training, and considers the interaction between the two. To
replace expert annotations it uses crowdsourcing workers in an iterative
procedure that starts training a structured predictor from almost no data. It
creates an interactive framework in which users ask questions and verify
candidate answers that are later used to retrain the system. It aims to jointly
train over multiple domains, and use domain adaptation methods to transfer
knowledge from one domain to another. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.