* 1737289
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Examination of Long Term Environmental Impact of Grazing
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2018
* Kelly Black, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 7,642.00

Research topics on environmental change and degradation span multiple scholarly
disciplines and speak to varying concerns across different populations and
audiences. Archaeological research plays an important role in conversations on
environmental change as it can investigate human-environmental interactions
across greater time scales and provide important insight on the ways society,
politics, and economy both shape and are shaped by the environment. Looking at
prehistoric and early historic time periods, this project uses an archaeological
approach to investigate how histories of animal husbandry, agricultural
production, and political economy intersected to produce complex environmental
histories. Investigating specific articulations between human activities and
changes in the environmental record at deeper time scales will ultimately
provide a stronger empirical context to guide public and scholarly debate as
well as inform environmental conservation policies.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Under
the direction of Dr. Kathleen Morrison, Co-PI Kelly Wilcox Black will conduct
faunal and dental microwear analysis on animal remains from an archaeological
site located in South India (Kadebakele, Karnataka India). The researcher will
combine faunal and dental microwear datasets with vegetation and remote sensing
data in order to investigate whether and under what circumstances, intensified
forms of land and animal use corresponded with deforestation, overgrazing, and
soil erosion. This case study will specifically examine questions related to
shifts in resource production strategies and their environmental impacts over
the course of the Neolithic, Iron Age, and Early Historic periods in South
India. This particular temporal context is important because it captures a
diverse set of social and economic practices, including the beginnings of animal
domestication in the region, as well as the subsequent emergence of towns and
urban economies. An empirically informed study concerning the relationship
between different modes of political economy, resource production, and changes
in vegetation, soils, and landforms will be specifically relevant to
contemporary environment conservation programs in South Asia. Such programs
depict processes such has pastoralism and animal grazing as inherently
environmentally destructive despite the fact that the long-term impacts of
grazing are poorly understood. The results from this research will provide a
much-needed long-term perspective on the impacts of intensified agricultural
production and livestock grazing and will critically evaluate how the empirical
evidence can be read against the assumptions and ideologies that are built into
existing conservation programs. Although this example is specific to the
environmental concerns and policies existing in South Asia, the analytical
framework provided can be replicated in other regions and provide insight into
present day global environmental concerns. Importantly, this research will use
archaeological evidence not only to help illustrate the complexity underlying
human-environmental interactions over time, but to also reconstruct how
populations in the past perceived episodes of environmental stress and how they
responded to them, offering new and diverse perspectives into how to cope with
and potentially remedy particular forms of environmental degradation.