* 1737035
* SCC-Planning:  Developing a Sensor-driven, Citizen Science Approach to Hazard Detection and Warning in Rural Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Robert Lempert, Rand Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Meghan Houghton
* 08/31/2018
* USD 99,966.00

For many communities, landslides represent catastrophic and difficult-to-predict
hazard. Predicting landslides is a significant challenge, as soil conditions,
localized rainfall, patterns of human development, and many other factors
converge to trigger slides in ways still not well understood by the geoscience
community. Meanwhile, landslide warning and response is fraught with challenges.
Citizens can become desensitized by too many "false alarms", or warnings not
relevant to their locale. Also, different social groups have different levels of
trust in governmental authorities, science, and each other. Risk management thus
requires significantly improved understanding of how to communicate warning to
diverse communities and how to prepare them to respond adequately to this
information. Using Sitka, Alaska as our example, this planning grant will expand
a national network of physical and social scientific collaborators and link them
to our existing science and community connections in Sitka and elsewhere in
Alaska. The planning effort will deepen the team?s shared understanding of the
natural science of hazard prediction and the social science and information
technology of warning and response systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to
improve the necessary shared understanding of landslide prediction, warning, and
response, the physical and social science domains must be coupled and co-evolve
as effective warning systems depend on accurate predictive capabilities. This
project will connect geoscientists, social scientists, and local stakeholders
together to determine the critical research questions around effective, needs-
based hazard prediction, warning, and response. Through this work, we will
accomplish the following goals: (1) prepare to deploy a landslide monitoring
system, (2) plan to leverage data from sensors to improve predictive power for
landslides, (3) create a framework to improve understanding of risk perception
and communication across social networks in remote and diverse communities, and
(4) lay the groundwork for a project that would leverage improved landslide
prediction capacity and increased understanding of risk perception and
communication to implement a warning system. The project will use the following
approaches to accomplish this work: (1) meetings and engagements with local and
national geoscientists, (2) methodological and technological survey of citizen
science and distributed sensors, (3) application of risk perception, social
network, and cultural measurement methods from health research, and (4)
collaborative grant-writing. We expect the following impact for the planning
grant and follow-on work: (1) improved techniques for hazard-related citizen
science; (2) better technical and social approaches to hazard warning systems in
diverse communities; (3) improved understanding of risk perception and community
resilience to natural hazards in rural and remote communities, including those
with Native American populations; (4) improved understanding of landslide hazard
prediction through connecting science with regional and national datasets.