* 1737514
* SCC-Planning:  Smart and Connected Residential Water Quality Community
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2017,12/31/2018
* Vinka Craver, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 12/31/2018
* USD 99,439.00

The objective of this proposal is to plan the development of a large-scale
implementation of water quality sensors at the residential level and to develop
a network of sensors using an Internet-of-Things (IOT) approach. Low sensor
costs and their easy integration with personal devices such as cell phones and
tablets open new opportunities for the development of novel approaches to
measure water quality at the household level and increase consumer confidence.
The proposed IOT network also will allow the community to gather crowdsourced
geo data across towns and districts to locate and ultimately solve the water
quality issues in the water distribution networks.&lt;br/&gt;Five planning
activities are proposed: 1) Collect information about available drinking water
sensors to be deployed at the community level; 2) Evaluate the development of a
smartphone-based Internet-of-Things system for water sensors; 3) Determine water
quality perceptions nationwide; 4) Determine the willingness to adopt the sensor
and network by users in different communities; 5) Engage water utilities,
private well owners and other water innovation organizations with end-users
(residents) to form a smart community that will have a potential to support
crowdsourcing the water quality data. During this planning proposal, our team
will collect data from multiple sources to propose a research strategy and to
select a community for pilot testing. Simultaneously, we will identify
perceptions, attitudes, behaviors and demographic aspects that could affect not
only the willingness to use the sensor but also other barriers for widespread
community adoption. Finally, we will identify facilities, resources and
expertise that will support the successful performance of the future research.
This project connects researchers from engineering, social and behavioral
sciences to solve complex problems affecting our society such as insuring safe
drinking water in times of decaying infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
order to orchestrate the intelligence of sensing and user interaction on
smartphones for water application, it is essential to understand the
requirements of the stakeholders both in the water management team and
residents. Hence, we will take a participatory design approach and interact with
these stakeholders periodically to conduct surveys and acquire their feedback on
their needs. This will also lead us to profile the user's capabilities to use
smartphones and other portable technologies such as water quality sensors. This
will determine the level of willingness of users to adopt the proposed
technology. Accordingly, we will design and develop the app user interfaces
using design-thinking processes that will meet the needs and capabilities of end
users. Additionally, we will determine the best methodologies to propose a full-
scale study in one of the communities selected for this planning stage. The
research team combined expertise will be able to address both social and
technological aspects for the development of a smart and connected community.
Supporting the community engagement efforts, New England Water and Environment
Association will facilitate the communication and activities coordination
between the research group and private well owners as well as water facilities.
Through the two proposed workshops the research team will develop the conceptual
framework for the future full proposal including the needs and concerns of the
community. Additionally, they will be able to identify facilities, resources and
expertise that support the successful performance of the research effort in the
community.