* 1737023
* Collaborative Research: U.S. GEOTRACES Pacific Meridional Transect: Thorium-232, Thorium-231 and Protactinium-231 as tracers of trace element supply and removal
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2022
* Christopher Hayes, University of Southern Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 10/31/2022
* USD 249,803.00

The goal of the international GEOTRACES program is to understand the
distributions of trace chemical elements and their isotopes in the oceans. Many
trace elements are essential for life and their extremely low concentrations in
seawater are thought to limit biological productivity (fertility) throughout
much of the ocean. This limitation, in turn, partially constrains the level of
fisheries that can be supported by marine ecosystems as well as the ocean's
capacity to absorb carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. Whereas the importance of
these trace-element micronutrients is well established, many basic features of
their ocean distribution remain unknown. Measurements of other elements and
isotopes can be used to understand the processes that influence the
distributions of the micronutrient elements. Two naturally-occurring radioactive
isotopes that are particularly important in this regard are thorium-230 and
protactinium-231, which have been designated as key parameters to be measured as
part of GEOTRACES. This project will focus on the measurement of these two
isotopes in order to provide critical information about the processes that
supply iron to the Pacific Ocean, as well as the rates of those processes. The
project will support an early career investigator, a postdoctoral researcher,
and students at the undergraduate and graduate
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Samples of seawater and of suspended
particulate material will be collected along a north-south transect between
Alaska and Tahiti to examine the processes that supply and remove trace
elements. These samples will be analyzed for naturally-occurring radionuclides
thorium-232, thorium-230 and protactinium-231. Aerosol samples and sediments
collected along the transect will be analyzed as well. In collaboration with
other investigators involved in the expedition, this project
will:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Interpret the distributions of thorium-232 and
thorium-230 to quantify the supply of iron and other trace elements delivered by
dust as well as the trace elements supplied by chemical reactions in volcanic
sediments along the Alaskan margin, &lt;br/&gt;2) Determine the sinking flux of
major particulate phases and of particulate trace elements throughout the water
column to quantify their rate of removal from the ocean, and &lt;br/&gt;3)
Compare the rate of trace element removal among contrasting environmental
regimes to be encountered along the Alaska to Tahiti transect to identify the
key physical, chemical and biological factors, such as dust supply and
biological productivity, that regulate the rate of trace element removal from
the ocean.