* 1737453
* SCC-IRG TRACK 2: A Novel Architecture for Secure, Energy-Efficient Community-Edge-Clouds with Application in Harlem (SEEC HARLEM) this proposal
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Bryan Carter, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,054,079.00

This project takes a holistic approach to address the technical, legal, and
social challenges facing under-served urban communities experiencing a growing
digital divide. A novel community-owned edge cloud computing architecture is
investigated that disaggregates the edge equipment for lower cost, improved
energy efficiency, simplified management and intrinsically stronger security.
The project targets a community within Harlem for initial concept exploration.
Indeed, the Harlem community like many diverse urban communities is facing
obstacles that extend beyond broadband access and include the entire home,
office and IoT/smart city technology eco-system. Beyond the edge cloud, the
project will include development of low-cost KVM (Keyboard, Video, and Mouse)
systems that will be used by a diverse set of community members to establish
proof of concept and performance metrics for the edge cloud, and identify system
usability by community especially as it relates to closing the digital
divide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prototype hardware and software will be developed
to study this architecture in both a lab environment, user trials, and in
participatory technology assessments by users in the community. Optimal design
rules will be derived for urban communities based on experimental performance
data and incorporating user constraints and use cases within the Harlem
community. Community ownership will be investigated as a means to overcome
longstanding legal and social challenges. The community edge cloud will be
studied as a constructed commons and governance models will be explored
considering different stakeholder relationships. This project will provide a new
dimension to and understanding of edge clouds and community network ownership
that can be widely applied in smart city environments elsewhere. Disaggregated
devices open up the potential for a new breed of consumer interfaces with
dramatically lower cost and energy use - as well as simple software and hardware
management and security. By virtualizing these technologies within the edge
cloud, potentially transformative benefits can be realized. Such technology
would provide a powerful tool in combating growing digital divides.