* 1737238
* Collaborative Research: A new system for air-sea CO2 flux measurements from moored and unmanned surface platforms
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Scott Miller, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2021
* USD 322,673.00

The oceans play a key role in the global carbon budget, currently absorbing
roughly one quarter of anthropogenic CO2 emissions. The flux of CO2 across the
air-sea interface is represented in models using an exchange coefficient or
"transfer velocity" that is highly uncertain both in magnitude and spatial
distribution, leading to uncertainty in current and future carbon budgets. The
ability to measure air-sea CO2 exchange on short time scales over a broad range
of ocean and atmospheric conditions is necessary to develop more accurate
parameterizations of gas exchange with more realistic representation of physical
processes affecting turbulence at the air-sea interface. This research aims to
develop the capability to directly measure air-sea CO2 fluxes from buoys, with
the potential to dramatically expand the database of direct flux measurements.
If successful, this project will provide new capabilities for ocean time-series
observations and the potential for incorporation into existing and future buoy-
based ocean observing systems. These capabilities can adapt to other low-power,
mobile platforms (spar buoys, catamarans, gliders) that will enable new
observational approaches and insights into processes at a range of spatial and
temporal scales. Future measurements enabled by this project also have the
potential to impact broader policy by providing more accurate information for
agencies and policy makers on how and where oceans take up and release carbon.

This project will build and test the first CO2 flux measurement system that can
be deployed on a buoy platform. The measurement approach utilizes the eddy
covariance technique, which provides a direct flux measurement with high spatial
(1-10 km2) and temporal (10-60 min) resolution. Previously, eddy covariance air-
sea CO2 flux measurements have been restricted to research vessels, resulting in
spatial and temporal limits on the collection of data that can be used to
improve understanding of air-sea gas exchange. This research aims to develop the
capability for robust, high-resolution, low-power, buoy-based CO2 flux
measurements by directly addressing the primary technological obstacles to
development of buoy-based eddy covariance CO2 flux systems: the small magnitude
of the flux (poor signal-to-noise ratio), sensor performance limitations, low
power availability, and harsh sampling conditions. Improvements to the sensor
CO2 performance in collaboration with an instrument manufacturer will provide a
clear pathway to commercialization and use by the broader oceanographic research
community. The survivability and power-optimization challenges will be addressed
by adapting the principle investigator?s experiences with both shipboard and
buoy-based systems. The project will leverage ready access to extensive lab and
field facilities that include ships, buoys, an indoor deep dive tank, and access
to the Gulf of Maine for field work.