* 1737565
* SCC-IRG Track 2: Smart &amp; Connected Kids for Sustainable Energy Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Ram Rajagopal, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 999,951.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Explanations of widespread disengagement with
energy use often rest on the belief that energy behavior is rooted in
individuals' concerns about the environment and/or costs of energy. Missed in
these explanations is the need to understand and address sociological and
psychological factors in energy behavior. This project employs a series of
energy use interventions in the community of Fremont, California, engaging
children, youth and their families in this community. The interventions take
advantage of new smart grid technologies, in particular, high-resolution energy
data now available via smart metering and increasingly smart devices and
appliances. Novel data-driven understandings of energy behavior will permit
segmenting households according to their energy-use lifestyles. A novel
intertwining of revealed lifestyle patterns from high-resolution data, data-
driven tailored feedback, and community-based interventions has the potential to
attract the hearts and minds of households and community members in ways that
economic and environmental concerns cannot. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The community
interventions will be child- and youth-focused and delivered at multiple levels,
with: (1) data-driven visualizations and messages to participants via mobile
applications; (2) an in-depth, multi-session intervention with local Girl Scout
troops that encourages engagement with real-time smart meter energy data,
devices and appliances; (3) a competition among local high schools to encourage
widespread energy engagement and savings; (4) community meetings led by trained
community college students adapted from Deliberative PollingÂ® techniques; (5)
sophisticated analytics of lifestyle and network effects; and (6) optimization
modeling to better understand future load flexibility with behavioral
modifications. Smart meter data on household energy use will be the main outcome
of interest. Randomized experiments and participant surveys will also be used to
gauge the program's effectiveness. We will thus combine the best practices of
big data analytics and visualization from engineering with community-engaged
intervention strategies from the behavioral sciences to enhance our knowledge of
the potential pivotal role of big data, social science theory, and community-
based methods in transforming local energy management and consumption today and
in the future.