* 1737090
* Collaborative Research: Evaluating how abalone populations in the California Current are structured by the interplay of large-scale oceanographic forcing and nearshore variability
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* C. Brock Woodson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 278,985.00

Oceanographic variability is increasingly recognized as a driver of change in
marine ecosystems. Understanding the effects of this oceanographic variability
and its extremes on organisms, populations, ecosystems and the critical services
they deliver is of great scientific interest and pivotal for resource management
and policy. The overarching goal of this project is to determine how small-scale
heterogeneity in habitat quality and site-specific vulnerability to extreme
oceanographic conditions might help identify safe spaces and protect coastal
populations and fisheries from the detrimental effects of increasing frequency,
intensity and durations of extreme oceanographic conditions. This project will
combine detailed nearshore oceanographic studies with ecological experiments and
coupled biophysical modeling to advance understanding of the drivers of local
oceanographic variability and consequent effects on coastal marine animals. The
research will determine how multiple, potentially stressful, environmental
drivers co-vary in the field and how such variation affects the population
dynamics of coastal species. Specifically, this project will provide key
insights regarding how changes in ocean acidification, dissolved oxygen and
temperature will affect green and pink abalone, an ecologically and economically
important resource in the southern California Current. Team members will work
with partner non-governmental organizations, resource agencies, and fishing
cooperative federations to disseminate results and incorporate data and insights
into fisheries management and adaptation initiatives in Baja California, Mexico
and in California, USA. This project will also support the training and
professional development of underrepresented groups at the high school,
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral levels through direct involvement in
research, intensive courses and international
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite large-scale drivers and regional
perturbations, local variability in ocean conditions may be a major driver of
the overall performance and vulnerability of coastal marine species. Research
performed as part of this project will test two specific hypotheses: (1) The
relative influences of upwelling versus tides, as mediated by coastal geometry
and structural complexity associated with rocky reefs and kelp forests act to
create high local variability in physical conditions, at scales of 10s-1000s
meters; and (2) Local variability in oceanographic conditions results in high
local patchiness in the performance of sedentary marine organisms, providing for
safe spaces in the face of escalating heat waves, hypoxia, and acidification,
that have caused recent mass mortalities in multiple species across the
California Current region. Integrated oceanographic-ecological field studies
will be conducted along the coast of Baja California, Mexico, using green and
pink abalone (Haliotis fulgens, H. corrugata) as model species. Complementary
laboratory experiments will evaluate how different exposure regimes (frequency,
intensity and duration of high temperature, and/or low dissolved oxygen and
acidity events) may affect the demography and persistence of abalone populations
under current and future environments. Coupled biophysical and population models
will integrate results from the field and laboratory experiments to understand
how local variability in ocean conditions affects population dynamics over
longer periods. The research will advance the understanding of factors affecting
the resilience coastal species by (1) ascertaining how large-scale oceanographic
phenomena manifest in ocean conditions (dissolved oxygen, acidity, temperature)
at local scales that are most relevant to coastal marine ecosystems and (2)
determining the effects of current, and expected future, ocean conditions and
variability on important marine species.