* 1737318
* Collaborative Research: US GEOTRACES Pacific Meridional Transect: Sources and Sinks of Neodymium Isotopes and Rare Earth Elements
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Chandranath Basak, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2023
* USD 443,776.00

The goal of the international GEOTRACES program is to understand the
distributions of trace chemical elements and their isotopes in the oceans.
Neodymium (Nd) isotopes and rare earth elements (REE) are widely recognized for
their utility as tracers of water transport and as indicators of the sources of
trace elements to the oceans. Neodymium isotopes have been designated as "key
parameters" to be measured on GEOTRACES expeditions. This project would measure
Nd isotopes on a 2018 GEOTRACES expedition in the Pacific Ocean. The North
Pacific is a particularly interesting place to measure Nd isotopes because North
Pacific and North Atlantic deep waters represent the two end-members of deep
ocean composition, and the few data available so far in the North Pacific differ
from expectations based on mixing of known water types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
US GEOTRACES Pacific Meridional Transect (PMT) from Tahiti to Alaska will play
an important role in solving the "mystery" of North Pacific neodymium isotope
ratios. The PMT is designed to extensively sample the oldest waters in the
ocean, along with Alaskan coastal margins, volcanogenic sediments, the
meridional dust gradient originating from volcanic arcs and the Asian and North
American continents, and large gradients in biological productivity. The primary
purpose of this project is to characterize the Nd isotope ratio of seawater
along the transect. In order to address fundamental questions on the Nd and REE
cycle in the Pacific, the investigators will also quantify boundary exchange
effects, atmospheric inputs, provenance of particles, impacts of biological
productivity, and fluxes into and out of seawater, in order to assess Nd and REE
sources and sinks, and to calibrate Nd isotopes as a paleocirculation proxy in
the Pacific. Specific focus areas include: (1) Nd isotopic characterization of
the shallow and deep waters, (2) margin processes associated with the Alaska
volcanic arc shelf, to study chemical exchanges between particulates, sediments,
and seawater Nd isotopes and REE, (3) changing meridional dust sources and its
impacts, (4) relationships between bottom sediment types, compositions,
nepheloid layers, and their influence on the water column, (5) the effects of
pore water flow on the water column; (6) the signal transfer between the deep
water and sedimentary archives (e.g., fossil fish teeth, Fe-Mn oxide coatings).
The project will advance the career of a postdoctoral research scientist, and
support numerous undergraduate students.