* 1737944
* ATD: Algorithms for Anomaly Detection Using Graphical Models
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Elchanan Mossel, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 477,394.00

The increased connectivity of our physical and virtual environments results in
elevated risks from agents who utilize interconnectedness in order to spread and
communicate. The PI will develop a mathematical methodology and algorithms to
detect corrupt agents / elements in interconnected and dynamically changing
environments. Potential applications include the detection of corrupt agents in
governmental and financial networks as well as detection of anomalies in
electrical networks, chemical plants and other physical infrastructure and
detection of election tampering.

The common theme of the project is studying systems whose states are defined by
graphs and where the detection of an anomaly is based on graph properties and
graph algorithms. The PI will study corruption detection on a graph where nodes
represent entities that can examine the status of their neighbors. Which graphs
and which algorithms are efficient at recovering corrupt nodes if such exist? In
a different direction, the PI will utilize Markov Random Fields as models
representing the interaction between individuals with the goal of detecting
anomalies from a dynamic perspective. The PI will further study new notions of
anomalies in voting, where the PI will utilize the mathematical tools from the
theories of noise stability and isoperimetry to define and detect unlikely
voting configurations.