* 1737686
* Broadening Participation in Engineering: Workshop on Reducing Attrition in Precalculus Pathways
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2017,06/30/2018
* Sez Atamturktur Russcher, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 06/30/2018
* USD 49,711.00

There are many pathways to an engineering degree and all of them pass through
calculus. In South Carolina, there is a significant racial and socioeconomic
disparity between engineering students who place below calculus and those who
enter college calculus-ready. Engineering Â­intending students from
underrepresented minority backgrounds are significantly more likely to place
below calculus than their white counterparts. That disparity translates into a
dramatic gap in engineering degree completion rates. Narrowing the gap and
broadening participation in engineering by reducing attrition rates along the
precalculus pathway to an engineering degree requires that secondary schools,
two-year colleges, and four-year colleges work together to identify barriers and
develop coordinated action plans for surmounting those barriers. The project
will bring together 30 action teams of three people from selected secondary and
post-secondary institutions across South Carolina for a two-day workshop. The
project is designed to meet three goals:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Identify common
barriers to success within institutions and between institutions,&lt;br/&gt;2.
Establish cross-institutional collaborations, and&lt;br/&gt;3. Build upon
existing best practices to develop specific action plans for reducing attrition
among precalculus students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to
understanding the specific focal predictors most relevant to precalculus
pathways to engineering degrees for South Carolina students, particularly those
who are first-generation college students and/or from racially underrepresented
or low socioeconomic backgrounds. The data collected from the workshop will help
us understand the barriers to engineering success as perceived by faculty and
administrators in secondary and post-secondary colleges. Action plans developed
during the workshop will establish a range of potential pilot studies for
addressing specific barriers at specific points along the pathways, and will set
the stage for larger-scale interventions to reduce attrition. These action plans
may serve as pilot projects or proof of concept for statewide interventions to
broaden the engineering participation of first-generation college students,
racially underrepresented minorities, and students from lower-income families.
The lessons learned from the project and from subsequent interventions may be
transferable to other systems with similar demographics. Themes that emerge will
increase our understanding of the complex interactions between high school
course selection, choice of higher education institution, and placement and
performance in the first college math course.