* 1737389
* Wave-topography interaction and impact on oceanic kinetic energy distribution
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Cimarron Wortham, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 190,525.00

The impact of variable topography on Rossby waves and mesoscale eddies is a
basic question in geophysical fluid dynamics, and topography can alter the
vertical structure and phase speed of Rossby waves and nonlinear eddies. The
vertical structure of eddies in turn impacts the vertical structure of ocean
eddy kinetic energy (EKE) and hence horizontal stirring. Therefore,
understanding the impact of topography on the propagation (phase speed) and
vertical structure of geostrophic motions is of global significance.
Specifically, eddy phase speed has been shown to modulate eddy fluxes of heat
and salt, so understanding the phase speed and structure of eddies is directly
relevant to the development of improved eddy parameterizations for coarse-
resolution ocean models. Also, satellite altimetry provides accurate, global
measurements of mesoscale EKE at the ocean surface, but no way to extrapolate to
depth. An improved understanding of the vertical structure of oceanic eddies is
necessary to estimate sub-surface EKE from readily available surface
observations. The research will investigate the impact of variable topography
with scales of 10-100km on geostrophically balanced motions, e.g. Rossby waves
and nonlinear mesoscale eddies. The code for computing the Rossby wave modes
with topography will be made publicly available, along with the algorithm for
projecting surface EKE estimates to depth. This project will support an early-
career researcher in his first independent study. The researcher is a Pacific
Science Center Science Communication Fellow, and regularly participates in "Meet
a Scientist" outreach programs. The proposed work will complement this ongoing
outreach efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bottom topography with wavelengths on the
order of 10-100km is nearly ubiquitous in the ocean, appearing on the flanks of
mid-ocean ridges and near seamounts. Previous idealized theoretical and modeling
studies have shown that topography on these scales can impact the vertical
structure and propagation speed of linear Rossby waves and eddies. The impact of
topography in more realistic cases, including nonlinear dynamics in a stratified
ocean with realistic topography, remains to be examined. Further, the dependence
on important parameters, including topographic amplitude, topographic
wavelength, bottom friction, and stratification, has not been fully explored.
Finally, the topographically altered vertical structure of nonlinear eddies may
have an important impact on the turbulent energy cascade and barotropization.
This is an analytical and modeling study to systematically explore these
effects. Specific goals are to (1) determine whether previous linear solutions
with one-dimensional topography carry over to the nonlinear regime with two-
dimensional topography in a quasigeostrophic (QG) numerical model, (2) examine
the vertical structure of eddies in historical current-meter records and an
ocean general circulation model (OGCM) to determine the extent to which
topography has an observable impact on mesoscale eddy vertical structure, and
(3) study the impact of topography on the turbulent energy cascade and energy
dissipation, through its effect on the vertical structure of currents.