* 1738802
* Phase II IUCRC Columbia University: Center for Energy Harvesting Materials and Systems (CEHMS)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2017,12/31/2023
* Irving Herman, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2023
* USD 607,000.00

The Center for Energy Harvesting Materials and Systems (CEHMS) has an
overarching goal to develop integrated solutions for challenging energy
harvesting, efficiency, and storage and distribution problems. The research
effort of the Columbia University Site aims at industry/university cooperative
research to harvest energy through modern structural materials and designs of
civil infrastructure systems. Given the intensive material and energy
requirements in the building and transportation sectors, working toward energy
harvesting through building envelopes and infrastructure surfaces is critical
for sustainable development. The general framework within the Site Center is to
work on materials development, system integration tools, and modeling to
optimize the performance of energy harvesting technologies and devices. Because
most energy is used in civil infrastructure, directly harvesting energy through
the infrastructure will reduce costs of energy storage and transmission, produce
synergistic life cycle benefits to the infrastructure system, and enhance the
national energy security and safety. Columbia's research program is nurtured by
the dynamic enterprise industry and large market of the NYC metropolitan area,
and will offer excellent opportunities for us to recruit and engage
underrepresented students in the research and education activities, providing
interdisciplinary study experience to young scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multidisciplinary research team will perform
research on industry-driven projects with the objective of translating
laboratory prototypes into commercial products; build on interdisciplinary
strengths in science and technology, and; develop strong collaborations with
industry. We will use a holistic approach to design and develop multifunctional
building envelopes and infrastructure surfaces, through which the interactions
and potential synergies between the various material and structural behaviors,
energy harvesting and efficiency performance, and human behaviors are properly
understood, modeled, and exploited, while eliminating or minimizing any
potentially detrimental consequences or interactions. In addition, we will also
develop effective sensing and monitoring systems and accelerated testing methods
for maximized energy harvesting efficiency and life cycle cost performance. As
the first step to make a transformative change for energy harvesting through
civil engineering infrastructure through the following five research thrusts: 1)
Multifunctional advanced materials and structures for energy harvesting and
efficiency; 2) Energy converting devices for solar, geothermal, and mechanics
energy harvesting and storage, such as battery and fuel cells; 3) Roadway energy
harvesting systems with infrastructure protection; 4) Energy efficient buildings
with energy harvesting and wireless sensing; and 5) Life cycle analysis and
testing of energy harvesting materials and systems.