* 1738698
* RII Track-4: Big Data and Massive Computation Approaches to Non-Equilibrium Dynamics of Strongly Correlated Materials
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2017,02/28/2022
* Cheng-Chien Chen, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 02/28/2022
* USD 228,228.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;In some materials, the motion of elections
through the material structure can be highly correlated, such that the electrons
behave as cars move in heavy traffic; they cannot maneuver freely and their
motions are strongly influenced by others. Materials that exhibit electron
correlations also exhibit intriguing properties, such as metal-insulator
transitions and unconventional superconductivity. However, whether electron
correlation is the sole cause of these observed effects has perplexed scientists
for decades. Overcoming this gap in knowledge could open up revolutionary
opportunities for novel transistor and ultrafast device applications. In this
project, the PI will use the supercomputing capabilities at Oak Ridge National
Laboratory to tackle this challenging problem. Advanced simulations will be
performed using tens of thousands of computing processors to model the behavior
of electron correlation systems at the atomic scale. The research will generate
more than 100 terabytes of data, requiring that Big Data techniques be employed
to effectively process and analyze the huge data volume. The project includes
efforts to broaden participation in the next-generation scientific computing
workforce. The research topics address several of the 10 Big Ideas for Future
NSF Investments and the Grand Challenges in Basic Energy Sciences, thereby also
having potential impacts on U.S. science leadership and an energy-sustainable
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The project's focus
is on modeling quantum many-body phenomena driven away from equilibrium, with
the goal of understanding correlated electrons' non-equilibrium behaviors
revealed by time-domain spectroscopies at ultra-short time scales. Matrix
diagonalization over 100 billion basis states will be tackled by matrix-free and
dataflow computing. Equilibrium and non-equilibrium wavefunction-based quantum
impurity solvers also will be developed. Non-linear time series regression will
be further implemented to alleviate the computational cost for time-evolution
calculations. The resulting codes will be employed to simulate ultrafast photon-
based spectroscopies on vanadium dioxide (VO2), using effective single-band
Hubbard model and multi-orbital Hamiltonian from Wannier projection. The role of
structure transition will be addressed by restricted phonon calculations. These
simulations could significantly advance the understanding of non-equilibrium
phenomena and photo-induced phase transitions in VO2 and other strongly
correlated transition-metal oxides. Open-source softwares also will be made
freely available to the public for parallel cloud computing to further benefit
the scientific community for numerical studies of non-equilibrium many-body
problems.