* 1738296
* I-Corps: Multiplex GTPase Activity Assay Kit
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2017,05/31/2018
* Tione Buranda, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center
* Standard Grant
* cindy walkerpeach
* 05/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is in the
development of a technology that measures the function of enzymes, called
GTPases. GTPases are molecular on/off switches that control normal cell function
and many aspects of health and disease. Current technology only measures the
activity of a single GTPase at a time and is labor intensive. High costs further
hinder routine laboratory or clinical analyses. A new technology for rapid and
sensitive measurements of multiple GTPases in cells or tissues can revolutionize
diagnostics and patient response to therapy. Potential commercial clients for
the technology include clinical laboratories, pharmaceutical companies, and
diagnostic kit manufacturers. Clients will be able to distinguish life-
threatening conditions that require different treatments or determine drug
treatment efficacy within hours instead of days. A 4- to 10-fold lower cost of
sample analysis is an added potential benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project will explore the commercialize potential of a new technology and make it
broadly available for scientific discovery and clinical applications. The
project further develops a technology that measures changes in cell or tissue
GTPase enzyme function. Individual GTPases turn on and off in response to
external cues that include microbes, disease, drugs and toxins. Coated beads
capture active GTPases present in cells or body fluids. A common clinical
laboratory instrument, called a flow cytometer, measures captured proteins on
the beads. The technology enables drug discovery, diagnostics, and molecular
discovery. A numerical readout makes it easy to monitor changes in GTPase
activities due to experimental treatments over time and in small samples. Rapid
screening of medications that can block disease processes speeds drug discovery.
Bringing these innovative capabilities to the commercial market will
significantly improve discovery output in academia and industry.