* 1738312
* SBIR Phase II:  Further development of the HAOPs water treatment process for membrane pretreatment and phosphorus recovery from wastewater
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2017,03/31/2020
* Alexander Vetrovs, MicroHAOPs, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 03/31/2020
* USD 670,962.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project results from the advancement of a novel water
treatment process that reduces membrane fouling and significantly lowers water
treatment costs. Membrane filtration is one of the primary water treatment
technologies to address the global challenge of water scarcity. However, the
membrane industry suffers from low productivity and high operational cost caused
by fouling. Over 95% of the water treatment plants in US that employ membrane
filtration currently operate at only 30-50% of their design capacity. Our
revolutionary pretreatment technology not only mitigates fouling, but also
increases system productivity by up to 400% and decreases the required membrane
cleaning frequency by a factor of 50, thereby saving water, money and energy.
The process can reduce both the capital expense and annual operational cost of
water treatment plants by roughly 25%. Our innovation is also applicable to
saline water, so it can be used as a pretreatment for desalination, and it can
address another major environmental challenge by removing phosphorus from
wastewater and thereby reducing the prevalence of blooms of toxic
algae.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project will continue our scale-
up and commercialization activities for our pretreatment technology to improve
the performance of membranes in water treatment processes with respect to
contaminant removal, process productivity, and energy efficiency, compared to
existing technologies. The process relies on application of a proprietary
particle in a novel reactor and has been demonstrated in our Phase I work. The
objectives of the Phase II work are (1) scale-up and construction of larger
treatment modules using commercially suitable materials and fabrication
processes; (2) testing under more aggressive operational conditions; (3)
improving particle production, delivery, and disposal processes; and (4)
evaluating the particles' suitability as an economic approach to remove and
recover phosphorus from wastewater. The economic analysis will also be updated
using data collected in Phase II study. The effort will advance the technical
readiness level (TRL) of our process to TRL6, while providing essential data for
further development and credibility for marketing. On completion of Phase II, we
expect to be prepared for deployment in small-scale commercial systems treating
one million gallons per day, and for testing in larger systems.