* 1738448
* SBIR Phase II:  Immediate Delivery of Massive Aerial Imagery to Farmers and Crop Consultants
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Amy Gooch, ViSUS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 08/31/2022
* USD 756,107.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will accelerate
the adoption of data intensive precision agriculture, increasing yields while
decreasing farm inputs such as fertilizers and pesticides. This project removes
the software bottleneck (time and labor) in processing large aerial surveys
taken by Unmanned Aerial Systems, enabling a cost-effective and timely process
to deliver actionable information to farmers. Using frequent high-quality aerial
scans, farmers may optimize the use of fertilizers and more finely control the
amount of pesticides and herbicides necessary to increase crop yield.
Furthermore, farmers mitigate costs and losses by being able to spot problem
areas, minimize the spread of plant diseases, and identify issues such as
standing water, irrigation malfunctions, and persistent automated machinery
errors in planting or cultivation. This project provides special benefit for
rural customers having inadequate internet infrastructure by eliminating the
need to upload massive imagery to the cloud for processing. The technology is
part of a broad initiative in agriculture addressing the need for large
increases in food production by 2050 in response to the projected growth of the
world?s population to over 9 Billion people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will continue development of algorithms for on-the-fly orthorectification,
stitching, and normalization of aerial image mosaics and their deployment in an
easy-to-use software prototype. The Phase I already demonstrated industry-
leading speeds for such image processing. The technology behind this research
project is designed from the ground up to process massive data with less memory
and increased speed relative to other approaches, enabled by a proprietary
streaming image representation, that allows multichannel gigapixel and terapixel
images to be treated as ordinary images. This Phase II supports new extensions
to the software that simplify and accelerate delivering a stitched and analyzed
map, such as prioritizing computation in regions of the image that a customer is
exploring. This would effectively eliminate the delay between image acquisition
on unmanned aerial vehicles and when it can be used. Crop consultants have
identified this as a transformative capability, as it enables ground-truthing
information derived from aerial imagery in the same field visit, saving time and
labor. The performance gains in compute-limited environments supported by this
project are a key link between new capabilities to gather information and a
farmer?s ability to utilize it to increase productivity while reducing costs.