* 1738696
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Intergenerational Transmission of Status in New Immigrant Families
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Shamus Khan, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 05/31/2019
* USD 12,000.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Intergenerational Transmission Through
Undocumented Status PI: Shamus Khan, PhD; Co-PI: Nicol Valdez NSF Abstract

This project is a study of U.S.-born, citizen youth to better understand the
intergenerational transfer of citizenship status. The project compares the
experience of youth from undocumented and documented immigrant families. The
legal-illegal dichotomy ingrained in U.S. immigration policies is conceptually
limiting for understanding the diversity of citizenship experiences for the
children of immigrants. A more nuanced analysis is now required to further
uncover the generational effects of parental undocumented status on their U.S.
born children with citizenship. This type of research offers new ways of
understanding the intergenerational transmission of parents' social background
to their children and develops insight into how local context can mediate and
shape the lived experiences of immigrant origin youth. This research holds the
potential to help policy makers, educators, and the wider public understand the
social implications of undocumented status for future generations.

This comparative qualitative study will interrogate intra-group differences
related to the legal status of Mexican-American families residing in New York
City. The hypothesis guiding this research is that parents? undocumented status
creates a social context that is inheritable or passed on to subsequent
generations. Interviews with both undocumented and documented families coupled
with ethnographic observations of a subset of these families will provide new
insights into the strategies undocumented families employ in their daily lives.
This study takes a multi-level ecological approach by gathering observations
across both the individual and contextual level. On the individual level, the
study will provide a descriptive portrait of the everyday lives of undocumented
and documented Mexican-American parents as they raise their families. On a
contextual level, this study will detail the highly variable experiences of
undocumented parents and their children resulting from factors such as
neighborhoods, schools, and social networks. Given that the undocumented
experience is often shaped by the local factors, New York's policies on
immigrant families can offer insight into how states can help ameliorate the
negative impact of an undocumented parent. More broadly, the stakes are high for
creating a more empowered and educated immigrant origin youth population, whose
future achievements do matter in aiding the competitive advantage of our nation.