* 1738062
* RIDIR: Collaborative Research: cyberSW: A Data Synthesis and Knowledge Discovery System for Long-term Interdisciplinary Research on Southwest Social Change
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Jeffery Clark, Archaeology Southwest
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 07/31/2021
* USD 367,389.00

Abstract

This project will create cyberSW, an integrated knowledge discovery system that
will significantly enhance interdisciplinary research on long-term social change
at decadal to centennial scales. The project will result in the data integration
of millions of objects from tens of thousands of Prehispanic settlements across
the U.S. Southwest, making it one of the largest digital archaeological
repositories in the world. A major challenge in using archaeological data is
that most relevant information is not digitally curated or synthesized beyond
individual projects. A number of recent synthesis projects in the U.S. Southwest
show the great potential of these data for addressing big questions in the
social sciences such as: What promotes the success or failure of some societies?
How does migration transform social identities and create new social structures?
And, what are the relationships between environmental challenges and social
changes? We will build on these prior projects to produce an integrated system
that will allow users at different levels of expertise to readily view, analyze,
and export data on past societies in the Southwest to address these and many
other questions relevant to contemporary society.

Due to preservation and intensity of investigations, the U.S. Southwest has an
unparalleled high quality archaeological record of human occupation and social
change. Archaeological data are geospatially- and temporally-referenced and
include variables such as population scale and movement, social diversity and
inequality, technological innovations and diffusion, and climate. Through the
creation of cyberSW the proposed project will realize the cumulative research
potential of these data by (1) merging several existing synthetic databases into
one scalable, networked digital repository; (2) collecting additional data to
fill in spatial, temporal, and material culture gaps; (3) analyzing those data
and creating user-friendly online tools for data analysis and visualization; and
(4) establishing a web portal for data visualization, analysis, and sharing that
is available to both professional researchers and the general public. Making
these data usable to researchers and to the public ensures that the findings of
archaeological research are accessible, interpretable, and replicable. The
online analytical tools will allow a wide range of individuals to conduct their
own analyses, whether tribal members interested in their history, land managers
responsible for public interpretation, students learning data manipulation and
display, or social scientists grappling with the long-term questions about the
human past. A Citizen Science component for registered volunteers will allow a
bigger community to participate in transformative science.