* 1738687
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Social Re-Discovery of Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Phil Brown, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 11/30/2018
* USD 1,565.00

This project will analyze the social discovery of per- and polyfluoroalkyl
substances (PFASs). In production since the 1950s, this group of chemicals are
used in consumer products, industrial surfactants, and fire-fighting foam.
Despite decades of use, the potential toxicity and scope of contamination of
PFASs were not known to the U.S. public, military, or regulatory agencies until
the early 2000s. This project will examine the discovery and re-discovery of
PFASs by individuals, stakeholder groups, litigants, and scientists over six
decades of mass production. Inherent in any discovery are questions about prior
ignorance; this project traces the ways in which regulatory frameworks produced
scientific ignorance pertaining to the effects of PFASs on humans and the
environment. Therefore, in addition to identifying the production of scientific
knowledge regarding the risks of PFASs, this project traces the ways in which
current regulatory frameworks produce scientific ignorance pertaining to
environmental exposures and human toxicity of PFASs. Sociological investigation
of this kind will find similarities and differences in social discovery
processes and track stakeholder behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
questions why scientific discovery about the effects of PFAFs that began in the
1960s did not take shape until the late 2000s, despite the decades-long
discovery of contamination in workers, wildlife, and eventually the blood of the
entire global population. This project will use participant observation, in-
depth interviews, and archival document analysis to account for this unexpected
and uneven discovery process. The methodology includes seven months of
participant observation at multiple sites to learn how scientists, industry,
regulators, and contaminated communities respond to PFASs. Semi-structured
interviews will be conducted. The intent will be to examine how scientific
research, corporate action, and lay activism began, and how stakeholders produce
and translate scientific data into informed regulatory decisions. Recent
research emphasizes that isolating a single cause of a latent health outcome
reflects a scientific and regulatory logic that fails to comprehend the novelty
of chemical exposure. Dominant regulatory data collection norms, risk management
frameworks, and legal paths of recourse do not align with the non-linear
pathways, intergenerational timelines, and often latent forms of harm that arise
from chronic chemical exposure. Sociology is uniquely positioned to identify
such incongruent logics, and thus can assist in pulling apart values,
assumptions, and incentives to clarify and re-imagine more adaptive
organizational forms. This project will contribute to the growing number of
social science studies on chemical policy, facilitating future comparison across
social science studies of chemicals and chemical classes.