* 1738606
* Collaborative Research: Hybrid Professional Development to Enhance Teachers' Use of Bootstrap
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* K Ann Renninger, Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2022
* USD 97,025.00

Integrating computing and mathematics appeals to various stakeholders for a
variety of reasons. For the mathematics education community, computing offers an
application of mathematics concepts that may strengthen teachers' and students'
mathematical understanding; for the computer science (CS) education community,
integration enables equitable access to computing education for all students;
for state boards and districts, integration accommodates staffing and curricular
constraints while targeting core learning objectives in multiple disciplines.
Bootstrap is a nationally-deployed curriculum that integrates computer science
and algebra. Bootstrap's current professional development (PD) program for math
teachers is a 3-day in-person event which assumes that teachers are somewhat
facile with algebraic functions. Both Bootstrap and the National Council for
Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) have observed that some teachers have a weak
command of functions. School districts would prefer a shorter in-person PD to
reduce staffing costs and increase flexibility. This project will use a hybrid
PD model to address both needs. Simultaneously, the project will research ways
to tailor the online content to be effective for teachers who differ in their
understanding of functions, goals for pursuing PD, and interest in mathematics,
computing, math/CS integration, and student thinking. This Researcher-
Practitioner Partnership team includes Bootstrap; NCTM (specifically its Math
Forum team, which has expertise in on-line training); Brown University;
Swarthmore College; the Oklahoma State Division of Secondary Mathematics and
Computing Education and school districts in Texas. A total of 270 middle-school
math teachers---a majority from rural areas or serving Native American or
Hispanic students in our partnering regions---will participate in Bootstrap PD
under this project. Assuming typical adoption rates, these teachers should reach
6,000 students within the project period alone. Building Bootstrap content into
the Math Forum will expose thousands of NCTM's teachers to the potential of
integrated math/CS curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The team will use design-
based research to develop and deploy a hybrid PD model and online support
community for Bootstrap teachers, augment Bootstrap PD to reinforce teachers'
understanding of algebraic functions, and conduct quasi-experimental studies to
inform the design of different pathways through the PD. This project will study
how to develop teachers' understanding of CS while also strengthening their math
proficiency. In particular, the project will explore the possibilities for CS to
improve teachers' understanding of algebraic functions. The project also will
study ways in which teachers' interest can be made visible and useful in
improving engagement and learning in integrated CS and mathematics PD. The
results should apply to integrative programs beyond Bootstrap, suggesting
strategies to tailor PD to serve more teachers.