* 1738058
* EAGER: A New Communication Measure for Distributed Computations
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Balasubramania Kalyanasundaram, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2021
* USD 224,986.00

Distributed computations will play a huge role in the future of computer systems
that range from a general purpose machine to a special purpose sensor network.
Wild-life, infrastructure and environment monitoring as well as other smart-city
projects will benefit from advances in such computational models. As a result
any fundamental advances in these new models will have significant broader
impacts. The investigator plans to involve students ranging from graduate school
to local high schools such as Thomas Jefferson High School for Science and
Technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A distributed computation is typically viewed
as a collection of local decisions to solve a problem. Unlike a single processor
system where all the information necessary to compute the target function is
available to the processor, in a distributed computation, each component of the
system has limited knowledge/information. In addition, the flow of information
from one component to another may be restricted by the system's inter-component
communication capacities. In light of the limitations of each component's
communication capacity, two natural questions arise: How should information flow
among the components in order to compute the function efficiently, and How much
information, in terms of bits, must be transmitted to each component at minimum.
Communication complexity has proved to be very useful in obtaining bounds on the
complexity of various problems ranging from circuit complexity to streaming
algorithms. This project considers a variety of communication models to capture
the essence of necessary data convergence to compute a function. A new measure
of communication complexity is pursued and this measure captures an important
component of what it means to be a distributive computation.