* 1738450
* SBIR Phase II:  Commercialization of Synthetic Metabolic Valves
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Michael Lynch, DMC Limited
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 02/28/2022
* USD 1,339,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project, if successful, will be to demonstrate the
potential of the technology to dramatically reduce the cost and risk currently
associated with production of bio-based products, enabling ultra-low cost
product development. The field of metabolic engineering historically has been
limited in predicting the behavior of complex biological systems in vivo from
simplified models and basic in vitro biochemical principles. In many cases, it
has proven much more difficult than expected to integrate a well characterized
production pathway into a living host and balance the complex requirements of
both biomass growth and production. The technology under development is a first
of its kind, truly scalable, high-throughput metabolic engineering platform
enabling the rapid development of microbial production strains. This significant
reduction in development cost enables the possibility to produce numerous
specialty products that would otherwise not have acceptable internal return on
development capital. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project will
develop a high throughput metabolic engineering platform that enables the rapid
development of microbial production strains. The platform, which bridges a gap
between current in vivo and in vitro bio-production approaches, relies on the
dynamic minimization of the active metabolic network in the context of a
standardized two-stage bioprocess. Metabolic networks are highly interconnected
wherein each metabolite and/or enzyme can interact with endless others. This
combinatorial complexity results in a huge potential design space, which is
intractable to the kinds of systematic experimentation required for the
development of standardized design principles. The global challenges in
addressing such a large biological design space have persisted, despite the
dramatic advances in, and decreased costs of, reading and writing DNA, high-
throughput DNA assembly, and microbial strain construction approaches. Dynamic
metabolic network minimization not only results in a design space with greatly
reduced complexity, but also provides strains that are robust to environmental
conditions. Robustness leads to predictable scalability from high-throughput
small-scale screens or "microfermentations" to fully instrumented bioreactors.
This project will extend the validation of predictable strain performance from
high-throughput microfermentation to pilot scale fermentation.