* 1738285
* CAREER: Structured Nonlinear Estimation via Message Passing: Theory and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/05/2016,02/28/2019
* Alyson Fletcher, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 02/28/2019
* USD 364,646.00

A fundamental challenge in engineering and science today is that systems contain
tremendous numbers of interconnected components with complex interactions.
Examples include communication and sensor networks, high-dimensional medical
images, or biological systems such as vast sets of interconnected spiking
neurons responding to a large array of stimuli. Graphical models provide a
probabilistic framework for modeling such systems, and contemporary message-
passing algorithms lead to computationally feasible operations by decomposing
problems on larger systems into smaller ones. This research develops a broader
methodology and new algorithms to address larger classes of more complex
nonlinear interconnected systems with potential for great technological impact.
For wider dissemination, this is coupled with educational initiatives including
developing courses combining perspectives in signal processing, machine
learning, and statistics in the context of modern applications. An open-source
code base will foster cross-disciplinary research in students, educators, and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research combines the power of high-
dimensional graphical models with recent advances in random systems theory to
tackle a much wider scope of problems than traditional message-passing or linear
methods allow. The investigator addresses the key gaps in scalable estimation
and model inference for structured nonlinear systems and develops powerful
general algorithms for solving core problems. Four main objectives address
aspects of this broader goal: (i) systematic general methods for representing
systems characterized by arbitrary interconnections of linear and nonlinear
components; (ii) computationally scalable message-passing algorithms for
estimation; (iii) rigorous quantification of high-dimensional performance; and
(iv) validation of the methods on real data, including neurological system
identification. These research thrusts greatly expand the scope of statistical
estimation techniques and provide a rigorous approach to large-scale signal
processing problems underlying the big data technology of today.