* 1738308
* STTR Phase II:  Enzymatic Synthesis of Chiral Cyclopropanes for Pharmaceutical Drug Synthesis  and Agricultural Crop Protection Applications
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Frances Arnold, Provivi Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2019
* USD 568,086.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to establish a broadly applicable, breakthrough
biocatalytic technology to produce an important class of compounds called chiral
cyclopropanes. Cyclopropanes are key intermediates that are used in the
synthesis of drugs, crop protection agents, and high-value electronic chemicals.
Products accessible using this technology have markets totaling more than $10
billion annually. If successful, the technology under development will create
safer, cleaner, more sustainable routes to important chemical products that will
lower cost by reducing the number of production steps, lowering the required
capital investment, significantly decreasing waste. Replacing existing chemical
routes with the more efficient and sustainable enzyme-catalyzed steps will also
improve the purity of many advanced pharmaceutical intermediates used in the
manufacture of drugs and crop protection chemicals.

This STTR Phase I project proposes to build on the results from Phase 1 in which
a highly efficient biocatalytic process for the manufacture of the drug
ticagrelor was developed using a novel, engineered enzyme. We will create an
expanded set of cyclopropanation biocatalysts with the capability to act on a
wider range of starting materials, thereby broadening the scope and utility of
this new enzymatic reaction. We will complete the development and
commercialization of the process for production of the key intermediate for
ticagrelor and initiate work to develop novel biocatalysts to produce ley
intermediates for anti-viral drugs. We will also develop and commercialize a set
of enzymes that can be used by drug discovery chemists to establish efficient
routes for next-generation drugs.