* 1738453
* SBIR Phase II:  Spiral Polynomial Division Multiplexing
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2017,02/28/2021
* Jerrold Prothero, Astrapi Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/28/2021
* USD 987,173.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is that it addresses the
bandwidth crisis, the problem of transmitting an exponentially growing amount of
data through a fixed amount of increasingly congested spectrum. The bandwidth
crisis limits economic growth by constraining communication, and also poses very
serious challenges for national defense and disaster response. Making better use
of limited spectrum is therefore of high societal and commercial importance.
This project will study a new approach, called spiral modulation, for achieving
much more spectrally efficient communication than previously thought possible
and thereby directly addressing the bandwidth crisis. Commercially, this could
facilitate much more rapid data transfer, enhancing existing business
applications and enabling new ones. Spiral modulation is applicable to any form
of electromagnetic communication, whether wireless or wire-based. It could lead
to commercialization across a wide range of communication sectors including but
not limited to wireless, mobile internet, unmanned vehicles, automotive,
aviation, and Internet of Things. It is a dual use technology with both civilian
and defense applications. Ultimately, spiral modulation could become the core
technology for the worldwide telecommunications
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project applies new mathematics to the problem of encoding information
into waveforms for telecommunication. In current digital communication,
information is transmitted using symbol waveforms constructed from sinusoids
which have constant amplitude over each symbol period. This approach is known to
produce a sharp upper bound on the highest spectral efficiency that can be
achieved. By instead constructing symbol waveforms from sinusoidal waveforms
with continuously-varying amplitude, spiral modulation bypasses the theoretical
limitation on spectral efficiency. Building on prior Phase I research, this
project will build an end-to-end hardware prototype to establish the
implementation path and performance characteristics of spiral modulation. The
research will progress in stages from waveform design and spectral efficiency
measurement experiments, through end-to-end radio design in software, the
hardware prototype development and documentation of best practices. It is
anticipated that this research will show significant spectral efficiency
advantages over existing signal modulation techniques. Other possible advantages
for spiral modulation may also appear, such as greater tolerance for
interference and phase distortion.