* 1738154
* Research Initiation:  Why do students decide to get involved in co-curricular engineering projects?
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2017,10/31/2020
* Graham Doig, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 10/31/2020
* USD 188,055.00

Co-curricular team projects in engineering - such as design projects,
experimental assignments, or national project-based competitions or challenges -
can be key experiences for students in forming personal and professional skills
and traits. They may also play a strong role in retention and degree completion
among underrepresented student groups (for instance women, minorities, those
with disabilities). While the benefits of participation are relatively well
established, the reasons why students choose to participate or not in the first
place are very poorly understood, as they may span a wide spectrum and may not
involve fully informed or rational foundations for decision-making. Failure to
understand student choices limits our ability to address barriers to
participation, and to structure campus programs and their funding to achieve
outcomes that include improved diversity and a higher quality of technical and
interpersonal learning in project teams. This research involves generating
significant new insight into why students choose to participate in co-curricular
engineering projects, through use of a mixture of surveys and more detailed
interviews with students in different types of universities. The research is
designed to yield insight into whether influential decision-making factors and
attitudes are consistent across demographic groups or if there are unique
gender, ethnicity, social, or socio-economic -related responses that may in turn
influence the makeup of co-curricular student project teams. The results will
improve the understanding of student motivations and perceptions, including to
what extent students consciously evaluate potential trade-offs and consequences
of making one choice over another. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The survey of students,
complemented by interviews for richer depth, uses a Q-Methodology and
phenomenological interpretation of student motivations and perceptions when
choosing to join (or leave) such projects. The research applies well-established
social science approaches to investigate a highly under-studied area in
engineering formation. Recent survey tools - developed with NSF funding -
designed to explore student co- and extra-curricular engagement are being
adopted for the Q Methodology. The Theory of Planned Behavior is being applied
to analyze and contextualize the student responses and link them to key
underlying attitudes, factors, and processes that influence student
participation in co-curricular engineering projects. It is anticipated that
predictions of future student involvement can be made based on characteristic
responses that will emerge. Students who chose to participate, students who
participated and left, and students who never decided to participate in co-
curricular projects will be sampled. The project brings together a team with
extensive experience in the co-curricular engineering project arena, including
engagement on issues of underrepresentation, self-efficacy, and professional
formation. Both undergraduate and graduate students, including those from
engineering and teaching, are receiving valuable research training in
engineering education as part of this research. It is anticipated that the
outcomes could help guide campus culture, structure, and funding decisions to
enhance the number and diversity of students gaining valuable co-curricular
project experience before entering the STEM workforce.