* 1738332
* SBIR Phase II:  A secure educational interactive software platform for improving high school student achievement
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Alan Marnett, BenchFly Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2021
* USD 975,784.00

This SBIR Phase II project is focused on the challenge of significantly
improving student achievement in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math
(STEM) concepts through the development of an innovative video software platform
that leverages the benefits of video-based active learning in the educational
environment. STEM fields are widely regarded as vital to a nation's economy, but
a disconnect exists between the STEM knowledge and skills that students acquire
in schools and those that they need to succeed in an increasingly global,
technology-dependent workplace. Phase II research will enable development and
testing of a video and peer review tool that will merge the core inquiry steps
of successful scientists with state-of-the-art video proprietary technology, and
allow collaboration between students and teachers located anywhere in the
country. Commercialization of this technology will provide school districts with
a needed educational tool to help teachers direct and assess STEM activities,
and support students as they learn critical thinking skills and master STEM
concepts, a mastery fundamental to successful careers in science and
engineering. Encouraging the growth of students' STEM competency through this
technology will encourage the growth of scientific innovations of the future,
supporting domestic jobs and a strong financial tax foundation for our country's
economic prosperity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical innovation in this SBIR
project is an educational video software platform designed as a framework for
STEM critical science inquiry, incorporating proprietary source code, student
peer review, teacher assessment, analytics, a searchable database, and secure
class-to-class video sharing. Each project requires that students work within a
framework mirroring the best practices of professional scientists: Students
organize concepts in terms of hypotheses, evidence, and analysis, and
communicate their evidence-based projects to be peer reviewed. The secure video
software platform is designed to be used within high schools and integrated into
teachers' existing Learning Management Systems (LMS) to assess student progress.
The goals and scope of the research are to develop the interactive video player
source code that supports the educational framework and then demonstrate the
results of this platform on student achievement utilizing a standardized
achievement test. These goals will be accomplished through several tasks focused
on software development to incorporate secure account creation, peer-review
interactivity, and LMS integration, followed by demonstration of class-to-class
connectivity of the platform. A pilot study will assess the software platform?s
functionality and validate its potential to significantly increase high school
student critical thinking and scientific inquiry measures on a standardized
test.