* 1738378
* Meeting:   Inside the black box: the mitochondrial basis of life-history variation and animal performance: January 3-7, 2018: San Francisco, CA
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Wendy Hood, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2018
* USD 14,774.00

Mitochondria play a critical role in determining animal performance.
Mitochondria produce cellular energy molecules that fuel nearly all organismal
processes, but also are responsible for the production of reactive oxygen
species - and in turn oxidative stress - an important contributor to senescence.
As a result, variation in mitochondrial properties between individuals can
predict differences in growth, reproduction, and rate of aging. While
integrative measures of mitochondrial function are beginning to provide new
insight, the theory and methods associated with these approaches are not
widespread in the research community. To address this need, a symposium will be
held at the national meeting of the Society for Integrative and Comparative
Biology, Jan 3-7, 2018 in San Francisco, CA. The symposium is designed to aid
networking among investigators and expand the appreciation of the ecological and
evolutionary effects of mitochondrial function to a wider community. The
symposium will include a wide diversity of scientists, including students and
postdoctoral fellows. The invited speakers will be made up of an equal number of
men and women ranging from the level of post-doc, through to assistant,
associate, and full professors. Complementary oral and poster sessions will
enable graduate and undergraduate students to participate in the symposium. All
presenters in the main symposium and companion sessions will submit an article
associated with their talk that will be published in a special issue of
Integrative and Comparative Biology. Through this publication, the ideas
presented in the main symposium will be disseminated to a larger audience and
cumulatively provide a basis for future studies of mitochondrial function and
life history variation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mitochondria play a critical role
in determining organismal performance through their production of ATP. But, they
also generate reactive oxygen species - and in turn oxidative stress - an
important contributor to senescence. As a result, variation in mitochondrial
properties between individuals can predict differences in organismal
maintenance, growth, and reproduction. Researchers have begun bringing
measurements of mitochondrial function common to biomedical research to
ecological and evolutionary studies. In addition, researchers have begun to
evaluate the genetic basis and in turn heredity of mitochondrial performance via
the intricate interactions between mitochondria and nuclear genes coding for the
mitochondrial proteins. The integration of these measures with oxidative stress,
metabolic rate, and other variables related to energetic capacity and efficiency
have begun to shed new light on the processes that contribute to organismal
performance. Thus, it is an opportune moment to bring investigators together in
an organized symposium, to present their research and assess the way forward in
this research. The symposium will introduce new investigators to this field,
provide a forum for networking, and promote expansion of expertise in the
ecological and evolutionary effects of mitochondrial function.