* 1738825
* CONECTAR: Collaborative Network of Educators for Computational Thinking for All Research
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Thomas Turner, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Fay Cobb Payton
* 08/31/2020
* USD 315,556.00

The University of California Irvine (UCI) is partnering with the Orange County
Department of Education (OCDE) and Santa Ana Unified School District (SAUSD) to
form a collaborative network of university and K-12 researchers and
practitioners with the aim of promoting computational thinking for students in
grades three through five. The intention is to build connections to a broader
curriculum as reflected in the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) and the
Common Core State Standards (CCSS), to the language and discourse needed to
ensure academic success, and to the learners' peers, community, families and
culture needed to make learning relational and meaningful. The work will be
situated in Santa Ana schools, where the majority of students are low-income,
Hispanic, English language learners. It will use the principles of Design-Based
Implementation Research (DBIR), designing interventions to implement, study and
refine, alongside OCDE and SAUSD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the first academic
year, the team will visit partner elementary schools to gather information about
current teaching of computational thinking, conduct a district-wide survey of
elementary school teachers, and gather examples of instructional materials
developed nationally to determine those that could be adapted locally. During
the first summer, researchers will work with a team of teachers to develop pilot
materials and instructional units for the 3rd, 4th, and 5th grade levels. These
materials--scaffolded for non-native English speakers--will integrate
computational thinking with NGSS and CCSS. During the second year, teachers will
implement the instructional materials in their classrooms with support from UCI
and OCDE. Data will be gathered to study the implementation process, the
challenges faced and how they are addressed, the extent to which the materials
engage the learners on the emotional, behavioral, and cognitive levels, and the
suitability of the materials for promoting computational thinking among the
targeted learners. During the second summer, the team will further refine
materials for broader implementation in Orange County.