* 1738283
* I-Corps: Mobile Augmented Reality
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Roman Lubynsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* cindy walkerpeach
* 09/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is catalyzing
the shift from mobile to spatial computing through enabling Augmented Reality
(AR) technology. AR has a broad impact across many use cases such as
instruction, visualization, and entertainment. AR offers an intuitive
visualization that decreases the cognitive overhead for the user, thus providing
an environment with less manufacturing mistakes, better-visualized parts, or
real-time data visualizations for example. Such technology enhances the
abilities of people by showing the relevant information when it is needed to the
user. This context-aware visualization tool offers a personalized experience in
a way that brings digital content into the physical world in an intuitive,
spatially consistent manner. This growing new technology has the potential to
change how people interact with digital content in the physical
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project addresses the problem of
estimating a partially observable three-dimensional manifold in conjunction with
a full 6-degree of freedom pose from inertial measurements and sequential two-
dimensional luminescent representations of semi-static observations - a
fundamental problem for Augmented Reality (AR). Inertial observations alone
provide minimal uncertainty for up to a tenth of a second using commercially
available and ubiquitous hardware, thus limiting the accuracy pose estimation
and, for practical long-term applications, necessitating visual input to be
jointly fused in. This project focuses on ubiquitous handheld computing
platforms, inducing resource constraint considerations for both accuracy and
human interface experiences. Further computational considerations need to be
made for enabling parallel application-specific processes, thus further limiting
available resources.