* 1738145
* Research Initiation:  Investigating the role of social responsibility on Veteran student retention
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Jeffrey Zacharakis, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2020
* USD 199,907.00

Social responsibility is the way a career can positively impact society. It is
one of the core ideals of all branches of the military and why many students
choose to study engineering. The goal of this research is to determine the
relationship between the principle of social responsibility in military service
and veterans' pursuit of engineering degrees. Several programs exist to help
veterans transition from service to civilian life, including support for higher
education. Many veterans enter engineering degree programs; however, the
dropout/dismissal rate of these students is significantly higher than other
engineering students nationally. Unfortunately, research is lacking on how to
understand and improve graduation rates of veteran students in engineering.
Results of this study will allow researchers to design interventions for
improving the number of veteran engineering student graduates nationwide. The
veteran student population brings unique backgrounds and experiences that
contribute to the national initiative of developing a diverse, globally
competitive engineering workforce. Broader impacts of this research include: (1)
diversifying pathways through engineering, (2) increasing veteran student
success in engineering, (3) engaging a wide range of veteran participants, and
(4) integrating mentoring between engineering and education faculty to build a
foundation for future collaboration on engineering education
proposals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project asks and answers the research
question: What is the role of social responsibility in reducing veteran student
attrition in engineering? The research approach is to create a survey using the
Dillman Tailored Design method to identify social responsibility attitudes in
veteran and first-year engineering students. An External Advisory Board
comprised of veterans with engineering backgrounds is involved as an external
expert review panel to provide baseline validity for the survey items. The
results of the survey as well as interviews of faculty and a veteran student
focus group are used to determine if concepts of social responsibility
positively influence veteran student retention. The survey, based on an existing
model to measure social responsibility in veteran students, is a novel approach
to understanding veteran student attrition. The PIs expect the results of the
survey to provide a framework and justification for other research questions
and/or projects related to veteran student retention in engineering. Determining
veteran student motivation in higher education is a fundamental advancement in
veteran student retention across all colleges. Furthermore, as social
responsibility is a motivator for underrepresented students, the PIs expect
these research findings to directly impact student graduation rates across
engineering with the potential to even further diversify pathways to engineering
degrees. The PIs plan to disseminate research findings to engineering educators
and military constituents through national engineering/veteran conferences,
workshops, peer-reviewed publications, and magazines.