* 1738428
* SBIR Phase II:  Development and Optimization of a New Molecular Test to quantify Latent HIV-1 in Samples from HIV-1 Infected Individuals.
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2017,12/31/2022
* Gregory Laird, Accelevir Diagnostics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,199,981.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be to enable and support the future
development, approval, and clinical use of new therapeutics the cure HIV-1
infection. HIV-1 infection can be controlled by available antiretroviral
therapy, but cannot be cured due to the persistence of the virus in a quiescent,
or latent state. This latent HIV-1 is the barrier to curing infection. While
latent HIV-1 can be found in all infected individuals, it is present in very low
frequencies. To cure HIV-1 infection, new therapeutics that eliminate latent
HIV-1 must be developed. This development is hindered by current lack of a
sensitive, accurate, and scalable test to measure latent HIV-1 in infected
individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to develop and
optimize a sensitive, accurate, and scalable test to measure latent HIV-1 in the
blood of infected individuals. Current tests used in research laboratories to
measure latent HIV-1 are either non-specific or require large volumes of blood
and many days to complete. This project is focused on developing a new molecular
test that specifically measures latent HIV-1 from a minimal volume of blood in
hours. Specifically, the project is focused on defining initial test performance
and developing critical assay controls needed for robust performance of this new
molecular test for latent HIV-1. Successful completion of this project will
yield a latent HIV-1 test prototype that can be advanced to market to support
research and early-stage clinical trials.