* 1738372
* SBIR Phase II:  Orally-dosed Intestinal Coating for the Treatment of Type 2 Diabetes Inspired from Bariatric Surgery
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Thomas Jozefiak, Glyscend INC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,199,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project addresses the healthcare needs of the 27
million Americans and 300 million patients globally suffering with type 2
diabetes (T2D). These patients are desperate for a safe treatment that
reestablishes glycemic control to augment or replace current management
strategies such as metformin and insulin, which only slow the progression of the
disease. This proposal provides a unique approach to T2D based on an orally
delivered intestinal coating that mimics the beneficial metabolic effects of
bariatric surgery. The potential commercial impact of this novel treatment is
highly significant as the total estimated cost of diabetes management in the US
is upwards of $245 billion, and rising. Overall, an astounding 1 in 5 US health
care dollars is used for the care of people with diabetes. Therefore, major
insurers are very interested in the reimbursement of alternative approaches for
treating T2D, thereby lessening the national cost
burden.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project supports the further
development of an entirely novel treatment for T2D based on new insights from
bariatric surgery. The medical community has recently recognized that certain
bariatric procedures involving duodenal exclusion confer profound and immediate
benefits in glucose tolerance. Sleeve-type medical devices have provided
clinical validation for this approach, but such devices are invasive and not
currently approved due to safety issues. The investigators propose a non-
invasive and safe orally-delivered intestinal coating which is expected to
provide the same effect as surgery and implanted sleeves, but requires neither a
specialist nor sedation. This proposal describes in-vitro and in-vivo
experiments that build on positive results of the Phase I project, and drive the
company towards human clinical trials. Specific Aim-1 is to optimize the active
lead compound through evaluation of a limited number of rational structural
variations. Specific Aim 2 is to demonstrate the dose-dependent efficacy and
safety of lead formulations in a chronic diabetic animal model. Consultation
with leading endocrinologists, gastroenterologists, and material scientists has
guided the selection of the materials and methods of this proposal. Completion
of the studies outlined in the NSF SBIR Phase II proposal will accelerate
clinical translation, bringing this novel treatment closer to patients in need.