* 1738555
* SBIR Phase II:  Proactive Network Configuration Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2017,01/31/2020
* Ari Fogel, Intentionet, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 01/31/2020
* USD 1,249,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project stems from technology for automatic network
configuration analysis. As ever more devices connect to the Internet and rich
services move to the "cloud," both the complexity of computer networks and their
reliability requirements are rapidly escalating. It is no wonder that network
outages and security breaches are common. Yet another side effect of this
complexity, which does not make the headlines but is equally damaging, is that
network engineers are understandably fearful of making configuration changes, so
networks are unable to evolve at a speed that keeps up with changing business
needs. The technology developed in this project will enable network engineers to
validate correctness, security, and performance properties of their networks
proactively, before errors reach the running network. This technology has the
potential to improve the robustness of critical network infrastructure that is
widely relied upon, to prevent unauthorized access to resources, and to increase
the pace of innovation. The project will also provide insights into the largest
"pain points" in modern networks and develop design and analysis techniques to
address them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase II project further develops the Batfish network configuration
analysis technology. Interactions with pilot customers as well as many
interviews with potential customers identified the needs of the marketplace and
how the Batfish technology can best be adapted to meet those needs. As a result,
the specific goal of this project is to seamlessly aid network engineers in
validating network behavior during the policy design phase. Drawing inspiration
from how software is developed today, the company will extend Batfish to support
continuous integration of network configurations and develop a series of
analyses that can find errors in network configurations with minimal input from
the network engineers. The anticipated outcome of these research thrusts is a
technology that allows network engineers to easily understand and gain
confidence in their proposed network designs and to iterate these designs more
quickly. The project will be driven by continued interactions with several pilot
customers.