* 1738097
* EAGER:   SC2: SpeCOlab Spectrum Collaboration
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Sangtae Ha, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 03/31/2020
* USD 99,985.00

The radio spectrum that is usable for wireless communications is a reusable but
finite resource. Exponentially growing demand by phones, computers, and the
internet of things drives a need for significantly improved dynamic spectrum
sharing and allocation. Spectrum allocation is slowly moving towards automated
management, with improved efficiency and new wireless services enabled at each
step. New spectrum systems still require controlled management of the spectrum.
By comparison, this project investigates ways to completely automate the
management of spectrum, leaving it to individual devices to learn how to
collaboratively share spectrum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team is an
interdisciplinary research group that brings together the disciplines of "Big
Data", machine learning (ML), telecommunications, and signal processing.
Efficient opportunistic radio spectrum allocation requires intelligent dynamic
agents that can make real-time decisions at the time scale of tens of
milliseconds, and can only be achieved using sophisticated machine learning
algorithms. A key ingredient for making informed spectrum allocation decisions
is the accurate identification of radio signals such as radio and TV
broadcasting, local and wide area data networks, cell phones, analog and digital
voice, radar, etc., which have been contaminated by noise, fading effects,
timing errors, and transmission channel distortion. The project focus is on the
development and implementation of ML strategies for classification, strategies
for wireless network configuration and multi-network collaboration. Building
upon successful strategies that have been used for image and voice recognition,
this project adapts deep learning (DL) algorithms such as convolutional neural
networks, deep neural networks, and reinforcement learning networks for the
classification of communication signals.