* 1738707
* RII Track-4: Characterization of LPS-induced Hsc70 ligands as a means of defining the role of C-linked glycosylation in innate immunity.
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* John Rakus, Marshall University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Timothy VanReken
* 08/31/2019
* USD 160,614.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The immune system's response to infection
and autoimmune diseases includes inflammation that is controlled by specific
chemicals, and the production and function of many of which is not clearly
understood. This project supports the PI for a six-month period in the Complex
Carbohydrate Research Center (CCRC) at the University of Georgia. The CCRC
possesses unparalleled research expertise and analytical instrumentation focused
on the biochemical study of carbohydrate molecules, including those involved in
inflammation. This fellowship allows the PI access to the expertise and the
advanced instrumentation capability of CCRC, and he will bring that expertise
back to Marshall University. Characterization of these molecules in the context
of inflammation will provide important information about the causes and control
of inflammation, including inflammation involved in autoimmune disease.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This fellowship will aid
in bolstering the research capacity in West Virginia by supporting the PI's
efforts to use the resources at the CCRC to evaluate protein regulators of the
innate immune response. Providing access to the facilities and expertise at the
CCRC will enable the PI to establish a vibrant research program studying the
role of glycosylation in inflammation in West Virginia. It has been shown that
C-glycosylated peptides enhance the production of the proinflammatory cytokine
TNF&amp;#945;, secreted from lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated macrophage-like
cells. This indicates that a currently unknown regulatory mechanism involving
C-linked glycosylation is crucial for activation of the LPS/TLR4 pathway. As
TNF&amp;#945; is the central cytokine produced in the inflammatory response,
defining how C-linked glycosylation regulates this cytokine response is critical
in properly addressing its dysregulation. Dysregulation of TNF&amp;#945; is
inherent to inflammatory diseases such as Crohn?s disease, sepsis, rheumatoid
arthritis, and metabolic syndrome.