* 1738061
* EAGER: A Saturation Approach to Microzooplankton Grazing Rate Determination
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2017,12/31/2021
* Stephen Archer, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 297,424.00

Heterotrophic protists are the dominant consumers of the 50% of global primary
production by phytoplankton in the oceans. Hence, they play a key role in
influencing ocean biogeochemistry, the composition of microbial communities, and
transfer of energy to higher trophic levels. The aim of the project is to
develop a novel saturation approach to quantify the rates of grazing on
phytoplankton by phagotrophic protists in the ocean. As a proof-of-concept, this
study will focus on determining grazing rates on picophytoplankton. This
smallest size-class of phytoplankton often dominates oceanic primary production
and can contribute up to 50% of annual primary production in coastal waters.
Understanding grazing is of critical importance to understanding how planktonic
communities function and respond to environmental change has the important
societal benefit of potentially more accurately predicting the future of global
fisheries and interactions between ocean and atmosphere that influence our
climate. The project incorporates experiential education of undergraduates in
the research environment and biological oceanography and will be a feature of an
Advanced Aquatic Flow Courses designed for graduate students, faculty members
and commercial entities. Public engagement in the science will be through Cafe
Scientifique presentations and the series of Open House events that occur at
Bigelow Laboratory through the year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The motivation behind
this project is that challenges in performing and interpreting current
experimental measurements of herbivory by protists in the ocean constrain our
understanding of this key process. The basis of the present approach is
saturation of the grazers with a surrogate prey, resulting in release of grazing
pressure on the natural prey. Measurement of the resulting increased growth rate
of the natural prey provides a value for the rate of grazing. The project
involves laboratory experiments using cultures of model predator-prey
combinations to select suitable surrogate prey and test the underlying
theoretical assumptions of the approach. This information will then be used to
inform the design of experiments on natural planktonic communities. The
objectives of these experiments are to test the efficacy of the saturation
approach and to compare results to traditional experimental approaches run in
parallel. This research will introduce a new approach to biological oceanography
that will have been thoroughly tested, with recommendations for optimum set-up
procedures and an assessment of the factors that influence uncertainty in the
results. The saturation approach has potential advantages over previous methods.
It lends itself to analysis by flow cytometry allowing high throughput and
accurate measurements, avoids manipulation of the natural seawater and microbial
communities, and provides growth and grazing information on defined components
of the phytoplankton community.