* 1738877
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Maintaining Sovereignty in Refugee Receiving States
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Rawan Arar, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 05/31/2019
* USD 12,000.00

This project will address how refugee-receiving states maintain their
sovereignty despite the challenges of porous national borders and dependence on
international institutions like the United Nations. The study investigates
refugee hosting in the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, which is a small Middle
Eastern country with 2.7 million refugees in a total population of 9 million
people. The challenges of providing shelter, education, health care, and
protection to refugees are made difficult because Jordanian citizens face high
unemployment and strained social institutions including overcrowded hospitals
and underperforming schools. Refugees and citizens alike are affected by growing
national security concerns and the threat of terrorism along the Jordanian-
Syrian border. While the study of Western sovereignty is foundational to
political sociology and the sociology of international immigration, the
literature neglects the sovereignty of developing states that host most of the
world's refugees. However, Jordanian sovereignty is indispensable to refugee
protection, regional stability, and the global flow of refugees. This project
will enhance understanding of developing countries that bear the refugee burden
for the rest of the world, exploring how such countries cultivate and maintain
their capacity to host large refugee populations while preserving final
authority over internal and external affairs of the state. A scholarly focus on
the sovereignty-refugee nexus allows for an assessment of the effects that
displacement has on refugees and citizens. The project will yield empirically
informed insights into interventions that take into consideration the rights of
refugees and citizens, the interest of the Jordanian state and Western donor
states, and the challenges of aid providing institutions like the United
Nations. As an important ally in the region and top recipient of US foreign aid,
Jordan?s sovereignty - and the state's capacity to host refugees - is critical
to American interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How is sovereignty enacted on the
ground through interactions among everyday people? Through ethnography and in-
depth semi-structured interviews (conducted in Arabic and English), this
research incorporates responses from 175 participants, including Syrian
refugees, Jordanian citizens, and UN and government officials. This allows the
researcher to theorize about how sovereignty is not only a top-down, state-
imposed project, but one that is also shaped by the agentic behaviors of
citizens and refugees. For example, the social construction of sovereignty from
the ground-up includes the ways that border guards practice discretion when
deciding who can enter and exit a refugee camp. The analysis of Jordanian
sovereignty is situated within a system of sovereign states. The practice of
Jordanian sovereignty is necessarily couched within disparities that are
foundational to the international refugee regime that distinguishes the Global
North from the Global South.