* 1738723
* Phase III IUCRC Ohio State University: Center for Smart Vehicle Concepts (SVC)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Marcelo Dapino, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 760,000.00

The NSF Industry University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) for Smart
Vehicle Concepts (SVC) has earned national visibility and a position of
technical leadership in the area of smart materials applied to automobiles and
air vehicles. The mission of SVC will focus on: conduct basic and applied
research on smart materials in pre-competitive mode for application to vehicles;
develop an unmatched base of research, engineering education, and technology
transfer considering emerging needs in the industry; and develop engineers and
researchers who not only understand theory but have experimental and system
integration expertise. The Center thus creates the science necessary to
transition smart materials from the concept stages to vehicle applications,
while advancing broader national needs toward promoting diversity in engineering
education; advancing U.S.-based expertise, resources, and human capital; and
creating and disseminating knowledge at all levels including undergraduate and
doctoral students, post-graduate researchers, and practicing
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work done in Phase II allowed SVC to
formulate critical research questions and identify technical challenges that
hinder the implementation of smart materials in vehicle design. Counting with
the enthusiastic support of the Industrial Advisory Board, the Center has
formulated a five-pronged strategy for addressing these challenges: (i) expand
the SVC faculty base, especially focusing on junior faculty; (ii) attract
additional vehicle integrators and suppliers of components and materials; (iii)
adapt the Center?s research portfolio on smart materials to evolving needs in
the industry; (iv) continue efforts to collaborate with other institutions and
attempt to attract additional academic partners. The sponsors have provided
ample evidence of how the Center has made contributions of commercial
significance to their organizations. During Phase III, the Center will implement
a new research roadmap that builds on its existing strengths while also creating
a new thrust dedicated to emerging vehicle technologies, namely vehicle
electrification, autonomous vehicles, and structural lightweighting. Within the
new research matrix, SVC plans to generate scholarly research of common
interest, foster cross-pollination across the automotive and aerospace sectors,
engage in technology transfer activities, and promote industry-focused student
training as a means to build the future employee base of the transportation
sector.