* 1738861
* RII Track-4: Modeling Dissolved Organic Matter at the Arctic land/ocean interface.
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Georgina Gibson, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 08/31/2021
* USD 221,867.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical models that describe the Arctic
Ocean ecosystem can act as early warning predictors for a changing climate, and
enhance understanding of how changes in the Arctic region influence the global
carbon budget. Scientists track carbon on global, regional and local scales
through annual carbon budgets which include both sources (income) and sinks
(loss or expenditure). Organic carbon from watershed-draining rivers in the
northern permafrost region is a critical component of the Arctic carbon budget.
However, this carbon source is poorly represented in existing Arctic Ocean
models. In the context of thawing permafrost, changes to the dissolved carbon
supply in these Arctic rivers may influence ocean chemistry, as well as the
availability of light and nutrients to plants in the Arctic marine environment.
This fellowship will allow the PI and a graduate student to establish a research
collaboration with the Computational Physics and Methods Group at the Los Alamos
National Laboratory (LANL) in New Mexico to develop improved models of the
dynamics of dissolved organic matter from rivers in Arctic Ocean and Earth
system models. In addition, it will enable the PI to extend from shelf/basin
ocean dynamics to ecosystem research focused on the land/ocean interface. This
research will enable a better assessment of the impacts of a changing climate on
the import and export of carbon in Arctic coastal regions. These improved models
will be valuable resources for national and international investigators studying
both the Arctic and global carbon dynamics. In addition to establishing the
collaboration, the fellowship will enhance student training. The new research
skills and collaborative partnerships with LANL personnel will enhance the PI?s
career trajectory, strengthen collaboration between the University of Alaska
Fairbanks (UAF) and LANL, and build on UAF?s reputation as a center of
excellence in Arctic research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;The fluvial input of dissolved organic carbon plays an
important role in carbon cycling on Arctic shelves; however, it is poorly
represented in current Arctic Ocean models. This project will develop improved
representation of biogeochemical processes associated with riverine dissolved
organic matter inputs to better assess the potential impacts of climate change
to the biological pump and the sequestration of carbon in Arctic coastal
regions. Existing observations of carbon in Arctic rivers will be used to
develop model drivers corresponding to major Arctic rivers for incorporation
into the global Earth system model developed by the High-Latitude Application
and Testing of Global and Regional Climate Models team, based at LANL. This
project will also yield an improved representation of dissolved organic carbon
compounds within the biogeochemical component of LANL?s high latitude (HiLAT)
model. Model simulations will help researchers assess whether and how the
strength of primary production and. The updated model will be used to help
researches determine the impact of riverine DOM concentration on the strength of
the biological pump in the Arctic coastal regions. Specifically, the variability
in annual primary production, and the annual export of carbon to the benthos,
over each Arctic shelf will be quantified for present and likely future riverine
DOM input. Annual carbon budgets will be computed and used to determine likely
future changes to the net flux of carbon on Arctic shelves, and thus the global
carbon budget.