* 1738506
* STTR Phase II:  Refractive correction using non-invasive laser-induced refractive index change
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Jonathan Ellis, Clerio Vision, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,250,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project enables the development
of the next generation of contact lenses for vision correction based on a novel
photomodification technique called "LIRIC (Laser Induced Refractive Index
Change)." More than 2.3 billion people world-wide suffer from refractive error
in their visual system, while over 500 million have inadequate access to
refractive correction. Glasses are an option for refractive correction, however
there can be practical limitations and even social stigma associated with
wearing glasses, particularly among adolescents. Meanwhile vision correction
with contact lenses is limited to lenses whose optical prescription is
determined by their thickness profile. This has negative consequences for visual
quality, on-eye stability and corneal health. The research represents a
fundamental shift in how vision correction is applied because it alters the
refractive index of an optical material, enabling previously unavailable visual
correctors in thin, stable contact lenses. LIRIC uses a high repetition rate,
femtosecond laser to micro-modify the local medium to produce custom refractive
corrections in hydrogels, and in living cornea. LIRIC works by accumulating
localized refractive index (RI) changes in an ocular material to create a
refractive lateral gradient index lens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changing the
refractive index using LIRIC instead of the surface shape can lead to several
fundamental advances for vision correction, with profound implications for
vision care: 1) contact lenses can be manufactured specifically for patient fit
and stability with the refractive correction decoupled from the lens shape; 2)
difficult and irregular refractive corrections (i.e. for irregular astigmatism,
presbyopia, and higher order aberrations) could be written more easily and with
better spatial resolution than with existing methods; 3) multifocal and
diffractive optical designs can be utilized for presbyopic and macular
degenerative corrections. Patients viewing through LIRIC lenses, created in
Phase I, had visual performance (visual acuity and contrast sensitivity) on par
with a control lens. The objective of the Phase II work is to demonstrate that
LIRIC works in contact lenses at process speeds necessary for commercial
manufacturing. The goal of this work is to demonstrate that a 6.5 mm optical
zone can be successfully processed in &lt;15 seconds. To effectively do so, the
LIRIC process has to achieve more than 1 wave of phase change (at 555 nm
wavelength) at laser scanning velocities in excess of 10 meter/second.