* 1738662
* RII Track-4: Photovoltaic Based Physically Unclonable Functions (PUFs) for Vehicular Security
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Himanshu Thapliyal, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 08/31/2020
* USD 206,164.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Today's vehicles have approximately 100
million lines of computer code and 60 electronic control units (ECUs), as well
as a wide range of computer-enabled technologies such as power and infotainment
systems, remote locking and unlocking, remote engine start, etc. With plans
underway to include vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) communications technology in new
vehicles, it is expected that there could be as many as 220 million connected
cars globally by 2020. However, these embedded devices in vehicles are
susceptible to malicious cyber-attacks, such as modifying the in-vehicle system
infrastructure, stealing intellectual property (IP), and misusing the vehicle-
to-vehicle communication. Fundamental advancements are needed at the hardware
and software levels to create a more reliable vehicle security infrastructure.
This research investigates the potential use of Physically Unclonable Functions
(PUFs) as a hardware security approach to simplify or solve many important
vehicular security problems, such as ECU piracy, ECU counterfeiting, secure
authentication, and key management. Collaborators at the Oak Ridge National
Laboratory (ORNL) have the needed expertise in PUFs, and the project will
provide the PI with needed training and mentorship in this area. The proposed
research could pave the way for the widespread use of photovoltaic-based PUFs to
mitigate vehicle cybersecurity vulnerabilities and the impacts of potential
attacks, thereby, increasing the public safety of American families and securing
driver's personal data. In addition, the project will lead to a stronger
research and education program in vehicular security at the University of
Kentucky and the Commonwealth of Kentucky.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide the foundation for a long-term
research program to design hardware security primitives based on intrinsic
properties of existing vehicular hardware such as built-in sensors or devices.
Building PUFs from existing vehicular hardware has the potential to mitigate
cyber-threats in vehicles with minimal redesign costs and performance penalties.
Photovoltaic (PV) devices have wide applications in vehicles such as ambient
climate control, automatic headlights, to generate electricity in hybrid and
electric vehicles, etc. Therefore, the PI plans to investigate new designs and
prototypes of PV PUFs for vehicular security. The proposed research will provide
a better understanding of the relationship between light intensity and output
current in PV devices for the generation of PV PUFs. Novel methodologies and
circuit architectures of PV-based PUFs will be designed, and the reliability of
the proposed PUFs with respect to temperature variations and aging effects will
be tested and evaluated under extreme meteorological test conditions. Simulation
and prototyping of PV-based PUF circuits will test the PI's hypothesis that
existing devices and sensors in vehicles can be used to mitigate the security
threats. Intellectual products will be developed, such as novel circuit designs
and architectures of PV-based PUFs, design flow of PV-based PUF generation, and
specific PUF designs and prototypes.