* 1738561
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Intra-regional agreements, migrants, and the state
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Vilma Ortiz, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 05/31/2018
* USD 11,975.00

This project analyzes the process that led to the national implementation of
Residency Agreements among nations affiliated with Mercosur. Mercosur is a
regional trade agreement among developing countries in South America that is
designed to resolve unauthorized migration in a manner that protects the rights
of immigrants without compromising national security. Beginning in 2002
nationals of the affiliated countries could relocate, obtain legal residency,
and access civil, economic, cultural, and social rights. By 2014, nine out of
twelve South American countries had affiliated with Mercosur and included the
Residency Agreements in their national migration policy. The widespread
adaptation of this policy suggests that policymakers had to build support for
these agreements from government officials and migrant advocates within six
countries: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Paraguay, and Uruguay. This
project analyzes the process that led to the national implementation of the
agreements in these six countries to identify the actors and factors that
facilitated or hindered the agreement's adaptation as national legislation. This
project expands our understanding of how regional migration policy can serve as
a tool to reform national immigration law. This project will also identify new
models and strategies for addressing unauthorized migration that can inform
policymakers and advocates around the world.

Specifically, this project analyzes the impact of Mercosur regionalism in the
six countries that negotiated and first adapted the Residency Agreements. Using
comparative historical methods, this project identifies the international
forces, regional contexts, and the domestic legal, political, and economic
factors that facilitated or hindered the passage of the Residency Agreements at
the national level. It also identifies the key actors and the policy networks
shaping this regional to national policy change. The Co-Principal Investigator
conducted N=112 interviews, created a regional and national migration policy
database, and compiled an economic growth and trade indicators database.
Overall, this research bridges international migration and regionalism
literatures and identifies new processes that reform immigration law. This
project contributes to the theory by specifying how regional migration policy is
a determinant of national immigration policy.