* 1738010
* ATD: Surveillance Evasion and Threat Avoidance
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Alexander Vladimirsky, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 399,998.00

The growing availability of data on pedestrian movement allows for increasingly
sophisticated models of people's goals, preferences, and perception of their
environment. Such models are important not only in traffic engineering ("How do
we structure the foyer in this building to avoid a stampede in case of
evacuation?") but also in improving our ability to detect emerging threats in
urban settings. Any dramatic change in the usual "patterns of life" might
provide a clue about the evolving conditions ("Why did this group of pedestrians
take such an unusual path to their target? Why is there suddenly a crowd at this
intersection?"), while the analysis of data aggregated over a longer horizon can
be also useful in improving our monitoring and modeling ("Which parts of the
city are generally perceived as more dangerous? Where should we deploy our
limited observation resources?"). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
two specific applications: (a) civilians in dangerous environments planning
their paths to minimize threat exposure, and (b) adversaries aware of the
existing monitoring measures planning their paths to evade the observation. In
both contexts, the PIs propose models and numerical methods for (1) path
planning based on one's beliefs about the environment and (2) adversarial/robust
path planning, with the environment possibly changing in response to people's
routing choices. The threat avoidance under selfish/independent decision making
will be also treated in the framework of "mean field games". The proposed
approach draws on methods from game theory, convex optimization, optimal
control, and multi-objective dynamic programming. The information patterns built
into this model make it possible to leverage the efficiency of fast numerical
algorithms already developed for a broad range of deterministic optimal control
applications. This project continues earlier work on causal/non-iterative
numerical methods and distributed optimal control.