* 1738981
* CICI: CE: Enhancing Cybersecurity for Broadening Data-Driven Research and Partnerships
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Sonia Fahmy, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2020
* USD 841,506.00

As more disciplines leverage computational and data-driven modeling, the
security of campus cyberinfrastructure is becoming increasingly important in
order to protect intellectual property and secure a competitive advantage for
researchers. Often, facilities and projects funded by industrial partners and US
government agencies create new institutional requirements for information
security and assurance. Designed for open science, the Purdue University campus
cyberinfrastructure does not currently have infrastructure in place to support
the wide variety of security requirements stemming from this growing volume of
aerospace, defense, and industrial projects being conducted on campus. The rapid
pace of expanding partnerships has outpaced the campus cybersecurity framework,
limiting the opportunities for researchers and students to conduct research.
This project brings together engineering and research teams to develop a cyber
attack detection and response capability for the Purdue University campus
research network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project enhances the Purdue campus
network to develop a security-assured research network infrastructure, and
deploys novel adaptive monitoring tools as part of the campus
cyberinfrastructure. Enhanced campus cyberinfrastructure empowers domain
scientists to conduct research with heightened security requirements. The
project also provides cybersecurity researchers with production network traffic
data to develop and evaluate adaptive intrusion detection and response and flow-
level anomaly detection. The proposed research will reduce the overhead of
network security mechanisms, and improve their effectiveness, agility, and
scalability. The project supports cybersecurity education and training by
engaging students in deployment and operation of networking hardware and
software. It provides students with a unique opportunity to apply their
conceptual knowledge to practical situations and better prepares them to be part
of the future workforce in cybersecurity. The highly interdisciplinary project
team consists of security, networking and data science researchers,
cybersecurity educators, campus Information Technology professionals and the
engineering community.