* 1738594
* RII  Track-4: Mechanisms underlying transgenerational inheritance of the stress phenotype
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Jenny Ouyang, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 160,423.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Today, 3% of the world's total land cover is
considered urban. By 2050, this number is expected to increase to 5%.
Urbanization is one of the most significant forms of habitat change, resulting
in biodiversity loss through local extinction processes. Urban expansion is
expected to impact 25% of all endangered species in the next decade. The overall
objective of this project is to investigate how some animals are able to thrive
in urban environments while others are not, with a particular focus on how the
natural stress response of some birds allows them to respond to factors such as
light, noise, and pollution. This stress response differs between individuals
that live in urban versus rural areas. This project will determine whether the
stress response is genetically inherited by studying house sparrows living in a
range of urban and urban settings. There is increasing global effort to build
more environmentally-friendly cities, which may reduce stress levels of humans
living in densely populated areas. Basic knowledge on how individuals adapt to
city life can guide such strategies. The PI will visit a laboratory at Princeton
University to learn the genetic techniques required for this project. Increasing
her competence in modern molecular genetics through cooperation with Princeton
will both establish an important new collaboration, and will significantly
contribute to development of her career at the University of Nevada at Reno. In
addition, a number of outreach activities are planned, such as the involvement
of citizen scientists who will learn about the research process through
collection of data from urban nest box studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;Urbanization affects biological systems worldwide.
Phenotypic differences between urban and rural populations demonstrate that some
individuals have adapted to city life while others are displaced. A key trait
facilitating adaptation is the degree to which animals respond to stress. This
stress response has a heritable component and exhibits intra-individual
plasticity. However, the mechanisms behind this variability and whether they
might be responsible for adaptation to different environments are not known. The
overarching hypothesis guiding this work is that an epigenetic mechanism,
specifically DNA methylation, is responsible for modifying an individual?s
stress response to environmental pressures. Variation in DNA methylation is a
prime candidate to explain how organisms adapt to urban environments. Using
house sparrows (Passer domesticus) from a gradient of urbanized habitats, the PI
will first examine urban-rural differences in DNA methylation patterns at
specific candidate genes and relate these patterns to the stress response. To
unravel if differences in the stress response are due to heritable adaptation or
phenotypic plasticity, an unprecedented cross-fostering field experiment will be
integrated with multi-generational screening of the stress phenotype and
methylation patterns. This experiment disentangles the contribution of genes,
expression, and environmental effects across generations to variation in the
stress response. By linking the fields of urban ecology, endocrinology, and
epigenetics, this project will pioneer insights into the epigenetic variation
underlying a physiological response. Knowledge of the mechanisms behind observed
phenotypic differences will enable us to better assess the potential for
adaptation of animals to city life, and thereby the impact of urbanization on
wild populations. The information acquired is becoming essential in a world that
is increasingly experiencing the stress of urbanization.