* 1738104
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Recovery trajectories of the hillslope green water cycle after rapidly repeated wildfires
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Andres Holz, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2021
* USD 203,130.00

As temperatures rise and rain and snowfall become more intermittent, wildfire
recurrence is expected to increase in forested areas. Although wildfires that
re-burn an area after only a short time (&lt;10 years) have been unusually
common over the last 30 years, the mechanisms governing these ?rapid reburns?
are incompletely understood. It may be that decreasing water availability, i.e.,
an altered hydrological cycle, on forested hillslopes is changing the controls
on plant regrowth after fire, and so on subsequent wildfires. However, there are
almost no data on the soil water resources that plants need following fires, the
spatial and temporal changes in soil moisture in burned areas over multiple
years after fires, or moisture feedbacks with vegetation regrowth. This research
addresses this critical gap in data on post-reburn hillslope hydrology and
ecohydrologic system recovery over time and will also help identify whether
reburns might mitigate or worsen the downstream flood and landslide risks that
often accompany higher post-fire water flows. The new knowledge generated by
this research will be produced in close coordination with federal and state
water and forest managers, including a series of research-management workshops
to improve research communication with management practices. The project will
also engage with the nonprofit community via a volunteer organization related to
the field area and with the public via creation of a temporary science exhibit
for display at a local museum and also for portable education at local
preschools and elementary schools during ?meet-a-scientist? visits and will
expand research a opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to understand (1) how
hillslope hydrological response differ with increasing numbers of natural
reburns and with time since last fire; (2) how the patterns and feedbacks
between the recovery of hillslope soil moisture and evapotranspiration fluxes
are linked to the recovery of vegetation, and how they vary with number of
reburns, seed-source distances, and time since fire; and (3) how the gradual
change in the hillslope water balance relates to downstream river flow dynamics
after a fire or reburn under variable climate influence. This research will test
multiple components of an overarching hypothesis that there are both spatio-
temporal (correlative) and biophysical (causative), linking soil moisture and
soil hydraulic process changes following reburns. In addition, it addresses how
the vegetation regrowth provides the fuel load for subsequent fires, and how
downstream flows and flood risks recede over time following multiple wildfires.
Soil moisture, matric potential, texture, water repellency, infiltration, and
hydraulic property measurements, live vegetation, and woody debris will be
mapped across six 0.25 ha field sites and monitored over time throughout the
study, building on an additional two seasons of preliminary data. Field methods
include in situ sensors and data loggers, 3D geophysical surveys of soil
moisture, micrometeorological monitoring, and detailed vegetation ecology
surveys including tree seedling presence and survival. The six exemplary field
sites on the southern flank of Mt. Adams, WA, are of similar ecology, climate,
slope, elevation, aspect, distance to unburned forest, and past severity per
fire, but differ in the number of past fires (1 to 3 in the last 13 years, and
an unburned control) and time since fire. Modeling of evapotranspiration will be
conducted for major vegetation and bare land cover classes and applied in a
spatially and temporally extensive manner across two relevant watersheds with
the aid of remote sensing data and long-term climate, drought, and streamflow
time-series. This modeling analysis will seek to better understand the
spatiotemporal dynamics of the post-fire hillslope water cycle and its relation
to streamflow dynamics after different numbers of wildfire reburns and different
recovery intervals after fire.&lt;br/&gt;