* 1738420
* Phase I IUCRC University of Florida:  Center for Space, High-Performance, and Resilient Computing (SHREC)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Ann Ramirez, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,227,993.00

Under the auspices of the Industry/University Cooperative Research Centers
(IUCRC) program at the National Science Foundation, a new national research
Center has been jointly established, the Center for Space, High-performance, and
Resilient Computing (SHREC). This Center comprises three university Sites,
including the University of Pittsburgh (Pitt) as lead institution, and Brigham
Young University (BYU) and the University of Florida (UF) as partner
institutions. The SHREC Center is dedicated to assisting U.S. industrial
partners, government agencies, and research organizations in mission-critical
computing, with research in three domains: space computing for Earth science,
space science, and defense; high-performance computing for a broad range of
grand-challenge apps; and resilient computing for dependability in harsh or
critical environments. The university Sites of the SHREC Center will help
address the shortage in the mission-critical computing workforce by training
many students with the knowledge and skills necessary to solve the many
challenges facing this growing industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the
complementary nature of expertise at each Site, the SHREC Center will address
research challenges facing the three domains of mission-critical computing, by
exploiting a variety of existing and emerging computing technologies, including
digital signal processors, field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs), graphical
processing units (GPUs), hybrid processors, advanced memories, and high-speed
interconnects. For space computing, a specialty at the Pitt and BYU Sites, the
Center will develop, evaluate, and deploy novel forms of space architectures,
apps, computers, networks, services, and systems, while leveraging commercial
and radiation-hardened or -tolerant technologies. For high-performance
computing, a specialty at the UF and Pitt Sites, the Center will explore the
application and productive use of heterogeneous computing technologies and
architectures in support of high-speed, mission-critical computing. For
resilient computing, a specialty at the BYU and Pitt Sites, the Center will
exploit its expertise in fault injection and mitigation as well as radiation
testing to demonstrate unique reliability concepts and solutions, including
adaptive hardware redundancy, fault masking, and software fault tolerance.