* 1738675
* Building Multi-level Alignment in Local Computer Science for All Implementations for Sustainability
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Leigh DeLyser, The New York City Foundation for Computer Science Education
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2020
* USD 359,248.00

Computer science (CS) education in the United States is a rapidly evolving
exercise in educational change. Local initiatives to bring quality CS education
to all students in cities and states are emerging as communities and school
districts respond to the growing desire to include computer science in K-12
education settings. Successful initiatives are often supported by non-profit
organizations or district leadership that possess an understanding of both CS
content and education. The multi-pronged approach has positioned the CS for All
movement to make rapid progress in the goal of broadening access to computing
education for K-12 learners. However, this rapid expansion has also created
significant difficulties, as the options available to schools and teachers have
outpaced the supports necessary for a school district, without an expert in CS
education, to thoughtfully select CS education partners to facilitate teacher
professional development and curricular implementation. Selection of CS
education partners requires an understanding of how to coordinate vision,
implementation, and curriculum decisions. Thus, this project will create a
research-practice partnership (RPP) to support K-8 schools in developing
coordinated visions and multi-grade implementation plans that facilitate their
development of sustainable CS programs that scale to broader participation.
Through research and implementation, the project will contribute to an
understanding of CS education implementation choices at the K-8 level. These
implementation choices are key to sustainable CSforAll initiatives around the
country. The project will contribute to the understanding of that decision
making process, supports that can help schools and districts in the process, and
measures for schools and districts to use to assess the alignment of their
ongoing implementation to community visions. These outcomes will contribute
fundamental insights about how to foster systemic educational change efforts as
they relate to CS education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research, a descriptive
study, will focus on documenting and understanding the process of visioning,
aligned decision making, and implementation moves that can facilitate broader
participation in K-8 computing education. Four project goals guide the
Researcher Practitioner Partnership (RPP) work: Goal 1: Establish an RPP between
the CSforAll Consortium, New York University, and two Boards of Cooperative
Educational Services in rural and suburban New York to support CS for All
efforts, with an eye toward long-term partnership and future, iterative work.
Goal 2: Design and pilot visioning, decision-making, and implementation routines
that can provide an integrated toolkit for facilitating K-8 school and district
decision making around CS for All implementation. Goal 3: Develop a set of
practical measures that can provide fast, formative metrics for districts and
schools to evaluate the alignment and implementation of their CS for All
initiatives over time. Goal 4: Conduct research on the guided decision-making
and implementation processes that the partnership undertakes that will result in
scholarly insights about enabling more nuanced and robust CS for All
implementation decisions that can be scalable, sustainable, and reach broader
populations of learners.