* 1738702
* Critical Issues in Mathematics Education 2017
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2019
* David Eisenbud, Mathematical Sciences Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Karen King
* 03/31/2019
* USD 49,979.00

This conference will continue the workshop series, Critical Issues in
Mathematics Education (CIME) on teaching and learning mathematics, initiated by
the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute (MSRI) in 2004. The topic for CIME
2017 will be "Observing for Access, Power, and Participation in Mathematics
Classrooms as a Strategy to Improve Mathematics Teaching and Learning". The CIME
workshops engage professional mathematicians, education researchers, teachers,
and policy makers in discussions of issues critical to the improvement of
mathematics education from the elementary grades through undergraduate years.
The workshop will deal with the problem of providing quality math education to
all, and the barriers to doing so. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. This work is also funded by the IUSE program which focuses on
innovation in undergraduate STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CIME
workshops impact three distinct communities: research mathematicians,
mathematics educators (K-16), and education researchers. Participants learn
about research and development efforts that can enhance their own work and the
contributions they can make to solving issues in mathematics education.
Participants also connect with others concerned about those issues. Workshops
are designed to recruit key individuals to the improvement of mathematics
education, frame critical issues, draw attention to issues of diverse
participation and success, and provide images of productive engagement for
participants to draw on beyond the conference.