* 1738567
* RII Track-4:  Enhancing Interdisciplinary Graduate Studies and Research Funding Opportunities in Sensory Neurobiology through Studies of Crustacean Vision
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2017,10/31/2022
* Megan Porter, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 10/31/2022
* USD 137,490.00

Non-Technical Description &lt;br/&gt;Comparing the development of distinct types
of animal eyes provides a remarkable 'natural laboratory' for understanding how
visual systems work, and how animals use visual information to interact with
each other and with their environment.  This research will study the function of
two crustacean species, the mantis shrimp and a copepod, which have vastly
different eyes than most other animals. This fellowship will take place in the
School of Marine Science and Policy at the University of Delaware, working with
an internationally recognized researcher in crustacean visual physiology and
behavior. The fellowship will provide training to the PI and a graduate student
in techniques that measure changes in electrical output of cells to characterize
changes in eye function over the course of development.  By studying these two
species in particular, and coupling newly learned techniques with the PI's
expertise in evolutionary studies through DNA analysis, the proposed research
will reveal how developmental changes in visual systems affect the behavior of
an animal.  The knowledge gained in the project will be integrated into a newly
developed course in Sensory Biology at the University of Hawaii at Manoa (UHM).
In addition, the work will be used to provide summer research experience to
undergraduates through two funded UHM NSF funded REU (Research Experiences for
Undergraduates) summer programs, one of which specifically targets the
involvement of Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander students. 
 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This fellowship will
provide training for the PI and a graduate student in crustacean-specific
electrophysiology and behavioral techniques, providing them with the
interdisciplinary tools to link molecular evolution with physiological function
and behavioral output for a truly integrated research program in visual system
evolution. The work will focus on generating novel ontogenetic datasets for two
crustaceans with unique eyes, the stomatopod Squilla empusa and the
copepod Labidocera aestiva, to investigate the development and evolution of
sensory system diversification.  Specific project goals are to characterize
complex stomatopod and simple copepod eyes using electrophysiology to describe
underlying photoreceptor diversity and function, and behavioral assays to
establish when particular visual capabilities become functional during
development. The addition of two new methodologies for studies of visual system
form and function will be transformative for the PI's research program,
generating broad, integrative training for both undergraduate and graduate
students and making future proposals more competitive through more integrated
experimental designs.  Conversely, time spent at the University of Delaware will
allow for reciprocal training in molecular techniques for members of the host
laboratory, thus providing the same integrative training across two
institutions. The proposed project will establish a collaboration between
leaders in the fields of crustacean molecular evolution and visual physiology,
as well as strengthen newly-initiated collaborations with other research units
at the PI's home institution.