* 1738849
* Building a Pathway for CS Principles Teachers:  A Two-course Sequence for Secondary Education Mathematics Pre-service Teachers
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Jeffrey Gray, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2021
* USD 299,903.00

The University of Alabama Tuscaloosa proposes to develop a new model for
preparing preservice teachers to realize the CSforAll goal of scaling computer
science (CS) education to tens of thousands of schools. The project will expand
an existing research-practitioner partnership (RPP) to support preservice
Secondary Mathematics (SEMA) students with coursework that will prepare them to
offer AP Computer Science Principles (CSP) at their future school. Many current
Professional Development (PD) efforts for CS education focus on existing in-
service teachers, but the future growth will also need to consider the
preparation of preservice Education majors who will develop content and
pedagogical CS knowledge through exposure to CSP topics.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work advances a course sequence and associated
activities that form a pathway for preservice educators who do not have deep
pre-existing CS content knowledge. The sequence includes an existing CSP course
currently taken by all SEMA students, and a new, second course for those
students with an interest in teaching CSP in addition to mathematics. This
second course will introduce students to topics related to equity in CS
education, overview various K-12 CS standards (including the newly developed
Alabama K-12 CS standards), explore connections to mathematics with
computational thinking practices and CS content knowledge, consider various
nuances of Advanced Placement (AP) CSP curricula endorsed by the College Board,
and establish a deeper understanding of the AP CSP Big Ideas and Learning
Objectives. Students will also participate in a teaching practicum and serve as
student teachers at the local high schools of RPP members. They will also have
the opportunity to attend a College Board CSP AP Summer Institute and a
conference focused on CS education. The courses will be externally evaluated. In
addition, the researchers and practitioners within the RPP will develop and
explore a set of research questions related to the interest and self-efficacy of
SEMA students as they prepare to become CSP teachers. These new teachers will be
the catalyst for broadening the participation of computing at high schools that
heretofore have not established a CS course.