* 1738782
* Phase II IUCRC Villanova University: Center for Energy-Smart Electronic Systems (ES2)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2024
* Bahgat Sammakia, Villanova University
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 07/31/2024
* USD 577,918.00

Data centers are an integral part of life, providing services ranging from
social networking, e-commerce and entertainment to cloud infrastructures that
provide storage and computing capabilities for individuals and enterprises. Data
centers consume over 2% of the nation's electricity, generated mostly from
fossil sources. The Center for Energy-Smart Electronic systems (ES2) was
established to develop tools and methodologies for improving the energy
efficiency of electronic systems, primarily data centers. Much of the energy
expended by data centers is wasted due to operating inefficiencies, including
operating more servers than are needed to handle the workload and overcooling
the IT equipment, or deploying sub-optimal cooling and IT technologies. ES2?s
research focusses on developing intelligent and fully automated techniques for
operating data centers to match the IT and cooling resources to the workload
demands, avoiding energy waste while maintaining service quality. ES2 research
benefits society by: (a) providing solutions to reduce the demand on the
electrical grid and the carbon footprint and enabling the growth of data center-
based services in an energy-efficient way and (b) developing human resources by
training engineers and computer scientists in high-demand skills. ES2?s research
therefore enables the nation to maintain competitive, agile and energy-efficient
cyber services and infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of ES2
research is to develop systematic methodologies for operating electronic
systems, including data centers, as dynamic self-sensing and regulating
cognitive systems that are predictive and verified in real time. At the
Villanova site, algorithms and systems are being developed to enhance and
control cooling and to assist expert system schedulers being developed at our
partner site to schedule or migrate workload in a holistic manner in order to
achieve optimal energy consumption. Advanced strategies for cooling data centers
using hybrid air-liquid cooling and single and two-phase liquid cooling are
being developed and optimized. These advanced cooling methods anticipate ever
increasing thermal densities in data center equipment. Our research is leading
to the development of improved methods and metrics for utilizing Dynamic Hybrid
Cooling Systems which can be used to deliver efficient on-demand cooling where
and when it is needed. The Villanova site is investigating methods for the
conversion of Waste Heat from electrical power consumed in a data center to
useful Energy. More than 90% of electrical power supplied to a data center is
dissipated as waste heat, hence our research will have significant impact on the
overall energy sustainability of data center systems.