* 1738163
* EAGER From Genomics to Brain Science: What Makes Researchers Tick in Transdisciplinary Initiatives
* SBE,SMA
* 06/15/2017,12/31/2018
* Ioannis Pavlidis, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 12/31/2018
* USD 60,408.00

The transdisciplinary formation between biology and computing fostered the
transformative achievement of decoding the human genome. Decoding the
functionality of the human brain is similarly posed to usher in a new era of
biomedical and technological advancements. The Brain Research through Advancing
Innovative Neurotechnologies (BRAIN) initiative is a federally funded umbrella
program aimed to streamline research efforts in brain science in the United
States. The Human Brain Project (HBP) is a competitive initiative funded by the
European Union, which shares the same goal with BRAIN but pursues different
policies, organizational strategies and incentive structures. The result is
different multilevel processes integrating people, ideas, scientific cultures,
and institutions in the same transdisciplinary challenge. Examined together,
these two projects offer a base for comparisons of the impact of science and
innovation policy interactions on collaborations among scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project build a dataset that funding and publication
sources, with faculty databases to capture the interactions among scholars
from&lt;br/&gt;various disciplines and ecosystems. Statistical and network tools
identify patterns of collaboration and their evolution as a result of the BRAIN
and HBP policy intervention. Qualitative feedback in the form of interviews from
key players identified via the quantitative methods, will support nuanced
interpretations of the results and guide extensions and policy recommendations.