* 1738485
* SBIR Phase II:  Visual Information eNvironment for Effective agricultural management and Sustainability
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2017,04/30/2022
* David Pramuk, VinSense, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 04/30/2022
* USD 910,100.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be the development of software and
monitoring system for the conservation of water resources and the economic
sustainability of agricultural crop producers. Agricultural production uses a
great deal of water. In California alone, 80% percent of all water usage goes to
agriculture. As communities expand and drought conditions develop, the
competition for scarce and expensive water resources has become intense. Growers
need to minimize costs and water needs by making their irrigation practices more
efficient. While new irrigation application technologies have reduced losses
from wind drift, leakages and evaporation, large amounts of water are still be
wasted as it washes through the soil past crop roots. The technology developed
in this project will allow producers to track soil moisture movement through the
soil profile and across fields. This will allow producers to develop irrigation
strategies based on the unique conditions of their soil types and topography and
reduce water waste. It will save producers money and enable them to stay in
business and meet new governmental regulations regarding irrigation.
Improvements in water management efficiencies and better crop management
practices can increase crop production and uniformity, reduce food costs, and
help preserve the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project
addresses priority challenges currently facing growers, producers, and
agricultural scientists in effectively using water for crop (food) production.
Soil and crop scientists have been examining the need for acquiring higher
resolution moisture and temperature data throughout the root zone and across the
landscape. A science-based approach is needed to optimally determine the number,
location, and depths of sensors to accurately measure, and then model, soil
properties for use in precise, effective and efficient water and crop
management. Moreover, for perennial crops such as wine grapes, there also is a
need to develop models and predictions relating these environmental conditions
and historical data to crop quality and volume as well as long-term tree/vine
health. The proposed technology uses novel visual analytics to organize the
resulting massive data flows and novel predictive models to allow stakeholders
to perform precision management of crops based on soil moisture conditions and
other field conditions that have not been possible to date.