* 1738536
* STTR Phase II:  Continuous Production and Collection of Magnesium via Carbothermal Reduction
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2017,05/31/2022
* Aaron Palumbo, Big Blue Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 05/31/2022
* USD 1,127,499.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Research (STTR) Phase II project stems from addressing the problem of
embedded energy in the manufacture of magnesium metal for use in vehicle light-
weighting. Improving fuel economy by incorporation of the lightest structural
metal, magnesium, does not save on total lifecycle energy consumed if the
magnesium was produced using conventional methods. The most energy efficient and
economical production method is known is a process technology that was
commercially viable during World War II but not at any other time in history.
The project innovation reinvestigates and reinvents this dated process,
discovering the reasons for technical and economic failure. Domestic magnesium
production using state-of-the-art energy-efficient practices will lead to
opportunity and growth for downstream manufacturers that support a wide range of
military, industrial, and consumer products such as car parts, electronic
devices, titanium and steel production, and canned beverages. The economic and
environmental benefits of the innovation in the long term will be ever more
prescient given the unprecedented rise in use of magnesium metal over the past
100 years. This innovation creates a clean and economic route to magnesium
production, helping to reinvigorate light metals industries within the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is derived from
a new paradigm in the condensation of magnesium metal gas produced by
carbothermal reduction of magnesium oxide. Previously, shock cooling through a
meta-stable temperature range was employed, generating pyrophoric powders that
are dangerous and difficult to handle. This Phase II research uses both rapid
cooling and controlled heterogeneous condensation for the formation of robust,
oxidation resistance magnesium condensate. This process is executed in a novel
and continuous condenser for high metal throughput. This effort is also made
possible through the development of a reduction reactor technology that operates
under milder conditions than previously used while maintaining high production
rates. Total plant energy consumption will be at least 50% less than the
dominant incumbent process. The Phase II project will result in a scaled ore-to-
ingot pilot facility for the manufacture of magnesium metal as a raw material
into manufacturing processes. Product quality, process feasibility, and proven
scale-up will be demonstrated.