* 1738472
* SBIR Phase II:  Resonant Light Detection and Ranging
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2017,02/29/2020
* Christopher Brown, Z-senz LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/29/2020
* USD 909,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
resonant light detection and ranging (R-LIDAR) distance sensor based upon use of
an optomechanical beam scanning element actuated at resonant frequency. The
broader impact of this project is to commercialize distance sensing
instrumentation that advances the development of robotic and autonomous systems
(RAS) by providing improved performance and order-of-magnitudes reduction in
sensor size and cost. The development of RAS technologies could benefit society
by increasing the productivity of economic activities in industries that
include: mining, oil and gas, transportation, manufacturing, construction,
agriculture, forestry, and defense. These industries are commercially
significant and accounted for 24% of US GDP in 2015. Upon development, the
R-LIDAR system is expected to make a commercial impact in a total addressable
market for light detection and ranging (LIDAR) distance sensors that is expected
to reach $739 million/year by 2018. Successful development of the R-LIDAR
instrument will also pioneer opportunities for resonant scanning instrumentation
in related optical applications that include microscopy, endoscopy, light
machining, and display.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Resonant beam scanners provide
robust high-speed and high-performance operation that address size, weight, and
power (SWAP) consumption limitations in state of the art light LIDAR distance
sensors. The key outcome of the SBIR Phase I project was the successful
integration of a resonant optomechanical element into an R-LIDAR distance
sensor, demonstrating a 125 X 125 pixel field-of-view acquired at a 20 Hz frame
rate. The SBIR Phase II project seeks to advance R-LIDAR instrumentation through
(1) development of low-SWAP robust scanning elements, (2) techniques and
instrumentation that allow for improved signal to noise ratio and high-rate data
acquisition from pulsed time-of-flight LIDAR sensors, and (3) increased ranging
capability of low-SWAP R-LIDAR instrumentation. Successful completion of these
technical objectives will result in a distance sensing technology that will be
particularly useful for high-accuracy surveying and inspection applications
conducted using small unmanned aircraft system (S-UAS), where size and payload
constraints are acute.