* 1738748
* RII Track-4: Paleoecological insights into the impacts of climate change on Vermont lakes
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Laurie Grigg, Norwich University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 08/31/2019
* USD 131,963.00

Non-technical Description The water quality of small lakes in Vermont and other
northern states is influenced by the types of aquatic plants growing in the
lake. Lakes dominated by large aquatic plants are able to maintain a relatively
stable, clear water state, while lakes dominated by algae are more likely to
suffer from a decline in both water quality and ecosystem health. The most
important factor controlling whether a lake is plant- versus algae-dominated is
the input of nutrients such as phosphorous, which has increased in many lakes as
a result of human activity. Annual and seasonal variations in temperature and
precipitation can amplify nutrient-driven changes in aquatic plant growth. These
short-term climatic impacts have increased concern over the long-term water
quality of lakes in the face of predictions of climate change. Lake sediment,
which accumulates in layers at the bottom of lakes through time, provides an
opportunity to investigate the dynamics between past climate change and aquatic
plant growth over longer time-scales and to gain insights into how aquatic
ecosystems will be impacted in the future by climate change. Lake sediment
samples from central Vermont contain data on the chemical composition of the
sediment and fossils of plants and animals, which will be used to reconstruct
changes in both climate and aquatic plant growth during the last 10,000 years. A
network of existing climate reconstructions from the northeast documents several
past regional climatic changes, which will provide a context for evaluating how
lakes respond to changes in temperature and/or precipitation. Collaboration with
the Department of Geology and Geophysics at the University of Wyoming will
enable access to critical analyses, as well as training in innovative
statistical approaches to data analysis. The results of this project will build
a strong collaboration between researchers at Norwich University and the
University of Wyoming while establishing new methods for investigating past
aquatic ecosystems and contributing to a greater understanding of the long-term
connections between aquatic plant growth, water quality, and climate change.
This work will inform future management decisions concerning the conservation of
Vermont's lakes and will provide additional evidence on the impact that
projected climate change will have on valuable freshwater resources.

Technical Description The fates of lakes and other freshwater resources in
Vermont have become of central environmental concern due to increased nutrient
loading. In small lakes, nutrient loading controls the dominance of
phytoplankton versus macrophytes, and is a determinant of water quality and
ecosystem health. Macrophytes promote a clear-water state while excessive
phytoplankton leads to turbid-water and eutrophic conditions. In addition to
changes in nutrient loads, fish population size and composition, lake size and
depth, and climate, have the potential to induce a shift between macrophyte- and
phytoplankton-states. Climate is the least well-understood of these factors and
poses an important set of research questions in Vermont, where during the last
50 years, winter and summer mean annual temperatures and total precipitation
have increased. This study will provide long-term insight into these issues by
using lake sediment cores from central Vermont to reconstruct past changes in
lake primary productivity and climate during the Holocene Epoch (10,000-0 years
before present). Temperature and precipitation changes during the Holocene in
the northeastern United States are well-documented by a network of
paleoecological sites, and provide an opportunity to examine the role of climate
as a driver of aquatic ecosystem change. Carbonate-rich lakes in central Vermont
contain multiple depositional environments that preserve unique sets of proxy
data that will enable the reconstruction of independent records of climate and
paleoproductivity. This work will be done in collaboration with the University
of Wyoming and will use a suite of sediment and geochemical analyses that are
available within the Departments of Geology and Geophysics' laboratories. In
addition, the collaborator at the University of Wyoming has developed
quantitative approaches to analysis of multivariate paleoecological data that
will be used to identify statistically significant patterns of variability. The
work completed during this fellowship will employ novel approaches to
reconstructing past changes in lake productivity that may be adopted more widely
by other researchers and will expand the application of paleoecology to
understanding modern limnological processes.