* 1738730
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Low-income Adults and the Federal and Faith-Based Healthcare Safety Net
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Collin Mueller, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 11/30/2018
* USD 11,565.00

Title: Unpacking Inequality in the Faith-Based and Federal Healthcare Safety
Net&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will explore how the everyday experiences
of low-income and uninsured adults shape both the healthcare they have access to
and the ways in which they navigate safety-net healthcare organizations in the
years following the passage of the Affordable Care Act (ACA). Low-income and
uninsured adults in the U.S. are the leading edge in the rising incidence of
preventable chronic illness and need high-quality preventive healthcare.
However, little progress has been made in understanding the role of healthcare
safety-net organizations in the lives of low-income and uninsured adults in an
era characterized by significant health and welfare policy changes, neoliberal
privatization, and safety net resource fragmentation. This study will analyze
multiple data sources centered on the perceptions and experiences of safety net
healthcare workers and low-income and uninsured patients who use primary care
clinics in a mid-sized city in the southeast region of the U.S. which has become
a New Immigrant Destination. Findings will be shared directly with public and
private safety-net healthcare organizations to advance the state of current best
practices in these settings, with the goals of improving equality in healthcare
treatment outcomes among patients and enhancing the coordination of resources
provided across safety-net organizations to low-income families.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research questions will address three specific aims. The
first involves a systematic investigation of how life course transitions around
health, family, residence, and employment shape when and how low-income and
uninsured adults enter healthcare safety net organizations. The second will
assess how gendered and racialized features of healthcare systems, welfare
systems, and bureaucratic institutions shape the organizational logics of public
and private primary care safety-net settings and sanction the efforts of
individual workers as they seek to improve their patients' everyday lives. The
third seeks to clarify the role of healthcare safety-net organizations in
shaping the attitudes, feelings, and health expectations of low-income adults
and the kinds of resources available to them. These aims will be addressed
through a comparative ethnographic case study of one private primary care
setting and one federally qualified health center. The methodology incorporates
team-based longitudinal ethnographic methods, qualitative interviews, and
patient electronic medical records. The analysis will examine organizational
policies, worker attitudes and experiences, and patient attitudes and
experiences.