* 1738706
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Processes and Politics of Trust at Work
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Allison Pugh, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 06/30/2018
* USD 11,465.00

This project analyzes how post-industrial workers accomplish and interpret
interpersonal trust at work and how this trust influences workers' job
perceptions within a broader context of labor insecurity. The project will
expand knowledge in two scholarly fields. To the interdisciplinary scholarship
on trust, the project offers a conceptual framework that addresses
inconsistencies in the definition and measurement of trust across different
studies. The project also enhances labor process theory by investigating how
trust organizes workplace relationships at a time when more traditional work
structures, such as internal labor markets and unions, are eroding. In
highlighting how trust not only fosters economic production but also guides
workplace meanings and commitments, the findings from this project can help
employers to create more inclusive and supportive work environments that
attract, develop and capitalize on global talent. In addition, worker advocates
and policymakers can use the project's findings to educate workers about the
benefits and liabilities of trust and to develop institutional supports and
policies that help workers leverage workplace relations to promote economic
security and mobility.

Workplace trust presents an empirical puzzle for sociologists of culture, labor
and inequality. In national surveys, Americans indicate high levels of
interpersonal trust at work while reporting very little trust more generally.
Prior research suggests interpersonal trust in the workplace should be eroding
in today's climate of transient and flexible work, workforce diversity and
systematic employee surveillance, yet workers' trust in one another and in
managers seems to persist within contemporary American workplaces. The proposed
research investigates this apparent incongruity by asking: (1) how trust is
collectively constituted within local work contexts that are distinctly
structured by varying levels of hierarchy, surveillance and social status and
(2) how processes of trust influence the ways in which workplace actors develop
and understand work relationships and assess work situations. These processes
are studied in two class-differentiated, service sector worksites through 12
months of participant observations and 80 in-depth interviews with workers and
managers.