* 1738975
* D3SC:  EAGER:  Collaborative Research:  A probabilistic framework for automated force field parameterization from experimental datasets
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Michael Shirts, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 07/31/2019
* USD 118,918.00

Michael Shirts of the University of Colorado Boulder and John Chodera of the
Sloan Kettering Institute are supported by a grant from the Chemical Theory,
Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of Chemistry to develop
statistical and probabilistic methods for parameterizing molecular force fields
through the automated integration of information from large experimental
datasets. This project is supported under the Data-Driven Discovery Science in
Chemistry (D3SC) Dear Colleague Letter (DCL), and is co-funded by the
Cyberinfrastructure for Emerging Science and Engineering Research (CESER)
Program in the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure. Force fields are
classical approximations to quantum mechanical descriptions of interacting
molecules. Because they are several orders of magnitude faster to use in
simulations than even approximate quantum approaches, force fields are integral
to computational modeling in chemistry, chemical engineering, biophysics,
materials science, and soft-matter physics. New and more accurate force fields
are needed in order to accelerate drug discovery, biomaterials design, and
nanoscale device engineering. Currently, force fields are primarily tuned using
quantum chemical calculations and small amounts of experimental data, and rely
on optimization methods that often require considerable manual intervention, may
not identify optimal solutions, and do not provide a way of characterizing and
propagating parameter uncertainty. When experimental data is included in the
tuning process, there is currently no systematic way to incorporate information
on measurement error to weight the data accordingly. Professors Shirts and
Chodera are developing a rigorous Bayesian probabilistic framework and
statistical techniques to overcome these problems. Their approach is designed to
take advantage of large, rich experimental datasets including measurement
uncertainty, leverage available data more efficiently, and automate both
parameter selection and the choice of functional forms in the mathematical
formulation of the force field. Software from the project is being disseminated
as open source Python code that can be interfaced to simulation codes such as
OpenMM and GROMACS. A new Open Force Field Group, with collaborators from
academia, the National Institute of Standards and Technology, and industry, will
advance community-driven force field development and applications during the
project and beyond.

This project is addressing the challenges of force field parameterization by
applying a rigorous Bayesian inference framework to determine force fields that
are maximally compatible with experimental datasets. The formalism is being
applied initially to organic and aqueous liquid mixtures using the NIST ThermoML
Archive, which contains a wide range of thermophysical property measurements and
associated measurement errors for thousands of molecules. Specific tasks include
(1) developing and evaluating an automated Bayesian force field parameterization
framework that scales to large numbers of parameters and large data sets, and
(2) using this approach to explore the automated selection of force field
functional forms. The Bayesian probabilistic framework developed in this work
promises to greatly reduce human effort, maximize force field transferability
and generalizability by avoiding over-fitting, and enable the systematic
extraction of available information from a given set of experimental data. The
probabilistic formulation will allow force fields to be easily extended to
accommodate new experimental data in a consistent manner via conditional
Bayesian updates, and will provide direct routes for estimating systematic
error. Initial tests of the new approach will help resolve important questions
on the parameterization of molecular force fields for liquid systems, such as
optimal choices of functional forms and combining rules. The same techniques can
be later used to determine whether pure fluid thermodynamic properties are
sufficient to parameterize fluids to reproduce mixture properties, as measured
experimentally by the project, and to assess the importance of including
polarization in force fields. Open source software tools will be released as
easily-installed interoperable Python modules and online instructive
IPython/Jupyter notebooks, and all experimental datasets and parameter sets will
be freely disseminated.