* 1738776
* Collaborative Research: Chicago Alliance For Equity in Computer Science (CAFECS)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/15/2017,09/30/2023
* Lucia Dettori, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,039,036.00

DePaul University, in collaboration with The Learning Partnership, Loyola
University of Chicago, Chicago Public Schools (CPS), and the University of
Illinois at Chicago, proposes a researcher practitioner partnership - the
Chicago Alliance For Equity in Computer Science (CAFECS)- with the aim of
ensuring that all CPS students have access to inclusive, high-quality,
introductory computer science education in high school. CPS, the third largest
school district in the nation, requires all students starting high school in
Fall 2017 or later to complete a computer science (CS) course. CAFECS will
ensure that CPS provides sufficient support to teachers and holds all schools
accountable for offering high-quality CS across the entire district. CAFECS will
empower at least 25,000 Chicago teens with the foundational practices of
computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAFECS stems from a well-established
partnership between university CS and educational research faculty, along with
CPS teachers and administrators. The partnership began forming in Chicago a
decade ago around the common goal of providing all CPS high school students
access to meaningful and engaging computer science instruction. CAFECS is
currently reaching a large and diverse population through the extensively-tested
Exploring Computer Science (ECS) curriculum and professional development
program, with its guided-inquiry approach and a focus on engaging students
through multiple modes of learning and culturally sensitive content. Over 200
teachers have completed ECS professional development delivered by CAFECS. In the
2016-2017 school year, approximately 7,000 students have completed ECS in 63
high schools (of the 106 district-run high schools). The student population in
these ECS courses spans the largest population categories long underrepresented
in computing includes 44% females, 38% African-American, and 47% Hispanic, which
is consistent with the district-wide demographics. Building on this initial
success, CPS must continue to develop mechanisms for providing professional
development for teachers and principals at scale in order to ensure that all
schools offer a high quality CS course to all CPS students. The project seeks to
build upon established relationships between the university partners and CPS so
that they will continue to serve the community beyond the scope of the project.