* 1738709
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Muslim Pan-ethnic Identity and Political Engagement across European Countries
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Patricia McManus, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,519.00

Current estimates hold that the Muslim share of the population in Europe is
expected to double between 1990 and 2040. Rising immigration poses challenges
for the successful incorporation of the next generation of European Muslims.
Muslim immigrants to Europe represent a diversity of cultures, ethnicities and
races; yet government policies and public discourse often treat Muslims as a
monolithic group. This project investigates the emergence of a shared group
identity in adolescence for Muslim descendants of immigrants in Europe, and it
considers how this shared group identity, can, in turn, be used for political
engagement and incorporation in adulthood. Findings will enhance understanding
of the place of religion in democratic societies that are adapting to rapid
demographic change and increasing religious diversity. Specifically, this
project examines religion as a source of identity, as a potential for social
cleavage, and as a mechanism for the incorporation of marginalized minority
groups into the mainstream democratic process. This research will provide
insights into religion as a basis for social relations and the place of Islam in
European societies. Results will also have implications for school officials,
social workers and policy makers in countries experiencing an increase in the
Muslim population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theorists argue that boundaries?defined
as perceptions of otherness?in Europe are based on religion. However, no
research has examined how boundaries are created by states and their
implications for religious identity salience, perceived religious
discrimination, and political participation. The researchers posit Muslim
identity in Europe as a racialized pan-ethnic identity: an imposed
categorization which unifies individuals from diverse backgrounds. Specifically,
this project investigates how the context of reception (national incorporation
policies and regional attitudes from the native majority) shapes three facets of
Muslim pan-ethnic identity: 1) its development in adolescence independently from
national origins and personal religiosity, 2) its roots in shared experiences of
religious discrimination, and 3) its potential for political engagement in
adulthood through pan-ethnic organizations. In order to study pan-ethnic
identity across these three domains, this project uses latent growth curve
analysis for modeling Muslim adolescents? identity salience between ninth and
eleventh grade in Germany, the Netherlands, England and Sweden, and multilevel
modeling for analyzing Muslims? religious and political incorporation in
nineteen European countries. The research uses the recently available Children
of Immigrants Longitudinal Study in four European Countries, the European Social
Survey of nineteen European countries, and data on country-level immigration
policy.