* 1738564
* RII Track-4: Quantifying Muscle Assembly in Live C. elegans Using Super-Resolution Light Microscopy
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Ryan Littlefield, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 08/31/2020
* USD 128,020.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;A major goal of modern cell biology is to
understand how organisms develop complex functional tissues using genetic
information. In muscle, contractile fibers composed of repeating structural
units shorten and produce force to power a wide variety of functions, such as
locomotion, feeding, and reproduction. To understand how muscle fiber assembly
occurs, newly-developed genome editing techniques and advanced light microscopes
will be employed to observe fiber components within an intact, developing round
worm. This collaboration between the University of South Alabama and the
National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Biotechnology (NIBIB) of the
National Institutes of Health will enable intensive knowledge transfer between
the institutions and provide immersive research training opportunities for both
undergraduate and graduate students. Our observations and measurements will not
only reveal how specific muscle proteins assemble into contractile fibers during
development, but will also lead to a better understanding of how muscles heal
after injury, adapt to altered mechanical environments, and respond to disease-
causing mutations and aging. This fellowship will allow participation of both
the PI and a graduate student, and has the potnetial to allow the PI to develop
a sustainable research program that would raise the instiution?s visibility in
this cutting-edge field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;Striated muscle contractile fibers (myofibrils) form by
the self-assembly of thin and thick filament arrays that are precisely
integrated into a series of repeating functional units (sarcomeres) to produce
force. Sarcomeric components remain surprisingly dynamic after myofibril
assembly, which enable muscles to structurally reorganize in response to
external signals such as mechanical load and stretch. In this project, we will
use state-of-the-art techniques available at the NIBIB to observe striated
muscle organization and dynamics within intact, developing roundworms
(Caenorhabditis elegans) with unprecedented resolution and precision. A novel
bicistronic tagging and truncations (BiTTs) genome editing tool will be used to
produce fluorescent reporters with minimal impact on gene expression, and will
create specific, fluorescently-tagged protein fragments that strategically
disrupt myofibril assembly and organization. Using low-dose, high-speed, super-
resolution microscopy, we will rapidly collect 3D images of developing C.
elegans embryos to quantify how endogenous proteins accumulate and change within
specific sarcomeric structures during myofibril assembly in a variety of muscle
types while minimizing phototoxicity and ensuring normal development and
behavior of the organism. This research is designed to examine complex,
important questions such as: How are thin and thick filaments connected and
organized into functional myofibrils? How do thin and thick filaments elongate
during sarcomere growth? And, how are new sarcomeres added during muscle cell
elongation? Because of the conserved structural, functional, and compositional
similarities among striated muscles within different animals, our findings will
provide important insight into how diverse muscle types develop, how muscles
repair and adapt sarcomeres after injury or growth, and how muscle fibers
malfunction during disease or aging.