* 1738714
* Phase II IUCRC University of Michigan: Center for Unmanned Aircraft Systems (C-UAS)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Carlos Cesnik, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 08/31/2024
* USD 546,665.00

Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) or "drones" have captured our attention as a
means to collect aerial sensor data, carry small payloads, and motivate students
through low-cost, hands-on flight experiences. Numerous research challenges
related to safely operating UAS of all sizes and missions must be addressed
before we can realize their full potential. The Center for UAS (C-UAS) is an
existing National Science Foundation Industry/University Cooperative Research
Center (IUCRC) supporting a wide range of UAS-centric research topics. C-UAS,
led by Brigham-Young University, has successfully transitioned into Phase II.
The C-UAS I/UCRC provides a critical pathway for university and industry members
to collaboratively identify and explore important basic and applied research
relevant to UAS. The University of Michigan proposes to join the C-UAS team,
offering new industry members and new research expertise to the existing center.
The Michigan team complements existing C-UAS strengths in autonomy, guidance,
navigation, and control and offers new expertise in high altitude long endurance
platforms, reduced-order aerodynamics modeling, and energy
harvesting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;C-UAS is pursuing two new center-wide focus
areas to kick off Phase II: autonomy and counter-UAS. For autonomy, Michigan
researchers will pursue identification and infusion of new data sources to
enable future UAS flight planners to quantitatively model and minimize risk to
people and property on the ground. Michigan will also extend previous work in
static and dynamic geofencing to assure each UAS remains within airspace it is
authorized to occupy. For counter-UAS, Michigan will pursue fundamental research
to analyze and design defense strategies against aerial swarms through
development of information-sharing and motion models that can be used to compute
jamming and interception defensive actions. The Michigan team will also
investigate two new UAS research thrusts. High-altitude long-endurance (HALE)
flight is envisioned through a flexible-wing platform that offers light-weight
aerodynamically-efficient performance; the proposed research will develop a
validated model of aeroelastic effects coupled with flight dynamics for very-
flexible UAS with modeling, simulation, and UAS flight experiments. A second new
research effort will develop reduced-order models of the atmospheric boundary
layer and vehicle aeromechanics effects that account for day/night convection in
complex terrain and urban corridors with application to UAS flight planning,
trajectory prediction, and control.