* 1738934
* NSF-NERC: Ground Geophysics Survey of Thwaites Glacier
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Richard Alley, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 02/29/2024
* USD 2,756,049.00

This project contributes to the joint initiative launched by the U.S. National
Science Foundation (NSF) and the U.K. Natural Environment Research Council
(NERC) to substantially improve decadal and longer-term projections of ice loss
and sea-level rise originating from Thwaites Glacier in West Antarctica. Global
costs of rapid sea-level rise to infrastructure (e.g., houses, roads, farms,
ports) are likely to be large. A possible source of water for sea-level rise is
the West Antarctic Ice Sheet, and Thwaites Glacier in particular. Ice sheets and
glaciers contain vast quantities of water (in the form of ice) that is
continually shed to the ocean, and continually replenished by snowfall (from
water that evaporates from the oceans). If the amount of ice that Thwaites
Glacier loses to the ocean over the next decades is much greater than the amount
it receives as snowfall, then sea level in all the world's oceans would rise,
possibly as much as a meter (approximately 3 feet). In order to estimate how
likely such a catastrophic scenario would be, we need to better understand the
surface over which Thwaites Glacier slides. If we can better characterize that
layer ("is to smooth? Is it rough? Is it soft? Is it hard?"), then computer
models of Thwaites would be much improved and we can make better projections of
the amount of ice that Thwaites Glacier would shed to the
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the project are to learn whether
basal conditions allow for rapid retreat of the Thwaites Glacier grounding line
or whether retreat may re-stabilize near its current grounding line. These
objectives will be achieved by using dedicated ice-flow modeling to guide
targeted field surveys and experiments over two seasons, and to measure the most
important unknown quantities and incorporate them into the models. Numerical
models will be used to generate hypotheses for basal conditions that are
testable through geophysical surveys and to project future behavior of Thwaites
Glacier after assimilating the resulting data. The geophysical methods include
seismic, radar, gravity, and electrical surveys that together will allow for a
fuller characterization of the bed. We will conduct field surveys in areas
representative of different parts of the glacier, including across the margins,
near the grounding line, and along the central axis of the glacier into its
catchment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.