* 1738689
* Phase II IUCRC Virginia Tech: Center for Energy Harvesting Materials and Systems (CEHMS)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2017,12/31/2023
* Dong Ha, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2023
* USD 847,619.00

Transforming ambient energy, available freely from many sources (mostly as
wasted energy), to electric power has attracted the interest of different
industries because of growth potential and breadth of applications. The ability
to generate power locally could eliminate the need to deliver power through a
wire, and recharge or replace batteries. Through industry-directed research and
collaborative efforts between the center sites, industry members of the Center
for Energy Harvesting Materials and Systems (CEHMS) and others will be able to
embed self-powered sensors within structures (buildings, aircraft, bridges,
nuclear plants, etc.) to relay information about their structural integrity,
power sensors for natural hazards monitoring, replenish power of portable and
wearable electronic devices, and support the Internet of Things and operation of
autonomous systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multidisciplinary research team
will perform research on industry-driven projects with the objective of
translating laboratory prototypes into commercial products; build on
interdisciplinary strengths in science and technology, and; develop strong
collaborations with industry. We will use a holistic approach to design and
develop multifunctional building envelopes and infrastructure surfaces, through
which the interactions and potential synergies between the various material and
structural behaviors, energy harvesting and efficiency performance, and human
behaviors are properly understood, modeled, and exploited, while eliminating or
minimizing any potentially detrimental consequences or interactions. In
addition, we will also develop effective sensing and monitoring systems and
accelerated testing methods for maximized energy harvesting efficiency and life
cycle cost performance. As the first step to make a transformative change for
energy harvesting through civil engineering infrastructure through the following
five research thrusts: 1) Multifunctional advanced materials and structures for
energy harvesting and efficiency; 2) Energy converting devices for solar,
geothermal, and mechanics energy harvesting and storage, such as battery and
fuel cells; 3) Roadway energy harvesting systems with infrastructure protection;
4) Energy efficient buildings with energy harvesting and wireless sensing; and
5) Life cycle analysis and testing of energy harvesting materials and systems.