* 1738121
* Drivers of Selective Mass Extinction: Insight from Integrated Paleontological and Geochemical Records
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Andrew Bush, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 07/31/2021
* USD 277,381.00

Environmental changes in the modern world threaten many species with extinction.
Understanding how similar disruptions drove extinction in Earth's past provides
essential context for understanding current risks to the biosphere. This project
focuses on the Late Devonian mass extinction, one of the "Big 5" mass
extinctions in Earth's history, which occurred approximately 372 million years
ago. It will address the following questions: 1) How did environmental
conditions change during this extinction? 2) What kinds of animals survived the
extinction and what kinds died? 3) What features or traits of these organisms
promoted survival versus extinction? The project will combine information from
multiple spatial scales, including extensive fossil collections from Late
Devonian-aged rocks in upstate New York and Pennsylvania and 'Big data' mined
from global, community-wide databases. The project includes outreach through
local museums, including public lectures on extinction and the development of
new hands-on activities for use at a local children's museum.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field-based component of the project will focus on
stratigraphic ranges of brachiopod and coral species in the upper Frasnian and
lower Famennian of the Appalachian Basin, organic carbon isotopes through
measured stratigraphic sections, and proxies for oxygenation, including fossil
content and trace metals. The global component will draw on the temporal,
paleoenvironmental, and paleolatitudinal ranges of genera in the Paleobiology
Database and other databases; new Late Devonian collections will be added to
improve data coverage. Leading proposed causes of extinction include global
cooling and ocean anoxia. At both the regional and global scales, selectivity of
extinction with respect to these factors will be evaluated using latitudinal
range as a proxy for temperature tolerance and paleoenvironmental preference
(depth preference and range) as a proxy for vulnerability to oxygen depletion.