* 1738396
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Men and Care Work Jobs, Evidence from Two Cohorts
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Wei-hsin Yu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 05/31/2018
* USD 12,000.00

Care work, broadly defined, work that enhances the emotional and physical well-
being or development of other people; care work is usually associated with
"women's work" and is typically underpaid. Men's presence in care work jobs
remains low despite job growth in education and health care and the decline in
traditionally male-dominated manufacturing sectors. Previous research has
debated whether rigid gender attitudes or material concerns such as higher wages
accounts for the low numbers of men in care work jobs. Moreover, jobs have
increasingly polarized; wages, working conditions, and job security have
declined in care work jobs since the 1970s. This polarizing pattern of care work
job growth is characterized by racial disparity, with racial minorities more
likely to occupy low-paying jobs. This project has two aims: first, to
empirically examine why and how men enter different kinds of care work jobs, and
second, to investigate the factors contributing to the racial disparity in the
paid care work sector under the context of increasing job polarization. By
shedding light on the cultural versus structural debate as well as the
intersecting inequalities by race and class along with men's presence in the
paid care work sector, findings from this project will help develop policy
suggestions about how to encourage more men to enter care work jobs while
closing the racial disparity in the paid care work
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address whether men?s avoidance of care work
jobs is motivated primarily by cultural concerns - care work jobs are typically
labeled as "women's work" - or by material concerns, the first part of this
project empirically tests the specific mechanisms related to gender attitudes,
human capital, and labor market positions behind men's entry into various kinds
of care work jobs. The project uses nationally representative, individual-level
data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) 1979. Event history
models will examine men's transition into first care work jobs. The second part
of this project explains a phenomenon that has been documented by previous
research - that is, the polarization pattern of paid care work jobs has been
highly racialized, with whites increasingly concentrating in high-paying and
racial/ethnic minorities in low-paying care work jobs. The analysis aims to
elucidate the extent to which this racialized pattern is driven by racial
disparity in education and labor market experiences, and/or by racial
discrimination. Using data from NLSY79 and 97, the study will show how
socioeconomic determinants of men's entry into high-paying and low-paying care
work jobs have changed in the "new economy" by comparing two cohorts of young
men (late Baby Boomers and early Millennials) who joined the workforce under
different labor market conditions. Findings from the second part will illuminate
increasing racial and class inequalities behind the celebrated trend towards
gender occupational integration. Since paid care work sectors are projected to
continue their strong growth in the U.S., insights from this project can inform
how labor market inequalities by race and class may decline or intensify in the
future.