* 1738757
* RII Track-4: Dynamic Live Imaging and Manipulation of Migrating Collectives Inside Tissues
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Jocelyn McDonald, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 08/31/2022
* USD 176,539.00

Nontechnical Description:&lt;br/&gt;During the development of embryos, groups of
cells (referred to as 'collectives') move together to help form tissues and
organs. Movement of these collectives inside the developing embryo is poorly
understood. This fellowship will study development of the fruit fly as a model
system to understand how cell collectives move within, and interact with,
living, intact tissues. The scientific goals of this project are to use new
advanced microscopic methods to reveal how collectives move in tissues, and to
use light to control cell movements. The PI and a postdoctoral fellow will be
trained in these new techniques at the University of California, Santa Barbara,
and will then bring the techniques back to the home institution (Kansas State
University). These studies will result in new tools that can be used to study
how embryos develop into fully formed animals, and to improve our broader
understanding of how cell collectives move within
tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The migration of
multicellular groups, or cell collectives, is vital to the formation and
reorganization of tissues during organogenesis. While collective migrations are
required for development, it is not well understood how cells stay ordered and
migratory despite moving inside densely packed tissues. Drosophila border cells
are an excellent genetically tractable model system to address how cell
collectives physically and molecularly interact with the native tissue
environment. The goal of this fellowship is to uncover mechanisms that underlie
interactions between migrating collectives and tissues through the use of
cutting-edge live cell imaging of the border cell system. The work will be
performed in partnership with reasearchers at the University of California,
Santa Barbara, which is a leader in the field of collective cell migration and
innovative live cell manipulation and imaging. The PI will employ a combination
of Selective Plane Illumination (SPIM) light sheet fluorescent microscopy
(LSFM), in vivo biosensors, and optogenetic tools that employ light to
manipulate protein function in live cells, will be used at the host site. These
techniques will address: (1) how tissue shape and organization impacts border
cell collective migration; and (2) how Rap1, a key signaling protein, controls
the adhesion strength and dynamics of border cells during their migration inside
the tissue. The project will allow the PI to create and use innovative imaging
and optogenetic tools to considerably advance our conceptual and mechanistic
understanding of how cell collectives migrate in complex native environments.
The PI will introduce and promote adoption of this technology at the PI?s home
institution, Kansas State University (KSU) by training other investigators on
how to use biosensors and optogenetic tools.