* 1738502
* RIDIR: Survey Data Recycling: New Analytic Framework, Integrated Database, and Tools for Cross-national Social, Behavioral and Economic Research
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* J. Craig Jenkins, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,402,259.00

Professionals and academic researchers in universities, government, the
corporate world, and NGOs need timely access to the wealth of existing
international survey data. Currently these data are difficult to use in an
integrated fashion because they are not directly comparable. This project
addresses this problem by developing a harmonized database derived from over
3,000 national surveys administered over 5 decades to more than 3.5 million
respondents from over 150 countries. The database contains measures of social
capital, wellbeing, and political participation. Indicators of demographic,
political, and economic aspects of the countries at the time respondents were
interviewed complement information about individuals. These products will
facilitate the integrated and efficient use of extant international social
survey data by a wide range of social actors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Survey
Data Recycling Project (SDR) enables innovative data-intensive research on major
substantive topics of social science interest and advances the fields of
comparative methodology and of survey data harmonization. There are two main
contributions. First, the SDR project builds theory-informed big data that allow
users to overcome limitations of space and time coverage inherent in separate
international survey projects. The SDR database provides individual-level
harmonized subjective measures from 24 international survey projects, including
the World Values Survey, the International Social Survey Program, the European
Social Survey, Eurobarometer and its regional editions from 1966 together with
metadata as variables describing both source data quality and harmonization
procedures. The second contribution is a battery of new analytical tools that
researchers can use to assess our harmonization effort and to analyze multi-
dimensional data structures stemming from ex-post survey harmonization,
including the SDR database. The project's portal provides access to the database
and the analytical tools facilitating data evaluation, visualization, analysis,
and extraction. The new framework for data recycling that we develop integrates
previously separate strands of survey methodology and constructs measures of
source data quality, and control indicators for ex-post harmonization. The
metadata allow scholars to account for biases and errors produced in the
harmonization lifecycle that runs from obtaining the source data, to creating
the target variables, and cleaning and checking the integrated data files. The
project is governed by a professional oversight committee and maintains strong
communication with the international survey research community to promote
improvements of, and access to its products. The SDR project creates a new
research paradigm for a unified theoretically-informed and methodologically
advanced approach to ex-post harmonization of cross-national survey data
accessible to multiple types of users.