* 1738793
* Phase II IUCRC Binghamton University: Center for Energy-Smart Electronic Systems (ES2)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Bahgat Sammakia, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 07/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Data centers are an integral part of life, providing services ranging from
social networking, e-commerce and entertainment to cloud infrastructures that
provide storage and computing capabilities for individuals and enterprises. Data
centers consume over 2% of the nation's electricity, generated mostly from
fossil sources. The Center for Energy-Smart Electronic systems (ES2) was
established to develop tools and methodologies for improving the energy
efficiency of electronic systems, primarily data centers. Much of the energy
expended by data centers is wasted due to operating inefficiencies, including
operating more servers than are needed to handle the workload and overcooling
the IT equipment, or deploying sub-optimal cooling and IT technologies. ES2?s
research focusses on developing intelligent and fully automated techniques for
operating data centers to match the IT and cooling resources to the workload
demands, avoiding energy waste while maintaining service quality. ES2 research
benefits society by: (a) providing solutions to reduce the demand on the
electrical grid and the carbon footprint and enabling the growth of data center-
based services in an energy-efficient way and (b) developing human resources by
training engineers and computer scientists in high-demand skills. ES2?s research
therefore enables the nation to maintain competitive, agile and energy-efficient
cyber services and infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of ES2 is to
dramatically reduce data center energy consumption. The center's vision is the
creation and operation of energy-optimized data centers and electronic systems
at any specified performance level by smart allocation and distribution of IT
load, smart integration of controlled on-demand cooling, and smart elimination
of energy waste and inefficiencies. The Phase I funding from NSF supported the
development of models, metrics and infrastructures that would realize this
vision. At Binghamton University, Phase II research focuses on the challenges
involved in reducing energy waste with just-in-time, just enough server and
cooling capacities to handle the instantaneous workload while meeting the
performance, reliability and availability goals. The approach taken relies on
the use of sophisticated techniques to model and predict the workload and
cooling system needs sufficiently in advance to permit timely adjustments of
processing and cooling resources. Considerations of thermal lags and other
transient thermal phenomena, the time taken for server activations and
deactivations and the potential impact of failures in a tightly-provisioned
system come into play, making the solution a complex optimization problem.
Inherent inefficiencies within the cooling, IT and power delivery components are
addressed through investigations centered on new and emerging technologies.