* 1738614
* RII Track-4: Deciphering sources and accumulation pathways of mercury in the tributaries and lake of a forested watershed using stable mercury isotopes
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Vivien Taylor, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 08/31/2022
* USD 134,957.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Concentrations of mercury, a potent
neurotoxin, frequently exceed levels safe for consumption by humans and wildlife
in fish from pristine, freshwater lakes. The most toxic form of mercury is
methylmercury, which is also the form of mercury that accumulates in wildlife
and humans. The environmental factors that control the transformation of mercury
to methylmercury in the environment are complex, and the sources of mercury and
the environmental conditions involved in production and movement of
methylmercury throughout the forests of the northeastern United States are not
well understood. This project aims to use an emerging analytical technique
developed by collaborators at the University of Michigan that relies on
discrimination between subtle differences in the masses of mercury isotopes to
identify the sources of mercury in a northern New England lake, with the goals
of advancing the application of this cutting-edge new method. Importantly,
application of this method will significantly improve current understanding of
the sources of mercury in soil and water, the potential for production of
methylmercury, and the accumulation of mercury in wildlife. Development of the
collaboration with the University of Michigan will provide training for the PI
and will significantly expand her research capacity at Dartmouth
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Natural
variability in mercury isotope ratios have been used to trace inputs and
identify processes that regulate levels of methylmercury, the toxic form of
mercury that is taken up by the biota. Biota in forested catchments of the
northeastern United States are subject to high concentrations of methylmercury,
but the production and transport of methylmercury in watersheds are mediated in
complex ways by landscape characteristics (e.g., percent wetland and open water
connectivity) and water chemistry (especially dissolved organic carbon levels).
In this study, stable isotopes of mercury will be analyzed to decipher the
sources of methylmercury to the tributaries of a pristine, oligotrophic lake,
and to trace the transfer of mercury in the watershed from these tributaries to
the lake. Isotopic mercury signatures in organisms can fingerprint methylmercury
accumulated from the ecosystem over long time periods. These signatures reflect
transformations (i.e., mercury methylation and demethylation) that occurred
prior to biological uptake, allowing them to be used to distinguish sources of
methylmercury (e.g., watershed, in-lake production) and pathways controlling
methylmercury formation (e.g., biotic methylation, photodegradation) in the
ecosystem. Through collaboration with the University of Michigan, and access to
the collaborator's analytical instrumentation and facilities, mercury isotopic
signatures will be determined in biota from the tributaries and the lake to: 1)
explain sources and pathways controlling methylmercury levels across streams
with varying landscape characteristics; 2) determine the effect of mercury
complexation to organic carbon on mercury isotope signatures; and 3) identify
major sources of methylmercury to fish in a pristine lake. This work will
establish the use of mercury isotopic fingerprints to determine sources and
production pathways of methylmercury in a watershed with no point-sources of
mercury contamination, and provide a valuable new application of stable mercury
isotope signatures.