* 1738132
* Research Initiation:  A Study on the Intersection of Race and Gender on Leadership Formation of Engineering Students
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Amanda Lewis, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2020
* USD 199,801.00

Development of leadership skills by undergraduate engineering students is a key
to successful careers in today's technology industries. Increasing diversity and
inclusion in leadership is also critical for long-term success of technology
companies as they increasingly become global enterprises. Yet, how to achieve
this greater diversity of leadership continues to prove challenging in both
engineering education and industry. This research will serve as a foundational
study that explores how identity shapes the leadership beliefs of a diverse
population of undergraduate engineering students. The influence of identity,
such as race and gender, along with the effects of the intersection of
identities on students' beliefs will also be studied. The aim is to identify the
factors and create a model of these factors informing how students view leaders,
leadership, and the student's own ability to lead. The results of this mapping
will contribute to the research and education communities' efforts to train a
diverse community of engineers as leaders in industry by creating a foundation
model of factors that affect beliefs about students' leadership skills. The
ultimate goal of this project is to create new educational approaches for
increasing students' belief that they can be leaders. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Intersectionality theory, used in this study, is based on the premise
that individuals have multiple identities and that the intersection of these
identities shape an individual's experiences. It also makes use of self-
efficacy, the belief a person has that they are able to achieve a defined goal.
Thus, one of the research aims is to include a broad range of identities by
recruiting from a diverse pool of undergraduate engineering students. This will
make it possible to probe students' leadership self-efficacy and elucidate how
intersectionality of identities, namely race and gender, affects this self-
efficacy. The strength of an individual's self-efficacy has been shown to
strongly correlate with the sustained pursuit by an individual to successfully
achieve their defined goal, while overcoming challenges to achieve it. The
proposed research aims to identify students' beliefs about leaders, leadership,
and their own abilities as leaders, while identifying how the intersectionality
of their identities affects these beliefs. While there is a strong body of
research on the impact a single identity, such as race/ethnicity or gender, has
on engineering formation or leadership development, the nuances of the
intersection of identities on leadership formation of engineering students still
remains a significant gap in knowledge. This gap impacts the long-term retention
and promotion of a diverse community of engineers and their ascension to
leadership roles in industry. The research is structured as a qualitative study
to analyze the leadership self-efficacy of engineering undergraduate students.
Students will be interviewed on their leadership beliefs and a qualitative
analysis will be performed using the constant comparative method. The results
will be used to create a conditional matrix of leadership self-efficacy of
undergraduate engineering students, where identities and intersection of
identities are integrated. Finally, a model of leadership self-efficacy and
factors that affect this self-efficacy will be developed from the analysis
results.