* 1738466
* STTR Phase II:  High Brightness Fluorophores for Bioscience Applications
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2017,12/31/2023
* Dongyan Zhang, StabiLux Biosciences, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,533,997.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase II project is the development of novel high-brightness
fluorescence compounds (fluorophores). These compounds will find applications in
flow cytometry, a laser-induced fluorescence technique that can analyze
thousands of cells per second. This efficient technique is important for
clinical diagnosis, and research in the areas of blood cancer, STEM cells, and
drug development. In a flow cytometry test, each cell structure is stained with
a known fluorophore that is conjugated with a specific biomarker. Thus, the
population of all cell structures and types can be determined simultaneously by
analyzing the fluorescence signals. Unfortunately, such analysis requires
experienced engineers, reliable equipment, and high-performance reagents. The
proposed high-brightness fluorophores will enhance the performance of equipment
and reagents, and enable the detection of low abundant cell structures without
complicated signal processing. In addition, these fluorophores will improve data
reliability, reduce research and drug development time, and cost. These
compounds also will simplify the design and reduce the cost of flow cytometry
equipment, which will help to expand market adoption. The commercial impact of
this technology is expected to be significant, as the market size for flow
cytometry is expected to be $2.2 billion by 2018.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR
Phase II project aims to establish a platform technology for the production of
high-brightness fluorophores that can emit in various colors. In principle, flow
cytometry could simultaneously detect up to 30 different parameters with 30
color signals. However, due to the issues of spillover (signal overlap), and
auto-fluorescence (background noise), the current technology allows for just
two- to eight-color analysis to ensure accuracy. These issues could be resolved
in part by a complicated signal analysis, but this approach may be prone to
analysis errors. The proposed high-brightness fluorophores are designed to
overcome spillover by increasing the weak signals of low abundance cells. In
addition, these fluorophores also may reduce or eliminate the need of
autofluorescence background compensation by increasing the signal to noise
ratios. A higher signal to noise ratio will enable scientists to obtain well-
resolved data with more accurate conclusions within a shorter amount of time.
This technology will allow the detection and sorting of low abundance cells, and
will promote the progress of immunology studies, cancer research, as well as
technology for early disease detection. This will enabling flow cytometry
equipment to be used to its full potential for reliable multi-color detection,
which will lead to better patient and research outcomes.