* 1738128
* Workshops to Increase the Number and Competitiveness of Minority-Serving Institutions (MSIs)' Proposals to NSF Life STEM Program
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* IVORY TOLDSON, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 04/30/2018
* USD 232,537.00

This broadening participation project will coordinate and oversee three two-day
regional workshops about research on STEM education for teams of researchers and
leaders from minority-serving institutions (MSIs). The goal of the workshops
will be to increase the capacity of MSIs to contribute to attracting, preparing,
and retaining underrepresented students for the future STEM workforce. To
achieve this goal, specialized activities will be implemented to create greater
awareness of current opportunities at NSF that will help prepare MSIs to take
part in diversifying the future STEM workforce. These activities will help
increase the quantity and quality of proposals from MSIs seeking funding to
create, implement, and evaluate innovative models of intervention that will help
more PreK-12 or undergraduate students select careers in STEM fields. This
coordinated effort will facilitate individual and cross-institutional capacity
building related to curriculum development, teacher support, and student
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Critical to this capacity-building effort will
be a focus on understanding the current research context and expectations for
competitive participation in STEM education opportunities offered by NSF. The
workshops will be hosted by Xavier University in New Orleans, Louisiana; Spelman
College in Atlanta, Georgia, and Rutgers-Newark in Newark, New Jersey to provide
intensive training to help more MSIs fully participate in and contribute to
national STEM education goals. This, in turn, will align with the Foundation's
strategic direction for broadening participation in STEM through innovation and
cutting-edge research. Project-related materials will be made available online
to ensure broader dissemination of information that will be beneficial to all
MSIs and other research institutions in relation to the Life STEM initiative.