* 1738543
* SBIR Phase II:  High performance biodegradable sandwich core structures
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Mark Peyron, Grow Plastics LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,332,499.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be the development and demonstration of a new
manufacturing technology for lightweight bio-based plastics. Plastic produced
from plant materials can have lower environmental impact than petroleum-based
plastics, but price and performance issues have limited their adoption. In Phase
I, Grow Plastics demonstrated the ability to produce lightweight, low cost,
thermally stable 100% bio-based packaging products. In Phase II, Grow Plastics
will continue the development of its products while also working to develop a
full-scale manufacturing line. The goal of the technology is to replace billions
of pounds of petroleum-based plastic with a lower density plastic requiring half
as much material, which is made from plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR
Phase II research project proposes to continue the development of a new
manufacturing process for layered structures in biomaterials. Grow Plastics has
demonstrated the ability to generate novel, high-performance layered cellular
structures in biopolymers in a new manufacturing process using new machinery.
The challenge in Phase II will be to continue the development in materials from
Phase I while also scaling the technology to industrial scale. Materials science
and manufacturing techniques will include polymer blending, solid state foaming,
and thermal crystallization of polymer blends. Analysis techniques will include
tensile testing, differential scanning calorimetry, thermo mechanical analysis,
and evaluation of final product properties.