* 1738265
* Phase II IUCRC University of Washington Site Addition:  Center for Health Organization Transformation (CHOT)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Cynthia LeRouge, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 07/31/2021
* USD 208,000.00

The University of Washington Departments of Industrial and Systems Engineering
and Health Services is a university site member of the Center for Health
Organization Transformation (CHOT). The mission of CHOT is to advance the
knowledge and practice of transformational strategies in evidence-based
management and clinical practice. CHOT conducts cooperative research among
universities, health systems and other health-related industries to advance and
link system design and technologies in innovative research to advance
healthcare. The UW site (CHOT-UW) focuses on research to improve the integration
of technology and healthcare delivery; specifically, CHOT-UW works to advance
the application of telehealth, system analytics and risk modeling, and
healthcare operational innovations. The CHOT-UW research team is
multidisciplinary and collaborates across the University. CHOT-UW industry
partners represent a collaboration that will impact healthcare delivery
throughout the Pacific Northwest as well as nationally. CHOT-UW expands CHOT?s
existing research capacity, increases its geographic presence in the West and
broadens the technology presence on the IAB. In addition, CHOT-UW provides
enhanced educational opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students to
participate in an applied research program. CHOT and CHOT-UW work together to
make technological breakthroughs and advances in the field of healthcare.

The University of Washington Departments of Industrial and Systems Engineering
and Health Services proposes to join the Center for Health Organization
Transformation (CHOT) as a university site (CHOT-UW). CHOT-UW?s the research
focus is at the integration of technology and healthcare delivery. As systems
engineering principles move past the early-adopter stage in the healthcare
sector, the research agenda needs to shift toward a more interdisciplinary
approach?one that incorporates both the human and economic factors associated
with system redesign, in a way that fully supports the goals of (1) improving
patient experience of care (including quality and satisfaction); (2) improving
population health; and (3) reducing the per capita cost of healthcare. Recent US
health care reform efforts attempt to address these systemic issues. However, to
further achieve health system improvements, it is important to understand the
complex systems that affect access to and coordination of care from an
interdisciplinary approach. The core research team from engineering and health
services will be supplemented with faculty expertise in informatics and primary-
care technology and public health analytics. This team brings a breadth of
theoretical as well as applied knowledge and are prepared to deliver
implementable research findings that result in efficient, high-quality, patient-
centered care while taking a technically-informed approach to inform the
development of decision-support, feedback and process re-engineering mechanisms.