* 1738065
* EAGER: SC2: Intelligent spectrum collaboration via a dynamically reconfigurable radio architecture
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Tan Wong, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 03/31/2019
* USD 99,363.00

Current engineering practices and regulatory approaches on the use of the radio
frequency (RF) spectrum are too antiquated to meet the ever&lt;br/&gt;surging
demand on the RF spectrum. A promising new solution to tackle this spectrum
scarcity problem is to equip radio networks with artificial intelligence so that
they can learn and predict the RF environment, as well as be social by
interacting with other radio networks, leading to more collaborative use of the
RF spectrum. This project will develop a software-defined radio system that can
intelligently sense and adapt to others' use of the radio spectrum and
collaborate with other radio networks in sharing the common RF spectrum. The
developed system will be characterized by its flexibility to quickly and agile
adaptability to changes in how others are using the RF spectrum. It will be also
be characterized by how it uses machine-learning techniques to both extract the
most relevant information about how the RF spectrum is being used and to adapt
the communication strategies based on this information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
dynamically reconfigurable system architecture will be developed in this project
to make most efficient use of all the available computational resources in order
to support all radio and ML functionalities. This highly flexible software-
defined structure takes advantage of the learned knowledge about the RF
environment by adapting the physical and medium access control layers use of
spectrum and coordinating this utilization through carefully designed network
protocols. A machine learning system is developed to identify the key
information about the evolution of the communication scenario, and autonomously
learn the state of the model. Reinforcement learning will be used to generate
appropriate adaptive communication strategies based on the system state.