* 1738359
* Phase II IUCRC University of Louisville: Center for Health Organization Transformation (CHOT)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Anna Faul, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 12/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

The University of Louisville (UL) applies to become a Phase II research site
addition for the NSF Industry-University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) for
Health Organization Transformation (CHOT). The American health care delivery
system falls short of care that is safe, effective, patient-centered, timely,
and equitable. Health care organizations are continually innovating in both
management and clinical practices to address care efficiency shortcomings, offer
the latest clinical technologies, and remain competitive. To attain significant
progress on all of these fronts requires transformational changes in health
organizations that fundamentally alter practices and culture, and lead to better
health care. UL CHOT applies and refines a comprehensive transformation
framework that will guide, research, and advance organization transformation in
health systems, especially hospitals, clinics, and physician groups. With health
spending rising exponentially, government, industry, and the public share
growing concerns about a range of health care issues related to the organization
and payment for health care services. New care models also require a shift in
the types of clinicians that staff healthcare organizations. UL CHOT is
committed to conducting research to understand what the optimal mix of these new
services will be under new value-based ways of providing healthcare for the
benefit of a diverse patient population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UL CHOT's multi-
disciplinary research team proposes to join the existing CHOT university sites,
adding value through its in-depth integration of expertise in population health
management, health information system design, and health systems sciences that
will create new synergies that allows the research to be highly relevant, and
incorporate best practices and the latest technology. UL CHOT will conduct
mixed-methodology, applied research on the antecedents, execution, and effects
of transformational interventions and strategies that combine evidence-based
management, clinical and information technology innovations, and ongoing
organizational learning and cultural change. Transformational efforts in health
systems frequently ignore or prematurely treat several individual and
organizational elements as "fixed" or immutable. Transformational strategies
call for significant reexamination and, often, realignment of values, processes,
and structures characterizing a health system. Such major innovations (i.e.,
LEAN, cutting-edge clinical innovations and information systems) call for
leadership, significant cultural change, inter-professional alignment, elements
of process reengineering, and effective monitoring and feedback. Our industry-
guided research program identifies the factors that produce desired results from
these kinds of transformational interventions in health systems. UL CHOT will
contribute significantly to the efficiency and quality of care offered by
industry partners by enabling more effective implementation of the
aforementioned tools and strategies.