* 1738337
* RII Track-4: The Molecular Nature of Environmentally Persistent Free Radicals on Nanoparticles
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Eric Vejerano, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 08/31/2021
* USD 251,321.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Many physical and chemical processes with
important environmental, human health, and economic implications rely on surface
interactions. Examples include materials production; the formation, destruction,
and remediation of contaminants; cloud formation; and host-pathogen
interactions. Explaining the nature and processes occurring on surfaces is
necessary to control, modify, and use them to achieve further scientific
knowledge and economic advantage. One environmental issue that depends on
surface interactions is the formation of environmentally persistent free
radicals (EPFRs). EPFRs are present in significant amount in atmospheric
particles, forming when byproducts emitted from the burning of waste and fuels
interact with metal-containing nanoparticles. Unlike previously identified
atmospheric free radicals, which exist for only a fraction of a second, EPFRs
can persist for several months, allowing them to be transported over a wider
area from their source. Health risks associated with inhaled particles that
contain EPFRs include a variety of cardiovascular and respiratory dysfunctions
as well as an increased susceptibility to infection. These concerns, in
conjunction with the trends and predicted impact of nanotechnology in the coming
years, present an urgent need to address and fill the critical knowledge gaps
about EPFR formation. Understanding the structure and nature of EPFRs is a key
step towards improving strategies to mitigate their adverse health impacts,
which will enhance public health and quality of life. Access to instrumentation
available at National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHFML; located at Florida
State University) will allow detailed characterization of EPFRs, enabling a
greater understanding of the mechanisms by which they interact with other
chemcials and potentially impact human health. This collaboration with
scientists at NHMFL is important to the PI's current and future research at the
University of South Carolina at Coumbia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;Elucidating the physical and chemical interactions
occurring on surfaces of nanoparticles will provide wider avenues of research
about aerosol science, chemistry, and catalysis that will be key to
collaboratively addressing critical environmental and human health questions.
The overarching theme of this research is to understand the various ways these
surface processes impact society, including the formation of persistent
contaminants catalyzed by manufactured nanoparticles, the interaction of
nanoparticles with volatile contaminants, the synthesis of nanocatalysts for
environmental remediation and energy production, and the development of
specialized nanoparticles for mitigating influenza infection. The facilities at
the NHMFL will provide an excellent research environment for this fellowship.
NHMFL is equipped with state-of-the-science equipment for characterizing and
analyzing nanoscale surfaces and for determining complex chemical structures.
Using a combination of advanced electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy
techniques available at the NHMFL, the research goals are to identify the
molecular structures of surface-bound organic EPFRs and elucidate the mechanisms
of EPFRs. The fellowship's goals will not only address an existing critical
need, that is, to investigate the environmental and human health risks
associated with EPFRs, but also enhance the PI's capabilities for other current
and future projects.