* 1738205
* Research Initiation: Leveling the Playing Field: Using Instructional Strategies to Address Disparities in Task Orientation for Women and Underrepresented Group
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Jennifer Buckley, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Edward Berger
* 08/31/2020
* USD 199,922.00

Women and students of color are underrepresented in engineering undergraduate
programs. Although there are many factors that contribute to
underrepresentation, one of the consequences is that women and students of color
potentially face an inhospitable climate in the dynamics of working in groups
where majority culture dominates. Team-based projects are a common practice in
mechanical engineering courses, and prior research suggests that engineering
student design teams tend to divide tasks along gender-correlated lines, with
women taking on more managerial and communications-related tasks and less design
and fabrication tasks. This proposal focuses on "leveling the playing field" by
understanding and addressing disparities in how tasks are divided within teams
of students, with particular attention to how this relates to women and students
of color. To do this, the project team proposes to evaluate the effectiveness of
two potential interventions designed to ensure that all students have access to
equal opportunities in group learning environments. The first intervention,
called Individualized Design Experiences, provides all students with baseline
skills and experience in design/fabrication tasks to enable them to more fully
participate in these tasks when they are in team settings. The second
intervention, Prescribed Roles, involves course instructors purposefully
assigning students to complete specific tasks as part of a group project, with
the intention of disrupting the task choices students might otherwise make. The
effectiveness of these two interventions is studied by tracking individual
students' contributions, their self-confidence, and their preference for
particular roles in multiple, team-based engineering projects over multiple
years. If these interventions are shown to be effective, this work will have the
broader impact of improving gender and racial diversity within engineering
undergraduate programs and expanding the talent pipeline within the engineering
profession at large. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The causes of underrepresentation of
women and other underrepresented groups (defined as non-white, non-Asian) in
undergraduate engineering programs are multifaceted. Both women and
underrepresented groups potentially face an inhospitable climate where majority
culture predominates in both implicit and explicit ways, including task
orientation on team-based projects. Team-based projects are a common practice in
mechanical engineering design courses, which is the setting for this proposed
research study. Using a cohort-based concurrent triangulation mixed methods
approach, our study addresses four research questions: (1) What factors best
predict students' task choices on team-based design projects, including gender,
race, and self-confidence? (2) To what extent do individual design experiences
create more balanced task orientation in teams? (3) How do instructor prescribed
roles affect task orientation? and (4) Do the effects of these two interventions
persist after the treatment period? By providing structured educational
interventions and studying their effects, the project team hopes to develop a
model of instruction that can be transferred across engineering programs. In
turn, this model can be used to drive professional development of engineering
faculty.