* 1738233
* SBIR Phase II:  Designing High Efficiency Small Scale Motors using Switched Reluctance Technology
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Mark Johnston, Software Motor Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2019
* USD 747,282.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to revolutionize the
efficiency of electric motors in the heating, ventilation and air conditioning
(HVAC) market. The innovation technology area is a new class of electric motor
and control hardware and software that is based on switched reluctance
technology, exhibiting very high efficiencies of 90%+ across a broad range of
speeds. This innovation will enhance scientific understanding by showing how
this new class of electric motors can be optimized to minimize noise and
vibration, while allowing variable speed control and Internet connectivity. The
potential societal impacts of such a technology are significant: more than half
the new motors purchased each year in the United States are 1-5 horsepower
motors (1.024M of 1.792M), and they collectively account for nearly 25% of the
United States electricity consumption. As such, if commercialized this
technology could save retail and commercial organizations millions of dollars a
year in electricity savings due to efficiency improvements. The benefits for an
adoption rate of just 5% of available applications are $500M / year in
electricity savings and 1M tons / year of carbon
savings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase 2 project aims to research a new type of electric motor with a high rotor
pole switched reluctance (HRSRM) design. This HRSRM motor has a simplified
physical construction with no permanent magnets but complex electronics that
manage the torque and speed in the motor through carefully timed generation of
magnetic fields. This class of motors have proven extremely difficult to
research because of highly nonlinear response characteristics, and sensitivity
to very small changes in timing, electromagnetics, and physical setup. This
project will research methods for adapting dynamic control algorithms to
increase the speed and sensitivity of the power electronics to manage these
characteristics. Research will also examine physical elements of the design and
build a generalized simulation model combining both finite element analysis as
well as structural modeling, constrained mode analysis and vibration models to
reduce and optimize noise, vibration and harshness measures. Finally this
project will optimize the ~600 key parameters associated with an HRSRM motor,
allowing the rapid design and prototyping of new motor designs in minutes rather
than months.