* 1738690
* Science Policy Research Report: Student Visa Policy and the Scientific Workforce
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Sarah Turner, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 05/31/2018
* USD 22,690.00

Students from around the world come to the U.S. to enroll in colleges and
universities at the undergraduate and graduate levels. Many of the students from
abroad enrolling at U.S. colleges and universities enter on F-1 student visas,
with 644,233 F-1 visas awarded in 2015. The optimal design of student visa
policy depends on the measurement of costs and benefits, recognizing that these
effects may differ by degree level or area of study. Key empirical questions
that inform policy evaluation related to student visas include: How do foreign
students affect the educational outcomes of native students, particularly in
scientific disciplines? Do students from abroad who study in the U.S. persist in
the U.S. labor market? What are the contributions to innovation and economic
growth generated by foreign-born students who receive degrees in the U.S. and
persist in the U.S. scientific labor market?

This research report provides a rich descriptive picture of the distribution of
students from abroad enrolled in U.S. colleges and universities on F-1 visas by
country of origin and program of study over time. The primary data source
informing this analysis is the universe of F-1 visa recipients (2004-2015).
These data, which are from administrative records, include over 5 million
records at the individual level and identifies each student?s intended degree,
subject of study, post-secondary institution in the U.S., city and country of
origin, along with variables indicating cost of attendance, financial support,
beginning-end dates, and whether the student pursued OPT. The report aligns
these data with the existing social science research evidence on international
student flows to U.S. higher education and the scientific labor market. Beyond
synthesizing available evidence, this report identifies some of the challenges
of measurement. Overall, this research report provides a comprehensive framework
for discussions of student visa policy, an inventory of existing policy
evidence, a roadmap for future data needs.