* 1738865
* RII Track-4: Investigating Evolutionary Innovations through Metagenomics
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Eric Hayden, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 130,772.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Microscopic life forms, or microbes, are the
invisible inhabitants of Earth. Despite their small size, these organisms can
have significant impacts on their environment, which includes animal and human
hosts. Modern analysis of complex populations of diverse microorganisms (the
microbiome) associated with a particular environment relies on DNA extracted
from samples. Analysis of such DNA can be highly complex, requiring advanced
statistical techniques (bioinformatics) to unravel the structures and properties
of microbiomes. This fellowship will allow the PI to work with experts at the
University of California at San Diego, a leader in application of bioinformatics
to ecological research. The PI will develop his own expertise in the rapidly
developing field of bioinformatics, acquiring skills that he will then be able
to apply to a variety of applications at his home institution (Boise State
University). This research project will study the microbiomes of the digestive
systems of animals that eat sagebrush, a toxic plant. By comparing the
microbiomes of digestive systems following consumption of toxic and non-toxic
food, the PI and his collaborators will discover how the microbes deal with
these plant-derived chemicals, which may lead to new ways to chemically
synthesize plant molecules, discover new antimicrobial drugs, or combat animals
that eat commercially and ecologically important
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Microbial DNA
sequence data are accumulating rapidly, but approaches that uncover the specific
functions of microbes are lagging behind. This project will conduct experiments
aimed at uncovering the microbial functions that facilitate the ability of
animals to eat toxic sagebrush. The PI and collaborators will collect and
sequence DNA from the microbiomes of digestive tracts of these animals, and do
so over time and between plants with different chemical toxins. This time-series
and comparative metagenomics approach will uncover specific microbes and
specific genes that enable rapid seasonal adaptation to sagebrush by pigmy
rabbits, and adaptation to unique sagebrush chemical profiles in Lepidoptera
caterpillars. It is hypothesized that many of the solutions employed by the
microbiomes inhabiting these specific organisms will be found in other organisms
around the world. In addition, the PI and collaborators will search for non-
coding RNA regulatory elements that have evolved in these contexts and enable
the microbes to detect and act on chemical signals. This research will advance
understanding of sagebrush herbivores and herbivore specialization to toxic
plants around the world. Herbivore-plant interactions such as this drive the
bio-diversification of the planet, and have numerous ecological and economic
consequences for people.