* 1738795
* Workshop on Microsystems for Electroceuticals and Bioelectronic Medicine, April 12-13, 2017, IBM Conference Center Washington DC.
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Victor Zhirnov, Semiconductor Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 12/31/2017
* USD 28,000.00

This proposal request is for the organization of a workshop to explore the
scientific issues and technological challenges associated with bioelectronic
microsystems for personalized medicine with an ability to treat a wide range of
diseases with a tiny device less than 100 microns in size that is capable of
performing in-vivo sensing and direct electrical interactions with a single
living cell. The goal of this workshop will be to develop a roadmap of
technology capabilities that are needed to enable a prototypical
bioelectromicrocell by 2022 in order to position the U.S. at the forefront of
this technology. This proposal requests support to provide travel funds and
subsistence for experts to participate in the NSF-SRC workshop on 'Microsystems
for Electroceuticals and Bioelectronic Medicine' to be held on April 12-13, 2017
at the IBM Conference Center in Washington DC. The discussions will also bring
out opportunities and changes necessary in education as the complexity of the
large scale integrated electronics demands interdisciplinary knowledge needs.
Development of bioelectronic medical devices requires multidisciplinary
knowledge and skills, including neuroscience, medicine, systems engineering,
materials, electronics. The workshop will help to identify needs for future
undergraduate and graduate curriculum in Biomedical Engineering. Plans are to
disseminate the outcome of the meeting by posting presentation materials on the
meeting website of SRC for the general public. The proceedings of the workshop
and the list of recommendations will be made available to all participants of
the workshop, NSF, other government scientists, industry and
policymakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bioelectronic Medicine promises a new era of
real-time, personalized medical diagnosis and treatment. Microsystems for
Bioelectronic Medicine are envisioned as medical devices that employ electrical
currents to affect and modify body functions as an alternative to drug-based
interventions. This group of emerging devices is also referred to as
'electroceuticals'. Currently, research on this topics is still in its infancy
stage. This NSF/SRC technical exchange meeting is organized to develop future
research agenda that enable the scientific explorations on 'bioelectromicrocell'
for bioelectronics medicine. It will explore ideas at the intersection of
science and engineering of semiconductor platforms for synthetic biology and
hybrid bioelectronics systems to address the key questions ranging from the
fundamentals and application of microsystems for bioelectronic medicine;
electronic signal treatment for therapeutic applications; realization for the
fabrication of bioelectromicrocell for replacing drugs by semiconductor
technologies; biocompatibility issues of bioelectromicrocell technologies; and
finally the development of roadmap from research to commercialization. The
workshop will provide an excellent opportunity for intellectual pursuit and
discernment of scientific challenges related to new approaches for
bioelectronics medicine.