* 1738307
* Workshop:  GOALI:  International Symposium for Wetland Systems for Water Pollution Control (WETPOL), August 21-25, 2017, Big Sky, Montana
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2017
* Otto Stein, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 11/30/2017
* USD 15,000.00

1738307&lt;br/&gt;Lauchnor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to partially
support an international conference, Wetland Systems for Water Pollution Control
(WETPOL) to be held August 21-25, 2017, Big Sky, Montana. This conference is the
leading international conference on applications of natural and engineered
wetlands for water quality improvement and has been convened biennially since
2005. The goals of the conference include making connections between fundamental
science and engineered wetland applications, knowledge transfer between the
different areas of wetland research and technology, increasing knowledge and
acceptance of wetlands for water treatment and making cultural connections
between diverse regions with different needs and potential uses for wetland
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Treatment wetlands have undergone recent design
advances that have drastically improved their treatment performance. In
addition, treatment wetlands provide a low cost, low energy wastewater treatment
alternative that can provide ecosystem services and aesthetic appeal. Despite
these recent technological advancements, current understanding of the
fundamental processes responsible for effective contaminant removal remains
limited. By bringing together experts in treatment wetlands technology and those
scientists, engineers and practitioners focused on natural wetlands and
restoration of wetland systems for ecological purposes advances in understanding
fundamental processes will result. The participants which are experts in natural
wetlands and wetland restoration gain access too many case studies and other
controlled experiments conducted by treatment wetland experts, allowing them to
better understand fundamental processes affecting wetland ecology and
biogeochemistry. Support for students will greatly increase the potential for
their participation at the conference on treatment wetland design and
participate in developing a more thorough understanding of wetlands. Industry
participation in WETPOL will promote the use and development of wetland
technology for various water treatment applications in the U.S. Hosting this
conference in the U.S. for the first time will help to increase awareness of the
benefits of treatment wetlands and enhance the potential for consultants to
implement treatment wetlands and wetland restoration projects. Many U.S.
communities that are conducive to small-scale, onsite wastewater treatment
systems can benefit from the interactions and knowledge gained from this
conference. In addition, knowledge of treatment wetlands applications for
treating industrial, mining and agricultural wastewater can benefit those
sectors in regions of the U.S.