* 1738497
* RII Track-4: Selection of methylxanthine-responsive aptamers
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Ryan Summers, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 08/31/2022
* USD 258,968.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to build capacity for
research in the growing field of microbial engineering at the University of
Alabama at Tuscaloosa (UA). With a wealth of natural renewable resources,
Alabama is an ideal location for research in metabolic engineering, synthetic
biology, and industrial microbiology for the production of bio-based fuels and
chemicals. However, there is very little research in these areas, which are of
increasing importance to the scientific community and industrial sector
throughout the state. This project will allow researchers from UA to conduct
studies at Yale University, learning new techniques and creating new tools to
engineer microbial cells. This research seeks to construct new systems to
control the production of specific microbial enzymes at the molecular level,
with particular attention to developing systems that control the production of
enzymes involved in caffeine metabolism. These systems will be of great benefit
in discovering new enzymes for pharmaceutical applications, and developing new
diagnostic tools to detect caffeine metabolism. This work will initially provide
training for one graduate student, and results will be integrated into
undergraduate curriculum and research. The research collaboration formed through
this project will help develop capacity at UA to perform research in the new and
growing fields of metabolic engineering and synthetic biology, providing
additional opportunities to educate and train graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
proposed work is to isolate aptamers and construct riboswitches responsive to
the methylxanthines theobromine, paraxanthine, and 7-methylxanthine. Aptamers
will be isolated through multiple rounds of in vitro selection of a library
composed of a 40 nucleotide random fragment attached to stem II of the
hammerhead ribozyme. Using the best aptamers isolated, riboswitches will be
constructed to control gene expression through translation inhibition or mRNA
stability mechanisms, and placed upstream of the gene encoding green fluorescent
protein to characterize their activity in vivo. Research will be performed at a
laboratory at Yale University, where these methods were pioneered. The
riboswitches and aptamers generated in this project will be of great benefit in
developing methylxanthine-producing mutant enzymes for use in the pharmaceutical
and cosmetic industries, enabling detection of intracellular caffeine
metabolites, and generating in vitro and in vivo tools to detect caffeine
metabolism. Additionally, the work will provide a template for construction of
metabolic pathways in which each enzyme is controlled by a riboswitch specific
for the enzyme?s substrate and will improve our knowledge of synthetic
riboswitch construction. The collaboration developed here will generate high
quality undergraduate and graduate research opportunities while greatly
expanding the microbial engineering and synthetic biology research capabilities
at UA.