* 1738492
* SBIR Phase II:  Large-Scale Behavioral Analysis Utilizing Convolutional Neural Networks and Its Application to In-store Retail Marketing
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2017,12/31/2021
* Everett Berry, Perceive, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2021
* USD 1,101,330.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be to enhance infrastructure for research
and education by exposing a previously unavailable dataset: fine-grained human
interaction with a physical environment. Humans are always building on and
shaping the world but there is little hard data to further examine the effects
this has. Beyond retail, this technology could affect how teachers layout
classrooms, how disaster workers provide relief, or how factories keep their
workers safe. The subtle physical details that affect humans everyday will be
understood and investigated in ways not possible without the proposed system.
This technology will benefit society by increasing economic efficiency because
retailers can meet customer needs more easily. This translates into large
potential commercial value because of the size of the retail market and because
retailers are under pressure to deliver differentiated customer experiences that
customers cannot get online or at big-box stores. Such experiences are enabled
by understanding the customer at a much deeper level which in turn is enabled by
the technology proposed here.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project uses sensor placement models,
statistical methods, and face recognition to fully realize the commercial
potential resulting from the Phase I development of a video analytics system for
understanding human behavior. Research in video-based behavior recognition has
seen renewed excitement because of deep learning but current work only addresses
pieces of the problem. Critical missing components are robust face
identification and registration, a process to install as few cameras as possible
while maximizing the viewable area of a store, and video analysis results that
are meaningful when combined with other data such as retail transactions. The
research objectives of extracting biometric data (such as facial features) from
video, automatically computing the optimal positions of cameras, and correlating
behavior metrics with business operations are essential to improve the retail
experience for shoppers and make the developments undertaken in Phase I more
commercially relevant to potential end users of the technology.