* 1738242
* WORKSHOP: Joint Doctoral Colloquium at the UbiComp 2017 and ISWC 2017 Conferences
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Anind Dey, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2019
* USD 33,725.00

This is funding to partially support a joint doctoral research colloquium
(workshop) of about 24 promising doctoral students from the United States and
abroad (up to 2 international participants to be supported by NSF), to be
selected through a peer review process, along with two panels of 4 invited
outstanding researchers from both academic and industrial labs. The event will
take place in conjunction with the 19th ACM International Joint Conference on
Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp) and the 21st ACM International
Symposium on Wearable Computing (ISWC), to be collocated in Maui, Hawaii on
September 11-15, and sponsored by the Association for Computing Machinery. The
ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing
(UbiComp) is the premier interdisciplinary venue in which leading international
researchers, designers, developers, and practitioners in the field present and
discuss novel results in all aspects of ubiquitous and pervasive computing. This
includes the design, development, and deployment of ubiquitous and pervasive
computing technologies and the understanding of human experiences and social
impacts that these technologies facilitate. Relevant research topics include,
but are not limited to, systems and infrastructures, devices and techniques,
applications and experiences, methodologies and tools, and theories and models.
More information about the conference may be found at
http://www.ubicomp.org/ubicomp2017/. ISWC is a conference dedicated to cutting-
edge research in wearable technologies, and is the premier forum for wearable
computing and issues related to on-body and worn mobile technologies. Every
year, ISWC brings together researchers, product vendors, fashion designers,
textile manufacturers, users, and related professionals to share information and
advances in wearable computing. The conference typically includes dedicated
workshops, a juried design competition, a lively gadget show, and high-quality
paper presentation sessions revealing the latest in wearable computing progress.
More information about this conference may be found at
http://www.iswc.net/iswc17/. The joint ISWC/UbiComp Doctoral Colloquium will
help expand the participation of young researchers pursuing graduate studies in
the various fields associated with ubiquitous computing, by affording them an
opportunity to gain wider exposure in the community for their innovative work
and to obtain feedback and guidance from senior members of the research
community. It will further help foster a sense of community among these young
researchers, by allowing them to create a social network both among themselves
and with senior researchers at a critical stage in their professional
development. Many participants in past UbiComp doctoral consortia have since
gone on to high profile research careers. The event organizers are committed to
achieving diversity among the student participants, including in terms of gender
and ethnicity. To further support diversity, no more than 2 students will be
accepted from any one institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the joint
ISWC/UbiComp Doctoral Colloquium are: to provide a forum that will allow senior-
level doctoral students to attend the ISWC/UbiComp conferences and take part as
contributors to the program, as well as encourage further participation in the
future; to give emerging ISWC and UbiComp researchers the opportunity to present
their work and receive feedback, guidance, and encouragement from respected
researchers to whom they may not have ready access at their home institutions;
to provide opportunities for discussion among senior-level doctoral students to
expose them to new perspectives on their field and in closely related fields; to
foster the building of research relationships that will continue to benefit the
students as they progress in their careers; and to expose the diversity and
depth of research in the field as being undertaken by junior researchers to the
greater UbiComp/ISWC community. To these ends, the format of the doctoral
colloquium will facilitate the open exchange of ideas and in-depth discussion
among members of the next generation of wearable and ubiquitous computing
researchers and established top researchers in the area. The colloquium will
begin with a joint session in which all participants will present a 1-minute
version of their research. Subsequently, participants will present in-depth in
two parallel tracks, attended by the respective conference panels. Students will
be encouraged to move freely between the sessions, attending presentations
according to their interests. The colloquium will close with a joint career
development panel. Meals and breaks will be shared. Presentations will be
scheduled with ample time allotted for questions and constructive feedback from
the panel and from the other student participants. Particular emphasis will be
given to such topics as focusing research questions and ensuring that research
activities appropriately address the research questions, the selection and
application of fitting and correct methods given the intended contributions of
the work, and the appropriate analysis, framing, and communication of findings,
results, and contributions. Additional opportunities for more informal
discussion and networking will be during the DC lunch and dinner events.
Extended abstracts from the DC will be distributed in the conference's
supplemental proceedings to all conference attendees, and indexed in the ACM and
IEEE digital libraries, offering further exposure. Finally, colloquium
participants will also be asked to prepare a poster for a joint ISWC/UbiComp DC
poster session as part of the main conference.