* 1738912
* CICI: RSARC: DICE - Data Insurance in the Cluster Environment
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Xin Yuan, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 07/31/2022
* USD 590,317.00

High-performance, distributed computing has become indispensable in solving
complex scientific, engineering, and business problems. The integrity of the
data generated and stored on computer clusters is of undisputed importance to
scientific research and business intelligence, as compromised data can lead to
incorrect conclusions and decisions. Unfortunately, existing security mechanisms
for high-performance and distributed computing systems are complex,
inconsistent, insecure, and difficult to deploy. Many systems utilizing the
current security mechanisms simply do not provide sufficient protection and
remain vulnerable to even trivial attacks. For example, recent studies have
found that thousands of unprotected database installations and computer clusters
have been hacked. As such, there is a pressing need to improve the security of
high-performance and distributed computing systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project develops a security framework for high-performance and distributed
computing systems that employs strong modern cryptographic algorithms, and is
easy to reason, deploy, and use without lengthy and error-prone configurations.
The project consists of three major components: a container-based virtual
cluster, a component to defend against side-channel attacks, and a secure
execution ledger for auditing. The first component is the key to enabling
authentication, authorization, and data protection for clusters without
sacrificing usability or performance. The project team will build the virtual
cluster based on the popular Docker container but enhance it with flexible key
management, attack surface reduction, and security hardening, including defenses
against side-channel attacks. Communications among nodes of a virtual cluster
and I/O operations are transparently encrypted to protect the data in transition
and at rest. The secure execution ledger provides a global holistic view of
program execution in the whole system, allowing auditing the behavior of
individual users as well as user groups. By tightly integrating these three
components, the project seeks to achieve strong support for the four pillars of
the cluster data security ? authentication, authorization, auditing, and data
protection.