* 1738784
* The Development of a Statewide Network for Teacher Preparation in Computer Science The University of Northern Iowa Partnership for CS Teacher Preparation
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2021
* James East, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 04/30/2021
* USD 299,984.00

The University of Northern Iowa proposes a Planning Grant to develop a research-
practitioner partnership (RPP) to facilitate computer science (CS) teacher
professional development (PD) across Iowa. There has been substantial
discipline-wide work done recently to develop curriculum and standards for high
school CS. Knowledge exists regarding PD for in-service teachers, communities of
practice, principles for broadening participation, and RPPs, but there are
plenty of opportunities to expand experience and expertise in these areas in
combination with each other. The proposed RPP for Iowa includes university
personnel to supply content, curriculum design experts and researchers, Iowa
Area Education Agenices (AEA) personnel for localization and ongoing support,
and school districts with knowledge practitioners. It is an ideal partnership to
design and test a network for providing computer science PD and ongoing support.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The partnership will start by piloting a PD network for
high school CS teachers in one of nine AEAs in Iowa. Identified in-service
teachers will complete three courses over two summers and the intervening school
year: an introduction to programming, a CS methods course, and a big ideas
course. Instruction will be designed using the Iowa Professional Development
Model. During the PD, participants will become familiar with engagement
practices and the culturally responsive computing practices through modelling
and explicit instruction. Furthermore, district personnel in the participants'
school districts will attend a workshop on understanding biases and broadening
participation in order to set a more positive school environment. Upon
completion of the PD, participants will be well-prepared to teach a high-quality
introduction to programming course or an AP CS Principles course. The proposers
have already recruited four districts for inclusion in the partnership and
expect to increase that number to 20 over the course of the award. Upon
completion of the project, having gathered substantial assessment data, the
proposers will be ready to expand this program to allow for participants from
school districts and AEAs covering the entire state of
Iowa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.