* 1738207
* The 6th Midwest Workshop on Control and Game Theory; Ann Arbor, Michigan
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2017,11/30/2017
* Vijay Subramanian, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 11/30/2017
* USD 12,000.00

Networked control systems or cyber-physical systems, such as those seen in smart
grid systems or intelligent transportation systems, and also e-commerce and
social networking platforms, are some examples of societal networks that are
widely used in our modern information age. The networked control system
methodology has even broader applicability with the techniques and ideas aiding
in the understanding of opinion spread in a population or the emergence and
prevalence of fads. Conceiving and engineering these systems involves in-depth,
inter-disciplinary, and collaborative efforts by experts drawn from controls,
game theory, optimization, economics, applied probability and computation. This
forms the basis for organizing the 6th Midwest Controls and Game Theory Workshop
on April 22 - 23,&lt;br/&gt;2017 in Ann Arbor, MI, where we will be bringing
together leading academic experts on controls, optimization, game theory,
economics and computation from the mid-western states to foster an exchange of
ideas as well as research interactions and collaborations between these
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop aims to promote extensive
research discussions, collaborations and open exchanges of ideas among all the
participants, and to provide mentoring and feedback to the young researchers in
the mid-west. The workshop will host two plenary speakers, fifteen invited
speakers from other mid-western institutions, and three invited speakers from
the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. All the speakers are leading academic
experts in the fields of controls, game theory, optimization, economics, applied
probability and computation. They will be presenting their current research work
and discussing their research visions. The plenary speakers will also be
providing a broader viewpoint of issues and research problems in their talks.
The workshop will be open to graduate students and post-doctoral researchers
from all the mid-western universities, and these young researchers will be
presenting poster and talks on their recent work. The invited speakers list will
also reflect the diversity of the organizing committee in terms of involving
women and minorities, as also the commitment and efforts of the University of
Michigan to promote it. As another refection of the broader scope we will also
be targeting an increased overall participation for this workshop from all the
mid-western institutions. Strong graduate student and post-doctoral researcher
participation will be solicited from all Midwestern institutions, and from all
areas in the theme of the workshop.