* 1738814
* Next Door to Silicon Valley: A Researcher-Practitioner Partnership to Address Disparities in Access and Expectations for Computer Science Education
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Jill Denner, ETR Associates
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,955.00

There is great disparity for students from low socioeconomic households,
Latino/a students, and female students to have quality opportunities to learn
computer science (CS) or practice computational thinking (CT). This project
seeks to advance knowledge of how to build research-practice partnerships that
can broaden participation in computing in K-8. This project is a collaboration
between Education, Training, Research (ETR), Santa Cruz City Schools (SCCS), and
the Santa Cruz Education Foundation (SCEF). The school district is in a unique
position, sandwiched between Silicon Valley where many family members of the
students, teachers, and staff work in the high-tech industry, and the
agricultural communities in the southern part of the county where the main town
is 81% Latino/a, 39% are foreign-born, and almost half of the adults have not
graduated from high school. The findings will address important questions about
what kinds of supports different children need to learn CS, as well as who
benefits from CS instruction, and how. The results will fill gaps in
understanding how to create systems change in schools and school districts that
can lead to CS integration for all students. These gaps include the process
through which prioritization and integration occurs in districts and the kinds
of support and resources that are needed for teachers. The findings will also
contribute to an understanding of how to reduce unconscious bias about who is
interested in and would be good at computer science. Finally, the activities
will fill an important gap in understanding how to engage parents at all
socioeconomic levels in educational reform. This project will produce
instructional materials designed to build on the interests and strengths of
girls, Hispanic/Latino students, and English language learners in elementary and
middle school. The activities will offer opportunities to learn CS and CT, and
will build the capacity of educators to test and revise strategies to integrate
CS into classrooms in a way that fully engages a range of learners. The
activities are also designed to leverage community resources and increase public
engagement, with a focus on parents who are traditionally not involved in
education reform, in CS education for all students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will address a high-level research question: How do we reduce the
disparity in students' access to quality opportunities to learn CS/CT and
ongoing support to persist in CS? The activities will include teacher
professional development, the creation of instructional materials and brief
interventions to integrate inclusive CS into elementary and middle school
classrooms, a district wide CS committee to identify needs and resources to
build a network of support to boost the capacity of all schools to integrate CS
into classes, the development of a system to leverage parent and community
resources to support and sustain CS education, and data collection and analysis
to monitor learning progressions and systems change in order to strengthen the
efforts to build a CS pathway for all students. The research methods will
involve working in a researcher-practitioner partnership to finalize measures,
collect qualitative and quantitative data, and interpret the findings and use
them in an iterative process to inform next steps. Outcomes to be measured
include teachers' CS capacity and behavior, students' CS knowledge and interest,
teachers' and parents' unconscious bias, a networked improvement community to
leverage resources and provide support, parent and community engagement, data-
and research-driven decision making, and a contribution to the field of
broadening participation in CS. An external advisor will monitor the project's
Theory of Change, the integrity of the research design and methods, and the
development of the research-practice partnership.