* 1738387
* SBIR Phase II:  Ultrasonic Nanocoining for Creating Large, Low-Cost Arrays of Sub-Wavelength Features
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Stephen Furst, Smart Material Solutions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2020
* USD 923,481.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be in development of Ultrasonic
Nanocoining - a new platform technology that is used to generate plastic films
or glass panels that are anti-reflective, self-cleaning, or colored through
structure. Such nano-structured surfaces can provide benefits for a wide array
of commercial applications, ranging from consumer electronics to automotive and
aerospace. These surfaces can save energy by preventing internal reflections in
OLED displays and cover-glass reflections on the surface of solar panels. What?s
more, these surfaces enable better use of available space by adding
functionality to surfaces without adding any appreciable volume. Nanocoining is
a low-temperature, chemical-free process that does not rely on chemical etching
or nano-particles, which have recently come under scrutiny from the EPA because
of unknown health and environment effects. The science contained within the
project spans several disciplines, and Nanocoining would ultimately contribute
to low-cost, scalable manufacturing for a wide array of
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultrasonic Nanocoining enables low-
cost, high volume reproduction of surface textures comprised of nano-structures
that are smaller than the wavelength of visible light. This is done by creating
a cylindrical mold with a nano-structured surface, then imprinting that mold
into plastics using roll-to-roll processing. The objectives of the current
project are to use Nanocoining to indent billions of sub-wavelength features
into both flat and cylindrical Nickel-plated molds in a continuous pattern, then
use these molds to replicate the structure into a variety of polymer materials
using roll-to-roll processing. The research will study each step of the mold
fabrication process, including focused ion beam machining of the diamond die,
controlling a dual-mode ultrasonic resonant actuator and registering millions of
indents side-by-side without leaving a significant seam between them. Replicated
film surfaces will be tested for optical and wetting properties, and the final
result will be functionalized transparent film samples that prove commercial
potential. In the future the process may be used to create meter-scale nano-
structured metal molds for production-scale imprinting.