* 1738386
* RII Track-4: Operando Analysis of Fuel Cell Materials at Advanced Light Source
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Kateryna Artyushkova, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 201,677.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The 21st century will likely face many
challenges, among them being the increasing societal need for non-stationary
energy production. Hydrogen fuel cells are one of the most promising
technologies for addressing and mastering this task. This project takes on the
challenge to advance the knowledge of processes and mechanisms occurring during
operation of fuel cells at the atomic and molecular levels. The structure of
materials of fuel cells at the nanometer scale of electronic structures will be
probed using the instrumentation available at the Advanced Light Source
facility, part of Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. The ability to
characterize solid-liquid interfaces in fuel cells at the atomic and molecular
levels under realistic operational conditions is the key to tackling some of the
most fundamental and profound problems in nature as well as electrochemistry.
This opportunity is extending the capacity of scientists and students from the
University of New Mexico (UNM) to conduct scientific research in this area. It
will allow research faculty and students from UNM to realize New Mexico's
potential for sustainable energy development through building a collaboration
with state-of-the-science facilities not available at this time within the state
of NM. This fellowship will not only support training of the research faculty at
the forefront of analytical chemistry but also training of graduate students,
thereby creating an opportunity for graduate students to conduct research at the
interface between basic and applied science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;The best performing hydrogen-based fuel cells rely on
platinum-derived electrocatalysts. The most promising class of alternative
platinum-group-metal-free materials is based on graphene-like carbon containing
nitrogen and transition metal (Metal, Nitrogen, Carbon material; MNC).
Understanding the specific roles of nitrogen and metal in fuel cell properties,
such as activity, stability, and durability, is a prerequisite for the rational
design of fuel cell electrocatalysts with improved performance. The goal of the
project is the investigation of structures of electrodes using operando
spectroscopic techniques and determining specific roles of chemical structures
in the reaction within complete fuel cell operating under applied potential in
the presence of oxidants for cathodic and reductants for anodic reactions. The
chemical structure of electrode materials, reactants, and products will be
studied under applied potential using ambient-pressure X-ray Photoelectron
Spectroscopy (XPS) utilizing the synchrotron light source in a realistic fuel
cell experiment. Of fundamental interest to this project is understanding the
mechanism of fuel cell reactions at the molecular level. The conversion between
electrical and chemical energy occurs in the interface region between a solid
electrode material, liquid electrolyte, and gaseous phase. Developing methods
for probing the tri-phase interphase under different applied potentials in
operando will be pursued. probing the tri-phase interphase under different
applied potentials in operando will be pursued. Comprehensive understanding
based on a study of full electrode systems under operando conditions will result
in the identification of the role that each type of chemistry present in an MNC
electrode has in the reaction. This will, in turn, accelerate rational catalyst
design.