* 1738034
* EAGER: SC2: A Universal Spectral Language for Blind Rendezvous in Open Spectrum Cognitive Intelligent Radio Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2019
* Adam Anderson, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 02/28/2019
* USD 98,869.00

The wireless infrastructure of the United States is often considered key to the
country's economic prosperity and national security. The data rate per link has
increased exponentially over the last 20 years and is expected to continue to do
so into the future if the problem of congested radio frequency spectrum can be
solved. Paradoxically, the issue of congested licensed wireless spectrum, in
modern networks, is at odds with the sparsity of the entire spectrum usage - as
little as 10% use at any given moment. One possibility for next-generation
wireless is to employ cognitive intelligent radios that can "socially" share the
wireless spectrum without disruption of preexisting systems in hopes of
increasing the overall usage of available spectrum. These intelligent radios
will weave through spectral "traffic" as one might envision autonomous vehicles
doing someday in the near future; however, unlike vehicles, two of these
intelligent radios must meet somewhere in spectrum in order to form a link. This
work proposes a universal spectral language to enable rendezvous of cognitive
intelligent radios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project will be
to create such a language where any wireless device that can sense or "look" at
spectrum can also communicate via spectrum. This approach is a passive and
noninvasive method for spectrum usage optimization with device-to-device
communication. The universal language lets heterogeneous devices form networks
and mismatched networks share the spectrum without centralized control. This
intelligent cognition causes conflict among users and networks which affects
efficient and fair spectrum access similar to the human behavior. The behavior
of autonomous networks can then mimic this social behavior, leading to a
possible solution to sharing spectrum. The algorithms developed on this project
will foster a new wireless environment that mimics stable social behavior, using
cognitive intelligent radios and universal communication that can lead naturally
to intelligent and social solutions to network spectrum sharing.