* 1738585
* Planning IUCRC Duke University:   Center for Alternative Sustainable and Intelligent Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Krishnendu Chakrabarty, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Perkins
* 07/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

This project will help plan for a potential NSF I/UCRC in Alternative
Sustainable and Intelligent Computing (ASIC), in order to explore research
frontiers in emerging computing platforms for cognitive applications, including
speech recognition, face detection and election insights, etc. The planning of
the I/UCRC center will be carried out under a unified banner, with inputs from
academia, industry, and government stakeholders. As a result, the center will
serve as a national platform for interdisciplinary research and communication,
charged with investigating advanced computing platforms relevant to various
topics of national interests such as national security and smart living, with an
eye toward commercialization and economic development for the nation. It will
pave the way for designing new computing diagram to address the White House
Grand Challenge of developing transformational computing
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by the fast growth of cognitive
applications and the recent significant development progress of underlined
technologies, the center will focus on designing alternative computing platforms
for these applications, which is generally difficult to be efficiently executed
on conventional von Neumann architecture. Industry is in great demand for a
revolutionary computing platform designated to these applications and the
planned academia-industry consortium is well positioned to meet such demanding
needs with real-world applications. The establishment of ASIC, hence, will
accelerate the development of the new computing diagram in industry sectors and
expedite technology transfer from research discoveries to practical solutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Duke University (Duke) site leads the coordination of the
center and focuses on applications of alternative sustainable and intelligent
computing systems, especially embedded systems, healthcare and medical, etc. The
research projects performed, if succeed, will benefit computer and IT industries
by introducing alternative computing platforms that well complement the
conventional systems built on von Neumann architecture in short term, and
position alternative sustainability and intelligent computing equivalently
important in long term. The obtained knowledge and expertise will effectively
backup the predictable booming of cognitive applications and their urgent
demands for hardware and software supports. The talents and expertise of center
PIs and the industry partners will be effectively integrated to enhance the
competence of the center members and accelerate technology transfer process. The
key transformative aspect of the planned ASIC is that, the success of the
project will make great advances in seamlessly integrating non von Neumann vs.
von Neumann architectures for future computing. Upon completion, this planning
project will prepare a solid full center proposal for Phase I with strong
supports from industry and government members. Broader impacts of the project
will be reached by wide dissemination of the project outcomes via publications,
seminars, tutorials and workshops, as well as industrial and military courses,
social media and technology transfer activities. Students will receive
invaluable experience in industry relevant applied research and networking
opportunities with industry representatives in order to capitalize these
experiences for their eventual employment.