* 1738358
* Student Travel Support for the 2017 International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA-44)
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2018
* Tushar Krishna, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 04/30/2018
* USD 15,000.00

The project will enable students to defray the costs of traveling to and
attending the 44th International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA-44),
to be held June 24-28, 2017, in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. ISCA is a premier
forum for presenting, discussing and debating new and innovative architectural
ideas and techniques for advanced computing and communication systems. This
symposium brings together researchers in fields related to processor
architecture, compilers, chips, and systems.

This project will have two primary broader impacts. First, the ISCA conference
will be strengthened as a result of the greater attendance that this travel
support will enable. Second, those students receiving travel support will
personally benefit from the opportunity to interact with peers and experts, as
well as establish connections that will help their professional careers. More
broadly, we expect additional indirect impacts. First, the available support
will be widely advertised in order to attract women and under-represented
minority groups (through postings on computer architecture web-sites and mailing
lists). Second, by focusing on students, the project will help foster the
mentoring of subsequent generations of computer architects.