* 1738317
* SBIR Phase II:  A New Paradigm for Physical Security Information:  A Platform Integrating Social Media and Online News with Information Sharing Across Trusted Networks
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2017,02/28/2021
* Gregory Adams, Stabilitas Intelligence Communications, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 02/28/2021
* USD 1,399,944.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is as follows. Commercially, the technology
described herein has the capability to provide faster, granular, dynamic
information about safety and security, globally, to firms, universities,
governments, and NGOs. This project uses novel methods to improve Natural
Language Processing and Machine Learning. As a result, better geo-parsing of
digital sources of news about security will result in risk content that can be
aggregated, displayed, and analyzed in original ways. This enables security
managers at these organizations to better understand risk and protect their
staff, providing a higher quality of care. For non-governmental organizations
(including firms), this enables improved decision-making about operations,
travel, and investment. For governments, this enables improved physical security
resource allocation. Socially, this project has the potential to improve
transparency and accountability regarding trends about safety and security, by
improving the aggregation and visualization of data. As an example, groups of
firms and governments in emerging markets can collectively identify previously
unnoticed patterns of insecurity, in support of public accountability.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project is an innovation over the state of the art in the following ways. First,
this project builds on current geo-parsing extraction methodologies by adding
methodologies unique to the safety and security space. Second, this project uses
external data sources for cross correlations to improve the "aboutness" and
granularity of extracted reports. Third, this project exploits contributions
from users at the organizational level - as well as individuals. That is, this
project supports the growth of an ecosystem in which human users of information
also contribute to the quality, volume, and timeliness of that information. This
contribution is also intended to improve the geo-parsing methodologies via
machine learning. The opportunity is the improvement of geo-parsing extraction
mechanisms. The research objectives are to test the hypotheses that NLP
algorithms can exploit patterns unique to the safety and security space; that
external sources of news can be exploited for improved granularity and
"aboutness" scores; and that user-generated content can serve to support an
ecosystem of information sharing. The anticipated results are that the above
innovations will result in usability scoring sufficient for the safety and
security use case.