* 1738739
* Planning IUCRC The Ohio State University: Center for Disruptive Musculoskeletal Innovations (CDMI)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Carolyn Sommerich, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 07/31/2018
* USD 14,996.00

This award supports a planning workshop towards assessing industrial interest in
the research agenda of the Ohio State University (OSU) as a potential site
addition to the NSF funded Industry University Cooperative Research Center for
Disruptive Musculoskeletal Innovations. The OSU Site's primary goals are to
expand the center?s understanding of the causal pathways that result in
musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) and produce recurrent injuries and to translate
this knowledge into useful tools that can be easily applied for prevention. This
will be accomplished through multidisciplinary research efforts that use
engineering techniques to understand and prevent MSDs, guided by industry
advisors, that focus on: identifying sources of work-related back pain and other
MSDs; preventing these injuries through innovative intervention techniques; and
evaluating and treating those who have developed an MSD so that they can safely
return to work. The OSU team?s biomechanical models will enable evaluation of
how physical exposures, individual factors, and psychosocial influences interact
to load soft tissues and change biochemical responses within the musculoskeletal
system that contribute to employee pain, injury potential, and disability. These
efforts will complement the work of the existing Center for Disruptive
Musculoskeletal Innovations and its overall mission to improve MSD therapies and
treatments. This will create a more-holistic, systematic approach to injury
prevention (the most cost-effective means to reduce healthcare costs) and assist
in improving the management and quality of life of those suffering from low back
disorders and other musculoskeletal diseases.

Treating those suffering from a musculoskeletal disorder (MSD) is costly. These
soft tissue sprains/strains account for about one-third of all workplace
injuries or illnesses, more than any other. Of all MSDs, low back disorders
(LBDs) themselves affect 80% of the population and cost society about $100
billion annually. They are the most disabling type of injury, responsible for
approximately 100 million lost workdays, and U.S. employers spend about $30
billion each year just to treat employee back pain. Thus, preventing these
health issues is vital and the logical step to reduce injuries and help solve
this nation?s healthcare crisis. However, the causes of these injuries often are
complex, multi-factorial, and poorly understood. So, researchers at this Site
(guided by industry advisors) will address important MSD concerns, by applying
our sophisticated analysis techniques to better understand the causal pathways
by which individuals become injured. Our Site will complement an existing Center
that focuses on improving MSD treatments, to form a more-comprehensive,
systematic injury prevention process. Researchers and students working within
this Site will develop and apply enhanced engineering techniques to improve the
health and lives of individuals as well as make companies more prosperous and
competitive in the global market.