* 1738517
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of Osteogenic Pedicle Screws for Posterolateral Spinal Fusion
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Matthew MacEwan, OsteoVantage, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2020
* USD 732,992.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project relates to
the&lt;br/&gt;development of non-pharmacological interventions capable of
improving clinical&lt;br/&gt;outcomes following spinal fusion surgery. Between
1998 and 2008, the annual&lt;br/&gt;number of spinal fusion surgeries increased
137% from 174,223 to 413,171 and the&lt;br/&gt;national bill for spinal fusion
increased 7.9-fold. The greatest risk in spinal fusion&lt;br/&gt;procedures is
failure to fuse, which can be particularly troublesome in high
risk&lt;br/&gt;patients. Failure to fuse leads to poor surgical outcomes for
patients and may result in&lt;br/&gt;chronic pain, secondary surgical
procedures, reduced productivity, and/or permanent&lt;br/&gt;disability. In
addition, failure to fuse results in greater clinical burden for
physicians&lt;br/&gt;and increased cost per patient for payers. Lumbar fusions,
in particular, have a&lt;br/&gt;cumulative reoperation rate of 19% over the 11
years following the initial procedure&lt;br/&gt;(BCC Research, 2010). The
present project could result in the identification of new&lt;br/&gt;surgical
devices and techniques capable of improving surgical outcomes,
reducing&lt;br/&gt;complications, and eliminating costs associated with
unsuccessful surgery. Osteogenic&lt;br/&gt;surgical device and techniques
developed in the present project may also be used to&lt;br/&gt;accelerate bone
healing and improve clinical outcomes following fractures of the
skull,&lt;br/&gt;face, and long bones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 2 project is to&lt;br/&gt;demonstrate in an
animal model that osteogenic spinal instrumentation accelerates&lt;br/&gt;new
bone formation and improves the rate of posterolateral fusion compared
to&lt;br/&gt;clinically-accepted best practices in spinal fusion surgery.
Innovative osteogenic spinal&lt;br/&gt;instrumentation (pedicle screws, rods,
etc.) facilitates both mechanical stabilization of&lt;br/&gt;the spine and
focused delivery of fusion-stimulating direct electric current (DC) at
the&lt;br/&gt;fusion site. Application of therapeutic stimuli via selectively
anodized pedicle screws&lt;br/&gt;accelerates the rate at which new bone is
formed in critical regions of the spine such&lt;br/&gt;as the zygapophyseal
joint and lateral gutter. The propensity of newly formed bone
to&lt;br/&gt;create a robust, biomechanically sound fusion of adjacent vertebrae
is also increased&lt;br/&gt;under osteogenic stimulation. Phase I results
demonstrate that selectively-anodized&lt;br/&gt;electroactive pedicle screws
effectively deliver focused osteogenic stimuli to key&lt;br/&gt;regions of the
lumbar spine critical to spinal fusion. Results provide
computational&lt;br/&gt;evidence for the technological and clinical success of
novel osteogenic&lt;br/&gt;instrumentation in spinal fusion surgery. Phase II
will confirm that the system of&lt;br/&gt;electroactive spinal instrumentation
has the potential to accelerate bone growth and&lt;br/&gt;improve post-surgical
fusion outcomes compared to gold-standard interventions&lt;br/&gt;utilizing a
clinically relevant large animal model.