* 1738547
* RII Track-4: Strengthening structural biology research with single particle cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM)
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Tung-Chung Mou, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 08/31/2020
* USD 219,964.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Our understanding of how atoms are arranged
in molecules relies to some extent to how they can be visualized. Instruments
capable of visualization of molecular structures are developing, such that newly
developed instruments may be only available at a few locations. This fellowship
will enable comprehensive training in an advanced form of microscopy called
single-particle Cryo-Electron Microscopy(Cryo-EM). Once trained at the National
Center for Macromolecular Imaging (NCMI), the PI will use this equipment to
visualize biomolecular structures at the atomic level. This will strengthen the
development of comprehensive structural biological tools at the University of
Montana. Knowledge of the three-dimensional arrangement of macromolecular atoms
makes it possible to understand fundamental mechanistic details of critical
biological processes and the interactions between biomolecules. For many years,
X-ray crystallography was the most common method for determining macromolecular
structure; however, many important molecules, including membrane proteins, do
not readily crystallize. Thanks to the recent development of cryo-EM as a next-
generation technology for structural biology, analysis of large and dynamic
complex assembles is now possible. The NCMI is one of a few national cryo-EM
core facilities staffed with experts to provide training and automated single-
particle data acquisition. Through collaborative visits with NCMI at Baylor
University in Houston, TX, the PI and a student trainee will receive in-depth
knowledge of cryo-EM and hands-on experience to operate cryo-EM instrumentation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The fellowship will
provide the PI with training on Cryo-EM and associated techniques, which will be
used in his work on the analysis of the structure and function of specific
proteins. In particular, the project will involve characterization of mammalian
Ric-8A and its associated binding compounds, and the arenavirus envelope
glycoprotein. The overall cryo-EM training at NCMI includes sample preparation,
2-dimensional (2-D) data imaging, single-particle alignment and averaging, 3-D
map construction, and model development. A significant portion of the training
will also focus on practicing with the latest software packages developed for
data acquisition, 3-D reconstructions, structural analysis and visualization of
the cryo-EM results. This cryo-EM training will strengthen collaborations
between the NCMI and researchers from the University of Montana who wish to
extend their research on structural biology to include cryo-EM technology,
especially for samples that exhibit conformational heterogeneity, making them
unsuitable for X-ray crystallographic analysis.