* 1738965
* CICI: RSARC: SECTOR: Building a Secure and Compliant Cyberinfrastructure for Translational Research
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Yan Luo, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2022
* USD 999,651.00

Translational research has been driven by the increasing amount of heterogeneous
data sets collected from medical instruments, sensors, patient diagnosis
records, genomic and microbiome samples. The recent advancement in information
technology greatly accelerates the innovation in translational research by
applying in-depth analysis on these data with large scale computing and storage
resources. Clinical researchers now heavily rely on such cyberinfrastructure to
understand trends, derive correlations, and/or identify anomalies, which are
instrumental to accurate diagnosis, precision drug discovery and effective
treatment of diseases. In this context, the security of the patient data, the
efficient sharing of data, and the processing of data in a regulation compliant
fashion are critical. This project addresses the resource limitations and
security aspects of data-driven translational research. The project will greatly
speed up clinical research activities that rely heavily on the analysis of
sensitive data. The resulting software defined security infrastructure can be
applied to a wide range of cyberinfrastructure that carries sensitive data. The
project will strengthen the collaboration among computer scientists, clinical
researchers, IT managers and provides a rare opportunity to address the
cyberinfrastructure challenges in a holistic way instead of an ad hoc,
incremental manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project designs and deploys a
Security and compliant Cyberinfrastructure for Translational Research (SECTOR)
that enables sharing and computing on sensitive data sets between private
compute clusters, a shared HPC facility and/or a HIPAA compliant cloud.
Specifically, it (1) leverages the emerging software defined infrastructure
(SDI), blockchain and secure domain name system to extend the boundary of
computing on sensitive and private data. This is the first project to bring the
agility and resilience of SDI to clinical research activities; (2) designs a
framework that enables the deployment of a new workflows with fine grained user
and access control that are compliant with the HIPAA (Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996) technical safeguard; (3) enables the
migration of data computation using streaming based data redirection and
processing, requiring very little effort in porting existing scientific
applications; (4) designs a portal that exploits the underlying SDI resources to
help various stakeholders to express their workflow and simplify the management
of healthcare resources.