* 1738990
* D3SC: EAGER: Data-driven design of molecular models from microscopic dynamics and experimental data
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Anatoly Kolomeisky, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

With this award the CTMC program in the Division of Chemistry is funding
Professor Cecelia Clementi at Rice University to develop models for studying
properties of matter at various scales. A fundamental challenge for the chemical
sciences is to bridge the gap between the ability to study and manipulate matter
at the atomistic scale with the desire to understand and predict properties at a
macroscopic scale. Recently, there has been an immense increase in high-
throughput and high-resolution technologies for experimental observation. In
addition there is an increase in high-performance techniques to simulate
molecular systems at a microscopic level. These advances have resulted in a vast
and ever-increasing amounts of high-dimensional data. Consequently, there is a
recent surge of interest in data analysis techniques. In particular, techniques
that extract essential features, collective variables or representative states
from simulations. These simulation data have to be reconciles with experimental
data. However, with very few exceptions, these reconciling techniques are purely
descriptive and do not allow the formulation of general principles regulating
the macroscopic behavior. Furthermore it is difficult to scale up towards
significantly larger and more complex systems. This project develops a new and
general approach to address this challenge. The approaches are applicable to
very different chemical systems, ranging from signal transduction in cells, over
heterogeneous catalysis to the design of polymer brushes. The proposed research
impacts a large interdisciplinary community of students and researchers in
Chemistry, Physics and Mathematics. The project undertakes curriculum
development in computational and mathematical methods applied to chemical
systems. Curriculum development includes undergraduate and graduate courses. The
project is also recruiting and mentoring women and minority undergraduate and
graduate students. This activity is conducted through a collaboration with the
Tapia Center at Rice University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is developing
a general framework to obtain the effective dynamical models (structure,
equations and parameters) governing molecular systems. The key hypothesis is
that, in order to be able to understand and model macroscopic systems, there is
a need to use purely descriptive models to define generative models from data.
Models are developed at the mesoscale from microscale simulations and multiscale
experimental data. The approach is fundamentally different from available
coarse-graining techniques or model reduction methods. Both the form of the
macroscopic model as well as the effective dynamical equations are learned from
data. Functional building blocks that can be embedded in higher order
simulations are generated in order to bridge the gap between microscopic and
macroscopic systems. The method investigates if and how relatively general
organizing principles emerge from the interactions of a multitude of atomic
degrees of freedoms in different chemical systems. This modeling approach has
the potential to serve as a keystone to integrate vast amounts of chemical data
into quantitative, mechanistic and comprehensible models. Such models are able
to explain how different molecular components organize and interact as a
function of time and space in performing functions at the macroscopic scale.