* 1738287
* RII Track-4: Ab initio modeling of nuclear reactions for studies of nucleosynthesis and fundamental symmetries in nature
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Kristina Launey, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 08/31/2020
* USD 272,091.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Ever since the history-making discovery of
nuclear fission, which demonstrated the huge amount of energy that can be
released when the strong bonds between the atomic constituents (neutrons and
protons) are broken, theoretical nuclear physicists have searched for a
comprehensive explanation of the properties of the atomic nucleus based on
knowledge of the strong force between these constituents. This project takes
advantage of the instrumentation, computing capabilities, and theoretical
expertise at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) to develop a
theoretical framework that will improve our understanding of these forces. When
this goal is achieved, it will be possible to predict reactions that take place
under extreme conditions, from stellar explosions to the interior of nuclear
reactors. Improving our knowledge of nuclear reactions will help us further
understand 'nuclei-fueled' astrophysical processes, and safely and economically
harness nuclear phenomena in support of the broad scope of humanitarian needs.
Future advances in nuclear science and technology hold promise for a growing
number of applications for medicine, industry, energy, and national security.
The development of advanced instrumentation and applications of nuclear isotopes
in disease treatments provide two prominent examples that rely on elementary
properties of atomic nuclei. In addition to providing access to the facilities
and expertise at LLNL, this project will provide training and unique research
experiences for the PI and a postdoctoral fellow, with indirect benefits to
graduate and undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to dramatically expand the reach as well
as the impact of nuclear reaction theory with the aim of predicting properties
of experimentally inaccessible nuclei and reactions, while supporting and
informing experiments at current and upcoming radioactive beam facilities. The
goal is to develop and implement a symmetry-guided theory that will enable
pioneering ab initio investigations of reactions for heavier nuclear species,
while accounting for the challenging structure of the participating nuclei. This
will be achieved by capitalizing on approximate symmetries known to dominate in
nuclei. In this approach all participating particles in the target and incoming
proton or neutron are treated on the same footing within a 'shell model' concept
of the quantum many-particle system and the compound nucleus. In addition,
state-of-the-art chiral effective field theory interactions between protons and
neutrons will be employed. New predictions, possible through the unique
combination of expertise of theoretical and experimental nuclear physicists at
Louisiana State University and LLNL are anticipated for processes inaccessible
to experiments, which can facilitate neutrino- and fusion-related research and
are key to advancing knowledge about astrophysical processes, as well as of
fundamental symmetries in nature. This, in turn, can help address two of the
most fundamental questions of physics today: the origin of elements, and if the
neutrino is its own antiparticle. While the proposed applications focus on
specific important questions, the new developments will have wider impact, as
multi-physics simulations in the areas of nuclear energy and national security
have similar needs. As part of this research, future leaders will be trained in
research in low-energy nuclear science, while learning and working in massively
parallel environments at petascale computing facilities.