* 1738857
* RII Track-4: Governing Social-Ecological Transformation across Working Landscapes
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Brian Chaffin, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Eric Lindquist
* 08/31/2021
* USD 213,723.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Water availability, soil health, and
ecosystem services such as wildlife habitat, water filtration, and carbon
sequestration enhance the potential for both agricultural productivity and
sustainability of human communities. Managing for these elements simultaneously
is an increasing challenge across U.S. agricultural landscapes. Although
ecologists and agricultural scientists have made substantial progress in
determining best practices to maximize both commodity production and retention
of the health of associated ecosystems, efforts are also needed to identify and
quantify the societal elements that support productive agriculture and community
sustainability. Restoring or transforming severely degraded agricultural
landscapes often requires more than a single policy change or intensified
management practices alone. This fellowship addresses this need through a highly
interdisciplinary study involving the development of an innovative, statistical
approach for analyzing and generating insights from combined sets of social and
ecological data on U.S. agricultural landscapes. The fellowship enables the PI,
a social scientist from the University of Montana, to partner with ecologists at
the University of Nebraska-Lincoln to develop a statistical method for
identifying evidence of discrete social and ecological transitions that have
occurred in the Middle Platte River watershed of central Nebraska since the Dust
Bowl era of the 1930s. This analysis will be applied to distinguish specific
policy mechanisms that could be employed to improve degraded agricultural
systems through landscape-scale improvements in ecosystem health. This research
and the associated partnerships will directly support interdisciplinary graduate
education as well as provide a statistical analysis tool designed to overcome
persistent disciplinary barriers to data integration between ecological and
social scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this research is to better understand the potential for human-led
transformations of degraded agricultural systems across the U.S. Researchers
will develop quantitative methods for more robust identification of coupled
social and ecological processes that have led to systemic regime shifts. This
will be achieved by analyzing time-series datasets for a variety of both social
and biophysical processes in the Middle Platte River watershed of central
Nebraska. The Middle Platte River agricultural system is a data-rich test case
where multiple social-ecological regime shifts have occurred since the Dust
Bowl. Research objectives and methods include: (1) gathering available datasets
representing key environmental processes (e.g. water use, water quality,
agricultural production data) and social shifts (e.g. demographics, public
attitudes toward agriculture) since the 1930s agricultural transition in the
Great Plains; (2) performing discontinuity analysis using Fisher information to
detect and statistically explain evidence of regime shifts in the multivariate
data; and (3) characterizing shifts in governance affecting agricultural
landscapes before, after, and during identified regime shifts using statistical
analysis (QCA) of qualitative, archival data such as local agricultural laws,
policies, and industry or community periodicals. Characterizing the governance
surrounding past regime shifts in the Middle Platte River watershed will help
researchers further explain the potential of governance to either stifle or
support social-ecological system transformation from degraded to more
sustainable regimes. This research contributes to a growing body of knowledge
suggesting adaptive and transformative governance processes as means to
mitigate, adapt to, and potentially transform social-ecological systems in
response to the impacts global environmental change. Specifically, this research
addresses the need for productivity, sustainability, and resilience in the face
of natural and human-caused changes.