* 1738489
* SBIR Phase II:  Innovative visual search and similarity for decor, apparel, and style
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Sean Bell, GrokStyle Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2019
* USD 747,959.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to develop visual search for product
recognition in the furniture and home décor vertical. Text-based searches have
revolutionized the ability of people to complete tasks more quickly and
efficiently as they are able to find the information they desire in an
organized, compiled, and logical manner. Visual search provides the next level
of disruption in search capabilities by allowing users to find information even
more rapidly and accurately by using images. The deep learning-based software
being developed will allow consumers to find products they are interested in,
and co-purchase related products, quickly. Further, users will be more engaged
through exposure to designer photographs of products (inspirational
photography). By helping customers find exactly what they are looking for in a
timely manner, user engagement and productivity will be increased. Further,
related style-based recommendations will increase purchasing overall. Increased
spending stimulates economic growth by increasing taxable revenue by retailers,
and through increased sales taxes generated from the purchases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovative Research Phase II project
seeks to develop a visual search engine that is poised to disrupt retail and
ecommerce by switching the focus from text-based to visual search-based
exploration. The platform initially targets interior décor and furniture where
deep learning techniques are trained to recognize products across a wide range
of conditions. In Phase II, the software deep learning architectures will be
generalized to enable a broader range of products, and to allow customers more
control over design decisions and choices. A client-facing REST API will allow
retailers, designers, and media companies to programmatically access
functionality of the platform, and build their own user interfaces and apps on
top of the deep learning technology. Lastly, it is proposed to develop a white-
label app that can be customized for individual retailers who want to distribute
this visual search capability to their customers. Achieving these objectives
will create state-of-the-art performance in visual search for applications in
interior design, apparel search, real estate search, and product look-up.