* 1738027
* SBIR Phase II:  A Closed Loop Process for the recycle of End-of-Life Li-ion Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Eric Gratz, Battery Resourcers LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,177,850.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to demonstrate the feasibility of Battery Resourcers
recycling process on a scale that has commercial significance. This will further
allow Battery Resourcers to scale its process such that it can be a player in
the lithium ion battery recycling market place. Battery Resourcers' ultimate
goal is into increase recycling rates of spent Li-ion batteries by providing an
economically viable domestic recycling option. Additionally, Battery Resourcers
process produces low cost cathode materials for the battery industry which may
ultimately further enable green technologies like solar, wind and electric
vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase 1 award proposes to scale the
Battery Resourcers recycling process from 50kg to 0.5 tons of spent Li-ion
batteries. The proposed research focuses on process speed, safety and the
quality of the recovered materials. Rate limiting steps in Battery Resourcers
recycling process will be studied with an effort to improve process speed.
Specifically, Battery Resourcers will look at new filtering methods for the
solutions generated in its process. A method to safety shred Li-ion batteries is
examined by controlling the atmosphere and removing the batteries' stored
energy. Finally, the production of quality cathode materials from spent Li-ion
batteries is scaled from 50kg to 0.5 tons. Battery Resourcers' goal is to
produce commercial quality cathode powder on a scale that matters to industry.