* 1738326
* SBIR Phase II:  A Precision, High-Density Stimulation Electrode for Low-Back Pain Relief
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2017,03/31/2024
* Bryan McLaughlin, Micro-Leads,Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,200,114.00

The broader impact and commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to treat chronic back and lower limb pain
more effectively using a high-resolution stimulation technology. Lower back pain
affects more than 100M Americans. While spinal cord neuro-modulation is
successful for about 60% of patients, many people remain untreated and suffer
from chronic pain. Low-back pain is the most difficult to treat due as
conventional electrode technology cannot selectively deliver energy to these
fibers due to the bulky paddle electrode volume associated with the legacy
manufacturing processes. Furthermore, to achieve maximal pain relief,
neurosurgeons must wake the subjects during an operation to verify if the
patient senses pain relief as the electrode is positioned. Many subjects undergo
multiple operations due to inaccurate electrode alignment or movement of the
electrode over time due to physical activity. The proposed active grid electrode
technology seeks to double the size of therapeutic surface area, including
providing therapy to low-back fibers which are not accessible by conventional
electrodes. The technology is expected to improve low-back pain relief, as well
as use wireless programming to alter the therapy in the event of electrode
movement, avoiding the need for re-operation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project seeks to double the area of the spinal cord which can receive
therapeutic benefit, by developing an active stimulation-grid electrode grid
technology. By positioning a very small electronic circuit within the paddle
electrode, the team is expected to create a 64 contact therapy array to deliver
precision therapy. To accomplish these goals, the project includes three
critical tasks including: (1) develop a medical-grade design of the implantable
electronics, package, and lead array, (2) perform mechanical aging and stretch
testing, and (3) prepare prototypes for subsequent ISO 14708 validation testing.
The goal of the project is to accelerate the medical-grade hardware development
effort to enable future therapies to treat low-back pain. Eventual validation
after this project is completed will be performed in humans by selectively
applying stimulation and recording if the patient feels therapy in the low-back
area.