* 1738325
* SBIR Phase II:  A Systematic Approach, Language and Platform for Building and Distributing Interactive Educational Games in Operations Management
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2017,02/28/2021
* Karin Khoo, Fathomd, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2021
* USD 739,252.00

This SBIR Phase II project should increase the adoption of pedagogically
validated educational games that facilitate retention and effective use of
business concepts taught and relevant to managing organizations. Start-ups, for-
profit and nonprofit companies all need managers who can make effective
decisions in the face of complexity and uncertainty. It is of the utmost
importance to society, therefore, that the next generation of business leaders
is equipped with relevant frameworks and tools that supplement traditional
teaching methods and enable effective use of knowledge on the job. Hence, this
project has the potential to empower the U.S. workforce to be more productive
and innovative, which will improve existing business outcomes and thus drive
U.S. job and economic growth. Improved business operations will also lead to
more profitable business in general and potentially larger tax revenues for the
U.S. government. Eventually opening the GDL to third-party authors in the $18.6
billion global game-based learning market will accelerate game innovation and
usage in other business and engineering disciplines at a lower cost, which will
both enhance the effectiveness of the STEM workforce and encourage more economic
activity in the game development market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
based on three innovations that differentiate this solution from others: (1) a
scientific Game Research and Development (GR&amp;D) process designs games
containing pedagogical learning objectives; (2) a Game Design Language (GDL)
accelerates implementation of game concepts as automatically validated, domain
specific language while eliminating runtime errors; and (3) an innovative web
Game Distribution Platform (GDP) minimizes the effort to setup and manage games
in the classroom. Typical educational game development in languages such as
JavaScript is time-consuming, involves professional software engineers and
requires debugging of runtime errors, while usage of game technology in the
class is disruptive to the flow of instruction. Such challenges are therefore
prohibitive for non-professional programmers and game administrators such as
professors. To mitigate the problem of runtime errors, this project employs
methods of video game development, which typically use domain-specific languages
based on non-Turing-complete models of computation to solve these issues. Games
created with GDL will enable rapid new game development and have a guaranteed
level of technical quality, allowing professors to focus on pedagogical
relevance during instruction. The main technical hurdle is to tailor these
methods to result in GDL capable of expressing the Operations Management (OM)
games conceived during the scientific GR&amp;D process and playable via the GDP
that enables seamless class integration.