* 1738962
* CICI: CE: SciTokens: Capability-Based Secure Access to Remote Scientific Data
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* James Basney, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,000,000.00

The management of security credentials such as passwords and secret keys for
computational science workflows is a burden for scientists and information
security officers. Problems with security credentials (e.g., expiration,
privilege mismatch) cause the workflows to fail to fetch needed input data or
store valuable scientific results, distracting scientists from their research by
requiring them to diagnose the problems, re-run their computations, and wait
longer for their results. In an effort to avoid these problems, scientists often
use long-lived, highly-privileged credentials (e.g., enabling the workflow to
fully impersonate their identity), increasing risks to their accounts and to the
underlying computational infrastructure and resulting in complexity for
information security officers managing the infrastructure. The SciTokens project
delivers open source software to help scientists manage their security
credentials more reliably and securely. The project includes participants from
the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) Scientific
Collaboration and the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST) project to ensure
relevance and facilitate adoption. Integration with the widely-used HTCondor
software and collaboration with Open Science Grid and the Extreme Science and
Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE) facilitates adoption by the wider
scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the challenges and risks
of managing security credentials for scientific workflows, the SciTokens project
delivers an open source software infrastructure that uses IETF-standard Open
Authorization (OAuth) tokens for capability-based secure access to remote
scientific data. SciTokens uses OAuth refresh tokens, maintained securely on the
submission node, to delegate short-lived, least-privilege OAuth access tokens to
scientific workflows, to enable their remote data access. The access tokens
convey the specific authorizations needed by the workflows, rather than general-
purpose authentication impersonation credentials. These least-privilege
authorization tokens help to address the risks of scientific workflows running
on distributed infrastructure including NSF resources (e.g., LIGO Data Grid,
Open Science Grid, XSEDE) and public clouds (e.g., Amazon Web Services, Google
Cloud, Microsoft Azure). By improving the interoperability and security of
scientific workflows, the SciTokens project 1) enables use of distributed
computing for scientific domains that require greater data protection and 2)
enables use of more widely distributed computing resources by reducing the risk
of credential abuse on remote systems.