* 1738508
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Gender at the Nunalleq Site: Community Perspectives from Quinhagak, Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2019
* Madonna Moss, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 06/30/2019
* USD 17,833.00

The goal of this project is to collect information about gender and Yup'ik
lifeways of the past from residents of Quinhagak, Alaska, and to apply this
knowledge to archaeological interpretations of social life at the pre-contact
site of Nunalleq. Interviews with Yup'ik residents of Quinhagak will focus on
how Yup'ik communities defined gender in the past, and how gendered identities
may be visible archaeologically in the artifacts and built spaces of Nunalleq.
Using community knowledge as the cornerstone for archaeological interpretations
ensures that Yup'ik perspectives are honored in the research process and that
gendered social identities are considered in a complex and contextual manner. As
a community-based project, this research is part of a larger disciplinary
movement towards Indigenous community involvement in the planning and
implementation of archaeological projects and the interpretation and analysis of
resultant data. The benefits of such approaches are myriad: not only does
community-based research attend to the specific needs and conditions of
Indigenous communities (many of whom are marginalized), but such strategies
often result in more robust and publically-relevant research questions and
analysis. Together, the Nunalleq site and the neighboring community of Quinhagak
provide a unique opportunity for community-based research on gender. Located
just a few miles outside of Quinhagak, Nunalleq has long been a fixture in local
histories, and its links to the 13th-17th century Bow and Arrow wars connect it
to a broader regional heritage that has been little explored. Nunalleq has been
subject to remarkable permafrost preservation, with artifacts of unusual quality
being recovered in very high numbers. The confluence of having high-quality
archaeological data alongside a community with knowledge of and interest in the
site creates an ideal setting for community-based research on gender and social
identities, themes that are best explored with robust archaeological and oral
historical data. That themes of gender and social identity have received little
attention in regional archaeological studies further suggests the importance of
this study, as does Nunalleq's status as an archaeological resource increasingly
threatened by environmental change.