* 1738244
* 2018 Mesophotic Coral Reef Ecosystems Gordon Research Conference
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Michael Lesser, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 07/31/2018
* USD 30,000.00

This award will provide support to conduct a newly approved Gordon Research
Conference (GRC) entitled; Mesophotic Coral reef Ecosystems. The funds will be
used to provide partial support for the registration and travel costs of
conference attendees with special emphasis on conference speakers, junior
scientists, post-doctoral researchers and graduate students from a wide variety
of backgrounds. The 2018 Mesophotic Coral Reef Ecosystems GRC will provide a
significant scientific and educational forum for this rapidly emerging field of
coral reef science. This conference will be able to foster a diverse
interdisciplinary meeting that brings many of the world's current scientists
working in this field while also providing a dynamic forum to recruit new
investigators and broaden diversity in the field. Climate change will continue
to affect shallow coral reefs for decades to come but we know very little about
the role(s) of MCEs in the resilience of their shallow water counterparts. The
physical and biological connectivity between shallow and mesophotic reefs is
essential to understand at a time when we do not even have a grasp of the extent
and biodiversity of MCEs around the world. The support will help this growing
field of researchers to coalesce behind some central questions and diversify in
terms of discipline, gender and race. The GRC organizers anticipate this will
result in an improved global network of mesophotic coral reef scientists that
will be able to engage in interdisciplinary studies to answer critical questions
on MCEs in a collaborative way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mesophotic Coral Reef
Ecosystems (MCEs) are unique and understudied ecosystems characterized as low-
light adapted deep reef communities that occur from ~30-150m. These reefs are
typically further offshore from anthropogenic stressors and are below the depth
limits of most natural disturbances. The habitat available for the development
of MCEs has been variably estimated at three to ten times the known areal extent
of shallow coral reefs (&lt;30 m). As a result, MCEs are increasingly recognized
as potentially important refugia for a variety of shallow reef species currently
impacted by climate change related stressors. Therefore, there is a critical
need to address many questions regarding the structure and function of MCE
communities in their own right, but also in the broadest sense that includes
their role in the resilience of shallow coral reef communities to environmental
insults. The group of scientists studying MCEs is growing rapidly and includes
coral reef ecologists, molecular biologists, oceanographers, physiologists,
biogeochemists, paleo-climatologists, fisheries biologists, microbiologists,
chemical ecologists, population geneticists and managers interested in resource
conservation. This GRC will assemble experts from around the world, as well as
students and post-doctoral researchers, to present new data and evaluate the
evidence supporting the multiple factors controlling the structure and function
of MCE communities worldwide. Given the increasing number of investigators
devoting research time to this new field of coral reef ecology and biology, and
the increasing number of graduate students and post-doctoral researchers
involved, the GRC expect to attract a minimum of 150 participants from around
the world. Moreover, MCEs represent a unique biophysical gradient that is
attracting researchers from other fields to address issues of adaptation at the
genetic, biochemical, and physiological levels in these natural laboratories.