* 1738293
* Design of Motion-Artifact Robust Electronic Tattoos and Software Reconfiguration Methodologies for Bio-impedance Sensing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Roozbeh Jafari, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 08/31/2022
* USD 316,000.00

Electronic-tattoos (e-tattoos) are ultra-thin, ultra-soft sensors and
electronics that can noninvasively adhere to human skin like a temporary
transfer tattoo. Compared to the state-of-the-art wearable electronics,
e-tattoos offer several exceptional characteristics. First, they conform to the
skin and create a tight contact with the human body enabling robust signal
measurements. Second, they may allow the skin to breathe eliminating the adverse
effect of traditional adhesive patches. Lastly, they do not constrain natural
skin motion hence present high degrees of comfort for the user. In other words,
the user may "put it on and forget about it". E-tattoos are poised to enable new
opportunities for the next generation of ubiquitous, unobtrusive and cost-
effective health and wellness monitoring impacting the national health, bringing
personalized care the individuals need to their homes. A strategic education and
outreach effort focuses on broadening the participation of underrepresented
groups in science and engineering via a year-long undergraduate research
experience with enhanced graduate school preparation in partnership with Texas A
&amp; M University EnMed program and University of Texas-Austin NASCENT NSF
Engineering Research Center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emerging bio-impedance
sensing offers new paradigms to capture a number of important physiological
signals including heart rate, respiration rate and blood pressure, all around
the human wrist. As the most dynamic body part, the wrist is under constant
movement. The major challenge in bio-impedance sensing is the negative effects
of motion artifacts that corrupt the data, degrade the signal fidelity, and
prevent decision making with sufficient confidence. Our project leverages ultra-
thin and ultra-soft e-tattoos for bio-impedance sensing on the wrist because
e-tattoos enable the most intimate but noninvasive coupling for the electrodes
and the human skin, even under severe skin deformation. Our project also
explores software reconfiguration methodologies and machine learning techniques
to further address the challenges. In particular, we investigate: 1) design and
development of an array of submicron-thick, skin-conformable graphene electrode
tattoos for the first time, and 2) novel reconfiguration techniques that would
eliminate or reduce the noise associated with motion artifacts and enhance the
signal fidelity.