* 1738895
* III: EAGER: Knowledge Graph Mining for Financial Risk Analytics
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2017,12/31/2021
* Mohammed Zaki, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

Graph Data mining and learning via text analytics over financial documents can
be a powerful tool to enhance financial risk measurement and management, as well
as to enable regulatory oversight and compliance. This proposal seeks to develop
novel knowledge graph mining methods for the vast set of financial news and
events streams, and disclosure documents (filings, call reports, etc.) from
financial institutions for systemic risk assessment of the banking and financial
system. Novel methods developed in this proposal will help both the financial
institutions, such as banks and insurance firms, as well as regulators of such
financial institutions. Risk indicators based on text analytics can be used for
a range of asset and risk management decisions for the former, and for
identifying specific risk type for regulatory oversight for the latter. Since
textual data is ubiquitous, and extracting valuable insights from text remains a
challenge, the risk analysis techniques developed in this project, will also
help analyze other domains where textual data can offer valuable insights.
Examples include international crises, natural disasters, humanitarian efforts
and so on, where an assessment of the risk is essential for appropriate
responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research project the PI will
develop innovative data mining and learning methods to create a "financial risk"
knowledge graph from textual and semantic features mined from the publicly
available annual and quarterly reports filed with the SEC. The PI will also use
textual data from news articles and credit assessment reports. The key
underlying methods rely on developing innovative state-of-the-art text and graph
mining methods for effective domain-specific approaches to deal with financial
text. Especially, the PI plans to define, extract and track nuance and sentiment
topics corresponding to different risk exposures of financial institutions, such
as credit, interest rate, liquidity, exchange rate risks, as well as the impact
of operational, regulatory and reputation risks, to improve risk prediction and
monitoring. The outcome of this task will be a rich knowledge graph of risk
based on text and graph mining. The knowledge graph will comprise risk-nuanced
sentiment words and phrases for the use in risk analytics and a set of financial
risk concepts and relationships among different entities.