* 1738528
* SBIR Phase II:  Low friction and high durability PTFE nanoparticle composite coating for bearings
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2017,05/31/2021
* Samuel Beckford, SurfTec, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 05/31/2021
* USD 909,969.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will demonstrate
compatibility of a novel polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) composite coating with
metal-polymer bearings currently on the market, scale up the coating deposition
process, and implement pilot processing lines. Currently, there is a need for a
method to improve adhesion at the PTFE/metal interface while also reducing
corrosion, friction, and wear. The implementation of this technology will aid in
the transition from traditional lubricants to solid lubricants in manufacturing
and has significant implications for the US economy and the environment.
Currently, annual lubrication-related maintenance costs are as high as $1
trillion, and consumption of petroleum-based lubricants is estimated to reach
43.78 million metric tons as of 2016. The effective implementation of this
technology will reduce maintenance costs and downtime by eliminating premature
bearing failure. This project will serve as a proof point for the adoption of
nano-coating technologies for reducing friction and wear in mechanical systems.
It will also reduce barriers to entry for these coatings in industries dominated
by outdated lubrication practices. The total applicable market size for metal-
polymer bearings is estimated to be $1.0 billion, and a substantial near-term
revenue opportunity for the proposed technology in this sector will be the focus
of this effort. This beachhead opportunity serves as an industry validation
point for the proposed technology and an entry point to other industrial and
manufacturing applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
project is based on improving the adhesion and mechanical properties of PTFE
liners in metal-polymer bearings using an adhesive biomimetic polymer. This
technology increases the wear-life of PTFE coatings, allowing for applications
from which they have historically been precluded due to high wear and
delamination. During Phase I, the proof of concept was established through
demonstration of strong adhesion, 40% reduction in friction, 80% reduction in
wear and elimination of susceptibility to corrosion in current metal-polymer
bearings. The focus of Phase II will be in tailoring the coatings for specific
product applications and implementation. The proposed SBIR Phase II work will
overcome the remaining technical hurdles and validate the use of this technology
as both a solution for improving the adhesion between PTFE and substrates and as
a replacement for current PTFE liners in metal-polymer bearings. The execution
of this project will allow the realization of critical proof points needed by
industrial partners and speed the adoption of this technology into product
lines.