* 1738209
* Research Initiation: The Formation of Engineering Students' Beliefs about Intelligence
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Amy Betz, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2021
* USD 253,436.00

To address the complex problems of our ever-changing world, engineers need to
demonstrate resilience and engage in life-long learning. Previous research has
shown that people have a wide-range of beliefs regarding intelligence. For
example, some people believe intelligence is a static trait that does not change
over time, while others believe intelligence can be developed with effort.
Research has also shown that these different underlying beliefs about
intelligence are strongly tied to behaviors such as how an individual responds
to challenges. In this study, both first-year and senior engineering students
will be interviewed about their experiences in engineering school with respect
to multiple behaviors linked to beliefs about intelligence. This study will
provide valuable insight regarding how engineering culture and the undergraduate
formation of engineers impacts students' beliefs about intelligence, which is an
under-recognized factor in their ability to engage in engineering problem
solving. This work is imperative to determine how to shift engineering culture
to be more inclusive and form engineers that persist in the face of challenges.
Findings will also be leveraged to inform the faculty and graduate students
delivering courses and presenting at outreach events, resulting in more
effective educational programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will provide a
rich characterization of students' beliefs about the nature of intelligence,
building on prior quantitative studies. The team will utilize Carol Dweck's
well-established framework of Mindset to guide their investigation. A cross-
sectional study will collect and analyze interview data to characterize and
compare student beliefs about the nature of their intelligence in both the
first-year and senior year. When completed, the proposed project will provide
insight into students' perspectives on engineering undergraduate culture and how
it impacts the formation of their beliefs about intelligence, which are tied to
resilience and a commitment to life-long learning. This work could be
instrumental in transforming engineering culture and undergraduate engineering
education to be more inclusive and encouraging towards productive beliefs about
the nature of intelligence. Results from this study will be published in peer-
reviewed conference proceedings and journals. These publications will engage the
engineering education research community in an important discussion about
underlying beliefs that impact the formation of engineers. This project will
also provide professional development and mentoring for two professionals, to
learn how to conduct rigorous engineering education research. As a result, the
pool of individuals qualified to submit future education research proposals will
be expanded. Finally, the team's plan utilizes qualified evaluators and member
checking in order to assess the success of the research.