* 1738495
* SBIR Phase II:  AirLoom Investigation -- Modular, Scalable Wind Turbine at 23x Mass Savings
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Robert Lumley, KiteFarms LLC
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 08/31/2019
* USD 749,942.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project stems from a potential reduction in the capital
cost of wind turbines by an astounding 15x. The Company's patented, remarkably
simple design also reduces transportation, maintenance, and land costs, and
provides greater location and altitude flexibility. It uses the same
aerodynamics as today's dominant wind technology, the horizontal axis wind
turbine (HAWT), but with innovations that build on recent research into airborne
wind energy generation. Multiple, 6-meter airfoils (they look like model
airplanes) behave exactly like the outer tips of a conventional wind turbine
blade, which is where most of the power is generated in a HAWT. The airfoils run
along a rail- as if one captured kites and put them on short leashes - and a
linear generator makes the power. The proposed research is a continuation of
SBIR Phase I research and development that had demonstrated that these
principles are scientifically sound. If successful, this Phase II project would
drastically reduce the cost of wind-generated electricity, making it competitive
with fossil fuels. It would thus be a completely self-sustaining commercially
viable entity, creating jobs and generating tax revenues. By out-competing
fossil fuels, it would use market forces to encourage renewable energy
development, thus reducing energy-related emissions and improving national
health, prosperity, and welfare. The project's light weight, low profile, and
easy, flexible set-up may also have military and emergency applications that
would help secure the national
defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed technology
captures energy through translational rather than rotational motion in the tips
of the airfoils as they run along a rail tethered by bridles. Its major
innovation is a patented bridling system that handles downwind forces
(aerodynamic tip-over forces), which are the primary cause of the HAWT's mass
and cost. Another major innovation is to run airfoils in an oval rather than a
circle. This alters the math behind swept area, the key input for generation
capacity. Because the oval's swept area is a function of length and height,
rather than radius squared, this project can add capacity in many different
ways, escaping the tyranny of building ever-bigger and -taller circles. The
first objective is to design, test, build, measure, and refine a 100 kilowatt
(kW) device. A meaningful-scale second-generation device will demonstrate the
project's ability to meet performance, weight, and cost targets, while
facilitating decisions about how to build far larger devices, and modeling their
costs. The methods and approaches will continue to conquer challenges in five
subsystems: structures, aerodynamics, power generation, control, and grid
integration. The team, which includes leading experts in both academia and
industry, will design subsystem options. It will convene to find the best
system-wide design and construct the device, with many refinements along the
way.