* 1738081
* Effect of the Triaxial State of Stress in the Connectivity of Hydraulically-created Fractures in Crystalline Rocks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Bruno Goncalves da Silva, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2019
* USD 124,710.00

There is great potential in the use of hydraulic fracturing to increase the
permeability of crystalline rock formations in Enhanced Geothermal Systems (EGS)
and Artificial Groundwater Recharge (AGR) applications. EGS has the potential of
providing more than 100,000 MWe for the next 50 years in the United States; AGR
is a method that enhances the recharge of wells at shallower depths, which may
be particularly useful to increase the supply of clean water to populations in
dry regions. In both applications, the rocks are hydraulically fractured in
order to create a network of interconnected fractures that will increase the
permeability of the stimulated formations. The lack of fracture connectivity
after the hydraulic stimulations may lead to low, or insignificant, increases in
the permeability of the hydraulically-fractured rock formations which, in turn,
may result in financial losses and ultimately cause the abandonment of EGS and
AGR projects without taking advantage of their full potential. Therefore,
understanding the effect of field variables, such as the triaxial state of
stress which will be investigated in this project, in fracture connectivity is
of adamant importance to the success of these applications. This project will
also engage and educate undergraduate and graduate as well as high-school
students, on the fundamentals of hydraulic fracturing applied to EGS and AGR.

This project will 1) evaluate the effect of the triaxial state of stress in the
connectivity between hydraulically-created and existing fractures in crystalline
rocks, and 2) identify visual and acoustic emission (AE) precursors of rock
failure due to hydraulic fracturing. In order to do so, an apparatus developed
and previously used by the Principal Investigator in the hydraulic fracturing of
prismatic granite specimens subject to a vertical load will be redesigned to
allow one to apply a triaxial state of stress in prismatic rock specimens. Flaws
pre-fabricated in these specimens will be pressurized with water leading to the
propagation of hydraulic fractures. The entire fracturing process will be
observed visually, using High-Resolution and High-Speed Video cameras, and by
monitoring the acoustic emissions produced by the development of new fractures.
By integrating the visualization with the AE-monitoring of the fracturing
processes, it will be possible to evaluate the effect of the triaxial state of
stress in the mode of fracture connectivity and to identify precursors of
visible crack development. Determining these precursors will potentially allow
one to predict rock failure and the expected mode of connectivity of hydraulic
fractures before these phenomena take place. The experimental observations of
this research will be the basis for further developments and validation of
coupled hydro-mechanical models used to simulate the hydraulic fracturing of
crystalline rocks.