* 1738514
* STTR Phase II:  Spatially controlled direct transfer printing of semiconductor components for high-performance flexible electronic devices
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2017,12/31/2021
* Max Lagally, SysteMECH, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2021
* USD 848,784.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will advance a
novel probe-based direct transfer (PBDT) printing technology for manufacturing
flexible hybrid electronic (FHE) devices. PBDT promises to deliver unprecedented
selective, high-fidelity component transfer of a broad range of low-dimensional,
high-performance electronic components with diverse architectures and sizes to
flexible substrates. The technology will accelerate manufacturing capability to
meet a critical need in the flexible and printed electronics market. The
development of a stand-alone, automatic PBDT tool will provide flexible
electronics developers and manufacturers an unparalleled solution for
integrating high-performance thin and ultra-thin electronic materials into next-
generation flexible devices. The impact on the market and on daily life has the
potential to be transformative, with everything from consumer devices (e.g.,
flexible phones and tablets), to imaging and sensing, to health care and
homeland security being improved by advancements in flexible device
manufacturing. Furthermore, PBDT will enable new directions in flexible device
research and product development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The overall objective
of the Phase II project is to produce a prototype of a commercial version of a
PBDT tool. In addition, detailed performance specs of the process and tool will
be established, and functional FHE devices will be assembled using automated
PBDT printing. The Phase I feasibility study demonstrated that the PBDT approach
of handling a flexible substrate as both a stamp and as the destination
substrate allows for defect-free transfer of semiconductor components that are
an order of magnitude thinner and more complex laterally than what conventional
tools can handle. Based on the Phase I accomplishments, Phase II funding will be
used to develop and demonstrate a prototype tool that will serve as the template
for a fully automated commercial product. Successful commercialization of PBDT
will require advances in PBDT processes and hardware; therefore, the specific
objectives of the Phase II project are focused on (i) characterizing the full
process space of PBDT technology, (ii) demonstrating a complete process flow for
assembling and metalizing functional FHE devices, and (iii) validating the
prototype in terms of printing rate and fidelity. The collaborating university
partner will contribute to the design and fabrication of thin and ultra-thin
silicon components to assess the performance of the tool and demonstrate viable
FHE sensors.