* 1738411
* RIDIR: Collaborative Research: Analytical tools for text based social data integration
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Amarnath Gupta, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,194,781.00

When something happens in the world -- such as a natural disaster, an election,
a protest, or a policy change -- many types of media record different accounts
of the same event. Newspapers, social media posts and government documents all
provide unique versions of events stored in different formats. Because each
source provides its own perspective, synthesizing these stories vastly increase
our ability to learn about both events and the dynamics of the media
environment. Yet, social scientists are limited in their capacity to access
these myriad perspectives because there are few tools for automatically
combining these accounts into one integrated analysis. This project will provide
a rich infrastructure for integrating texts from diverse sources documenting the
same social phenomenon. Such integration often reveals much about underlying
social dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a tool to
integrate documents with different formats with accounts of the same or closely
related events through four main methods. First, the tool will allow users to
align documents by topic, while accounting for structural and stylistic
differences between documents. Second, the tool will compile different types of
documents by a shared event or entity. Third, the tool will allow for user-
provided schema to combine semi-structured documents. Last, the tool will
facilitate data fusion, by identifying and resolving contradictions from
multiple sources. The tool will be sufficiently flexible to fit multiple
research purposes, allow for human feedback to assist with integration, and
facilitate reproducibility by creating a common resource that can be the basis
of future research by a whole community of scholars. The system itself will be
applicable to almost any set of unstructured text data and will have broad
applicability for questions across the social sciences.