* 1738830
* Using hyperlocal and networked strategies to support computer science education for middle grade students in Chicago
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2017,03/31/2018
* Nichole Pinkard, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Karen King
* 03/31/2018
* USD 995,500.00

For youth to put in the amount of time and energy to develop sustained interest
in activities that develop computer science (CS)/computational thinking (CT)
literacies, those activities need to be accessible (cost, location, and warm
environment), relevant, and viewed as a valuable form of social capital. The
project will expand an existing research practice partnership (RPP) focused on
increasing computational making (i.e. the integration of design, coding, and
making to create interactive artifacts) learning opportunities for middle grade
youth living in the Chicago Bronzeville community. By adding a school-day
component, the project will focus on curating, developing, and implementing
instructional materials that integrate computational making learning activities
into middle grade (6-8) classrooms. Grounded in the prior work of the Digital
Youth Network (DYN), the project approach will create an ecosystem to support
student development of digital media literacies. By creating a learning
ecosystem that creates a context where CS/CT literacies are accessible,
relevant, and valued, the project will create the motivation for students to
seek opportunities to deepen and showcase their developing CS/CT skills within a
supportive community of peers, mentors, teachers, and families. The project will
address national and local conversations by providing a living example of how to
bring together a cohort of schools, informal learning providers, and academics
to create and implement an intro to computational making middle school strategy.
This strategy will blend together learning activities designed to develop core
computational making skills, with content-focused projects (e.g. math, science,
social studies, literacy and art), and community showcases designed to support
and grow student and family understanding and engagement in the diversity of
ways to use computer science and computational thinking to create, develop, and
control interactive artifacts that have meaning in everyday
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Bronzeville Fusion Network RPP team will work to
address two shared questions: (1) How can we foster a community learning
environment, anchored within schools, that recognizes, supports, and promotes
computational literacies as a desirable and accessible form of social capital by
educators, youth, and families? (2) How do these community level connections
impact youth CS/CT learning opportunities, participation, social networks,
knowledge, and understanding? To address these questions the RPP team will
leverage existing quality CS/CT resources (e.g. tools, programs, curriculum,
especially those that are free and research-based), existing local
infrastructure and policies (e.g. online learning platforms, professional
development models), and programmable interactive electronics (e.g. sensors,
arduinos, makey makey) to create culturally meaningful computational making
learning opportunities that connect middle school learners to quality
opportunities in ways that work and that are sustainable. To accomplish this
goal, the project will systematically engage in hyperlocal work in Bronzeville,
a Chicago community on the southside of Chicago, representing approximately
119,000 residents. The project will work with schools, educators and leaders
from local community organizations to collaboratively explore, curate, and
organize existing national CS/CT learning resources into culturally meaningful
blended learning activities and modules intentionally designed to engage
Bronzeville youth in exploring and discovering the essential role of CS/CT
literacies in making the interactive objects students use daily. We will also
use a networked strategy in Bronzeville, capitalizing on a citywide online
learning platform that brings together face-to-face and online learning
resources to support students, families, and teachers in finding and
participating in formal and informal activities designed to increase student
engagement in academics and enrichment activities, allowing youth to develop
portfolios of work and participation and to see and comment on the interactive
artifacts created by peers. While this work will focus within the Bronzeville
community, all of the curricular and learning resources developed through this
RPP will be deployed at a broader city level through this online platform.