* 1738138
* SBIR Phase II:  Pellet based 3D print extrusion process for shoe manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* D.Casey Kerrigan, JKM Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 08/31/2019
* USD 598,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project lies in the development of a novel cost-
effective 3D printing process to manufacture footwear. Currently most footwear
is mass manufactured, typically overseas, using fixed molds that do not meet the
specific needs of an individual. 3D printing of footwear offers the promise of
providing individual customization tailored not just to fit, style, and colors,
but also to individual biomechanics and/or medical needs. However, a number of
technical challenges exist to make 3D printing of footwear sufficiently cost-
effective that it can be provided beyond just a select few individuals. This
project develops a novel and cost-effective 3D printing process to manufacture
the critical components of footwear, using readily available and recyclable
thermoplastic pellets. This novel 3D printing process will enable the
manufacture of new, innovative footwear designs that cannot be made with any
other manufacturing process. Additionally, it will make mass customization of
footwear a reality, providing access to healthy customizable footwear for many
individuals. Unlike traditional manufacturing processes currently being done
overseas, this novel manufacturing technology is very amenable to implementing
in the United States on a local level. Thus, this project will not only help
move footwear manufacturing back to the United States, generating income for tax
revenue, it will create entirely new clean, safe jobs in
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, led by a woman
physician-scientist with a unique combination of expertise in both biomechanics
and manufacturing, develops a novel and cost-effective 3D printing technology to
print a proprietary mix of elastomeric material into a novel sole design that
was developed on the basis of over twenty years of biomechanics research. The
primary innovation that is being developed in this project is a specialized
plasticizing screw-based extruder mounted on a 3D printer, specifically designed
to make footwear, that uniquely and reliably extrudes a recyclable, thermo-
elastomeric material that is most suitable for footwear, from its most cost-
effective raw form: pellets. This project also develops a novel healthy and
customizable sole design, based on the principal investigator's biomechanical
research, which can only be made with this manufacturing technology innovation.
Finally, this project develops a biomechanically research-based algorithm for
customizing footwear made with this technology based on an individual's specific
biomechanical profile and/or specific medical need. This project will allow for
a novel, cost-effective manufacturing process where a bank of 3D printers
operate simultaneously, each producing their own made-to-order pair of footwear
and/or footwear components customized not only to fit but to an individual's
specific biomechanical profile and/or medical need.