* 1738179
* SBIR Phase II:  Modified Ionic Liquid Electrolytes for Low-Cost, High-Energy Li-ion Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2017,05/31/2018
* Tyler Evans, SiILion, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 05/31/2018
* USD 173,827.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project lies in the prototyping and scaled
demonstration of a high-energy lithium-ion cell for commercialization. This is
expected to directly feed into the domestic specialty and defense energy storage
markets (aerial and underwater drones, on-person battery) and global consumer
device markets while it is also expected to prove the technology for further
development in the global electric vehicle markets. The proposed project and
resulting technology responds to the growing need for low-cost, high-energy, and
safe energy storage technology through a scientifically unique and
technologically innovative approach. If successful in enabling a next-generation
lithium-ion battery, this project will contribute to major advances in drone
technology and consumer electronics technology capable of societal
transformation. For example, providing 3-6 months of continuous drone flight
time creates opportunities for the communications and defense industries, or
providing batteries that take up ½ the space of conventional batteries for
electronics opens the opportunity for higher power and more highly functional
consumer devices. Moreover, this project represents an opportunity for the U.S.
to grow its leadership position in energy storage. With the global energy
storage market projected to exceed $45B by 2020, it is crucial for the U.S. to
gain and maintain a substantial position in the field.

Despite the slow rate of improvement in Li-ion technology, demand for a higher
performing battery is growing quickly. To address this issue, this project
proposes to enable a non-flammable, high-energy lithium-ion cylindrical cell
technology comprising a high-loading silicon anode and nickel-rich cathode. The
incorporation of a high-loading silicon anode in a cylindrical cell format is
unique and has proven very attractive across a range of markets. Moreover, the
innovation is proposed to be compatible with the existing battery manufacturing
infrastructure for rapid commercialization. This SBIR Phase II project will, for
the first time, demonstrate a working high-loading silicon anode in commercially
viable cylindrical cell prototypes through the optimization of the electrode
architecture and its accompanying electrolyte composition. Upon optimizing the
prototype cell design the anode will be scaled for integration into cylindrical
cells, the prototypes will be characterized for cycling and safety performance,
iteration and improvements will be made as necessary, and finally, prototype
cells will be incorporated into a drone-ready pack design for delivery to an
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles manufacturing partner. If successful in achieving these
tasks, this project should direct future research efforts towards a higher focus
on electrolyte-enabled battery designs.