* 1738321
* SBIR Phase II:  Predictive Algorithms for Water Point Failure
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2017,10/31/2021
* Daniel Wilson, SweetSense Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 10/31/2021
* USD 1,313,725.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop and
apply machine learning statistical tools to Internet of Things (IoT) water
delivery and water quality sensors. This will enable prediction and preemptive
response to water point failures. The resilience of these environmental services
is dependent upon credible and continuous indicators of reliability, leveraged
by funding agencies to incentivize performance among service providers. In many
locations, these service providers are utilities providing access to clean
water, safe sanitation, and reliable energy. However, in some rural areas, there
remains a significant gap between the intent of service providers and the
impacts measured over time. Achieving the SBIR Phase II core objectives will
help close the loop on effective and clean water delivery. IoT sensors and
services will address one of the most critical public health gaps by enabling
delivery of reliable and safe water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IoT solutions for this
environment may help address these information asymmetries and enable improved
decisions and response. However, given the remote and power constrained
environments and the high degree of variability between fixed infrastructure
including age, materials, pipe diameters, power quality, rotating equipment
vendors (pumps and generators), servicing, and functionality, any IOT solution
would have to either be bespoke engineering, or compensate for these site-wise
complexities through analytics. Instead, our SBIR II approach is to develop
universal, solar powered cellular and satellite IOT hardware for each service
type, and addresses site complexities through cloud-based sensor fusion and
statistical learning. In this way, we significantly reduce hardware and
logistical costs, and provide value to our customers through service delivery
analytics. In Phase I, we demonstrated the application of simple sensors and
sophisticated machine learning to identify off-nominal service delivery across a
cohort of water pumps of various designs. We developed a universal electrical
borehole sensor compatible with disparate fixed infrastructure, and we
demonstrated solving the problem of heterogeneous customer hardware with a
homogeneous sensor platform and adaptive machine learning backend.