* 1738114
* EAGER: SC2: A Systems Approach to Spectrum Collaboration
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2018
* Robert Iannucci, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 03/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

Wireless spectrum is a precious resource that can only be meaningfully used when
access is controlled. Current mechanisms for control are largely legislative,
granting organizations and individuals the right to exclude others. Exclusive
use of frequency ranges over time and space can be highly inefficient - denying
non-interfering, would-be users access despite under-utilization by rights
holders. Spectrum collaboration is advanced as an alternative control mechanism
in which intelligence on the part of transceiver equipment is used to
simultaneously govern access and maximize utilization. Such intelligence is
manifested in the form of sophisticated algorithms and supporting flexible radio
and computing hardware. This proposal takes a systems approach to spectrum
collaboration. The PIs propose new approaches to understand and classify
activities within a range of frequencies and to study and evolve channel access
protocols that are both proactive (getting data through) and polite (assisting
others in the mission of getting their data through). More broadly, the
investigators seek to create novel protocols and tools to facilitate spectrum
sharing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is built on three pillars:
(a) improved spectrum sharing through PHY-layer optimization techniques such as
beamforming and interference cancellation, (b) mechanisms to learn the RF
environment and spectrum usage patterns using reinforcement learning and signal
classification, and (c) defining a model for spectrum sharing, called channel-
as-society (CAS). The investigators contend that advances in these three domains
have direct applicability to the practice of spectrum collaboration and the
DARPA Spectrum Collaboration Challenge (SC2) in particular. The investigators'
ongoing joint work on Low-Power Wide-Area Networking (LP-WAN) serves as a
testbed for some of the concepts relevant to SC2, both informing and being
informed by the proposed research. In addition, the investigators plan to co-
teach a Special Topics course in Wireless Networks and Mobile Computing
specifically targeting the SC2 problem statement, engaging the students in the
creation of novel SC2 concepts and techniques.