* 1738902
* CICI: RSARC: Secure Time for Cyberinfrastructure Security
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Ganesh Venayagamoorthy, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,015,464.00

The accurate marking and tracking of time plays a key role in scientific
discovery and technology advancement. Scientific discovery is becoming
increasingly reliant on more precise and reliable timekeeping. For example, the
precise synchronization of time enables GPS (Global Positioning System) systems
to accurately measure distances between distributed components of scientific
instruments. Furthermore, tightly synchronized clocks between the base stations
of mobile phone and data networks enable mobile handsets to share limited radio
spectrum more efficiently. In fact, many modern critical infrastructures
including computer networks, communication systems, electrical power grids, and
financial networks rely on precise time and time synchronization for efficient
¬¬and safe operations. However, existing commonly used time synchronization
approaches, including both GPS and the Network Time Protocol (NTP), are
extremely vulnerable to attacks. As modern research cyberinfrastructure quickly
evolves towards a distributed architecture with the incorporation of cloud
computing resources and new forms of sensing and computing infrastructures, and
as attacks on the time infrastructure have increased, developing secure time
synchronization approaches for resilient time service is of paramount
importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project is to provide novel
and holistic approaches to enable time security for cyberinfrastructures that
employ the two most commonly used time synchronization mechanisms, i.e., GPS
based and NTP based synchronization. More specifically, the project seeks to
provide a security solution as a national service for all civil GPS time users.
It will also develop and prototype a redundancy based security solution to NTP
synchronization with minimal extra communication overhead. The main thrusts are
to: i) establish a reference GPS receiver and server at Clemson University that
can be used for GPS receivers across the US to detect spoofing attacks by cross
checking encrypted military code in GPS signals; ii) develop a pulse based
redundant synchronization approach to verify the reliability of network time
provided by NTP; iii) experimentally prototype the two secure time approaches on
a flood monitoring platform and a weather station platform, and use them to
secure Clemson's campus NTP timing network in collaboration with the Information
Technology (IT) department.