* 1738335
* SBIR Phase II:  Combining Program Analysis Breakthroughs and Big Data to Improve Mobile App Quality
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2017,02/28/2021
* Ilya Dreytser, NimbleDroid, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 02/28/2021
* USD 1,409,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will result from greatly improving mobile app
user experience, boosting developer productivity, and speeding up mobile
innovations by automating the mundane and simplifying the complex in Android app
testing. Apps are now everywhere. They innovate almost every industry. By making
it easy to build high-quality apps, users enjoy better experience and developers
enjoy better productivity, benefiting every industry and person that use
apps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
II project seeks to modernize the software development process by combining both
program analysis research breakthroughs and big data technologies. Toward this
vision, this project aims to build a unique product with innovative technologies
to help developers automatically test Android apps. The product continuously
tests apps across code changes to detect issues such as performance regressions,
crashes, and memory leaks, as soon as problematic code is introduced. In
contrast, existing tools often alert developers too late, after real users have
been affected and many code changes have been merged, making it both stressful
and difficult to find the problematic code. The proposed product gives
actionable diagnosis by pinpointing what problematic code developers need to fix
and explaining the why and how of the fix. It is thus much more intelligent and
easy to use than existing tools.