* 1738028
* Dimensions: Collaborative Research: Elucidating the drivers of mutualism variation in host-symbiont metapopulations
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Jeffrey Chang, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 09/30/2022
* USD 349,960.00

Symbiotic bacteria transform how plants and animals interact with their
environment. These bacteria are well known for their ability to enhance host
growth and tolerance to stress, but symbioses vary greatly in their effects on
host health and fitness. Little is understood about the forces that shape this
variation and drive the spread of symbionts that interact, but fail to benefit
the host. Here, researchers use the relationship between native California
legumes and nitrogen-fixing Bradyrhizobium bacteria to study the drivers of
variation in symbioses. The project will employ environmental sampling of
interacting plants, bacteria, and soil, genetic approaches, and greenhouse
experiments. The research will determine the magnitude of benefits the bacteria
provide to the host, what bacterial genes facilitate benefit or exploitation of
the host, and how the host responds and defends itself against ineffective
symbionts. The project will train undergraduate and graduate students as well as
two postdoctoral fellows. The researchers will educate local farmers on plant-
microbe interactions, and they will generate and curate a collection of plant
and bacterial variants that will be made freely available to other researchers.
The project is important because it will provide information on the parameters
that influence symbiosis and help guide how microbes can be better deployed to
increase productivity of agricultural systems and promote health of humans and
the planet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The maintenance of diversity in microbial
symbioses is paradoxical. Conventional theory predicts a lack of variation in
symbiont function because host species reward beneficial symbionts and intensely
select against ineffective partners. Here, a novel framework is tested to
explain the maintenance of symbiont variation. The planned work transcends the
dominant theoretical paradigm by investigating ecological, spatiotemporal, and
genomic drivers in a metapopulation of rhizobial bacteria and their native
legume hosts. Like other hosts, legumes exhibit host control traits: legumes can
discriminate against ineffective rhizobia during nodule formation, and can
reduce within-nodule growth rates of ineffective rhizobia. Despite the apparent
efficiency of host control, ineffective rhizobia are commonly uncovered in
natural and agricultural soils. Four aims are proposed to explain the
maintenance of symbiont variation in this key model system. Experimental
inoculations coupled with genetic and selection analysis are used to investigate
i) variation among legume host populations in their capacity to sanction
ineffective rhizobia, ii) the spatial and phylogenetic origins of invasions by
ineffective rhizobia, and iii) the genomic basis for the evolution of
ineffective rhizobia. iv) Inferred invasions of ineffective rhizobia will be
recapitulated using experiments that test fitness predictions under realistic
conditions. This work challenges conventional mutualism theory and highlights
the importance of genetic variation, spatio-temporal dynamics, and fitness
tradeoffs.