* 1738929
* CICI: RSARC: Infrastructure Support for Securing Large-Scale Scientific Workflows
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Shiyong Lu, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2022
* USD 999,999.00

The scientific workflow is an important paradigm for automating and accelerating
data processing and sharing in the scientific community. The correctness of
scientific discoveries relies on the trustworthiness and reliability of the data
processed by scientific workflows and the underlying cyberinfrastructure.
Unfortunately, modern scientific workflow systems lack robust infrastructure
support for the trustworthy execution of scientific workflows and for the
protection of the data processed by such workflows. A scientist or student may
forge or alter datasets or computation simply to get papers accepted for
publication. A malicious user may also publish forged workflow data on websites,
misleading other scientists into investigating and publishing invalid results.
This project aims to support a community of engineers and scientists to
collaboratively and securely collect, analyze, and share data using scientific
workflows. The success of this project contributes significantly to the national
cyberinfrastructure vision of securing the scientific discovery process for a
wide range of science and engineering disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project develops infrastructure support for secure execution of scientific
workflows, detection of anomalous execution flows, and protection of scientific
data. In particular, this project: (1) develops a trusted execution environment
for scientific workflows leveraging the Intel Software Guard Extension (SGX) to
protect the execution of scientific workflows as well as the data processed by
scientific workflows; (2) produces encrypted, tamper-proof, and non-repudiable
block-graphs that enable scientists to verify the origin of scientific data and
examine how a piece of data was modified and distributed; and (3) develops a
machine-learning based anomaly detection technique to detect anomalous execution
flows based on logs collected by the underlying cyberinfrastructure.