* 1738463
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of a low-cost production platform through engineered bacteria for a novel natural acaricide.
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Christine Santos, Manus Biosynthesis, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,219,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project, if successful, will be the development of a
microbial process for the economical and sustainable production of a highly
potent natural acaricide, which is a pesticide that kills mites and ticks.
Increasing wariness of synthetic insecticides combined with the need to prevent
tick-borne illnesses creates a tremendous opportunity for natural acaricides.
The project's terpene target has long been known as a highly effective and safe
acaricide; however, its commercialization has been hampered by a high cost of
production. The aim is to develop an alternative manufacturing process for
biosynthetic production enabling the cost reductions required to effectively
penetrate the $1.6 B acaricide market. Because the target is GRAS and because it
has been used extensively as a food ingredient for decades, there is a
compelling safety benefit combined with its potent efficacy, which may spur
increased spraying in public areas and private residences. Overall, this project
will provide a new sustainable, cost-effective production route, thereby
enabling acaricide commercialization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II
project will lead to sustainable, scalable, and economical access to a highly
potent natural acaricide. A commercial fermentation process will be developed by
employing advanced metabolic engineering and protein engineering approaches for
improving strain and enzyme performance. Achieving these production metrics will
enable formulation and commercialization of various acaricidal products,
including yard/area sprays, which will allow better control of tick populations
and halt the spread of tick-borne diseases such as Lyme disease. In addition,
this work will significantly advance the understanding of producing complex
plant natural ingredients, thus providing economical and scalable commercial
access to a wide array of compounds with significant potential benefit.