* 1738708
* RII Track 4: Electronic Structure Calculations to Characterize Mechanisms of Regioselective Additions to Olefins and to Advance P-31 NMR as a Reporter of Catalytic Intermediates
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Katie Mitchell-Koch, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 08/31/2022
* USD 176,284.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Chemical reactions between metals and
organic compounds may be complex and it is common for there to be numerous steps
in a reaction process. A better understanding of the mechanisms and potential
molecular structures involved in these reactions is needed both to optimize
processes and to predict the molecular structures that can result from these
industrially important reactions. The PI will conduct research at the University
of Illinois Urbana-Champaign (UIUC), where she and her collaborators will focus
on reactions such as those used for the synthesis of drug candidates and
pharmaceuticals. The resources available at the National Center for
Supercomputing Applications at UIUC will be used to conduct work grounded in the
PI's computational chemistry background. The availabilities of the computing
power and advanced instruments for chemical analysis at UIUC will be of great
value in unraveling the reaction mechanisms under study. In addition to having
access to these facilities, the PI and her students from Wichita State
University will form a close collaboration with an active research group at
UIUC, thereby strengthening the partnership between the institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The fellowship will
support the PI's activities at UIUC to computationally characterize
regioselective additions to olefins, catalyzed by rhodium and iridium phosphine
complexes. Synergistic computation-experiments will develop a framework to guide
synthetic advances. Electronic structure calculations will be used to acquire
relative energies and geometries of organometallic complexes, catalytic
intermediates, IR and NMR spectra associated with intermediates, and transition
state energies, to thereby elucidate the origins of selectivity in catalyzed
reactions and guide the design of future syntheses. The project will also
include an assessment of the computational methods available for calculation of
organometallic 31P NMR chemical shifts and 1JRh-P coupling. Once reliable
methods are identified, computationally-assisted assignment of 31P NMR spectra
could be transformational in mechanistic studies, allowing for routine
characterization and tracking of catalytic intermediates. On-site work will take
advantage of the UIUC NMR facility to acquire spectra. The results of electronic
structure calculations by the PI will be coupled with experiments to enable
advancements in synthesis, through characterization of reaction mechanisms for
recently discovered catalytic processes, and by predicting outcomes of modified
catalysts and substrates. Results will expand the scope of chemical reactions to
new substrates or products, particularly for drug development and manufacture,
and facilitate development of greener chemical processes.