* 1738563
* SBIR Phase II:  Microelectromechanical System Radio Transceivers for Low-Power Wireless Networks
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Tristan Rocheleau, MuMEC, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/28/2022
* USD 1,409,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop
a MicroElectroMechanical System (MEMS)-based radio transceiver providing a steep
reduction in operating power for wireless data transmission in battery-powered
devices. Conventional technology offerings for such radios are numerous, but
with 10's of mW of power consumption they are unable to operate for long periods
on batteries or scavenged power. If the low power radio promised by MEMS
technology is realized, battery life of consumer products such as wireless
headphones can be greatly extended, and battery size reduced, saving money and
increasing convenience to the end user. With the spread of compact wearable and
consumer devices, battery space is becoming increasingly at a premium, strongly
incentivizing lower power electronics. As this technology matures, the expanding
interconnection of devices (aka, the Internet of Things) offers yet greater
potential. With rapidly expanding market adoption of wireless connectivity for
sensing, control, and data collection, power consumption is becoming a major
limiter in device deployment. If lower power transceivers are available, wired
devices may be replaced by wireless and battery replacement cycles reduced or
even done away with altogether, saving time and money, and paving the way to
true interconnection of all things. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work of this Phase
II SBIR project will focus on designing and verifying performance of the MEMS-
based radios using fabrication processes suitable for mass production and
commercial distribution. By combining MEMS technology with traditional circuit
design, the proposed system will enable a 10x reduction in power consumption,
low enough that these radios will allow extended operation on battery power
alone. In the phase I project, the feasibility of the MEMS-based receiver was
tested using resonators compatible with currently available MEMS foundry
processes, and power consumption of the core radio-frequency transceiver
components was verified at a low 300 mW. In phase II, these results will be
expanded upon to add the additional transceiver components and software stack
needed for a complete commercial product. The resultant design will be then
transferred to the commercial foundry processes needed for mass production. The
end goal of this project is to demonstrate a complete MEMS-based radio
compatible with the widely-used Bluetooth Low-Energy protocol while operating on
a total of only 2 mW in receive-mode.