* 1738397
* SBIR Phase II:  Ultra-large and low-cost Electrodynamic Modeling in Commercial Clouds
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Zongfu Yu, FlexCompute Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 04/30/2021
* USD 1,389,348.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop
novel algorithms for electrodynamic simulations in commercial clouds.
Electrodynamic simulation is essential for computational prototyping in optical
and radio-frequency devices. Current commercial solutions require significant
upfront investment of both software and hardware. They also suffer from low
productivity due to limited in-house computing resources. This project will
develop a cloud-based simulation service which will provide on-demand, pay-per-
use, virtually unlimited simulation capability without requiring users to
purchase any hardware or software. This simulation technology will greatly
improve productivity, reduce the barrier to entry, and minimize cost in the
design of optical and radio-frequency applications. Moreover, it will serve
multiple scientific and engineering disciplines and will facilitate the use of
high-performance simulation in all phases of scientific discovery and
engineering design. It will revolutionize large-scale scientific simulation and
allow anyone with internet access to gain unprecedented simulation power.
Ultimately, this technology will help accelerate research and development in the
health, energy, and defense industries by offering intuitive, on-demand, and
practically infinitely scalable scientific software to engineers and scientists
at a price-point significantly lower than any other cloud computing
service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is currently no electromagnetic simulation
software which performs efficiently in commercial clouds, because they were
written under the assumption that the underlying computing platform is
homogenous and has low inter-CPU communication time, i.e. low latency. Starting
from the most fundamental level of space-time discretization, we will develop
the first electrodynamic simulation software that is latency-tolerant and cloud-
optimized. The work completed in Phase I developed several proof-of-concept
cloud-based electrodynamic solvers and demonstrated that commercial cloud
computing platform is a viable option for offering extremely low cost computing.
The general solver to be developed in Phase II will serve a broad set of
applications, and will be commercialized as the electromagnetic simulation
service in the cloud, featuring a fully immersive web-based visualization
interface.