* 1738186
* Research Initiation:  Understanding Student Perceptions of Engineering Stress Culture (ESC)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Kelly Cross, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 08/31/2020
* USD 196,386.00

Stress is a salient feature for undergraduate students that has negative effects
on student performance, retention, and experience. Previous work has shown that
engineering students perceive particularly high levels of stress and anxiety
about their grades and course performance. While these studies have identified
triggers of stress in individuals, the current project aims to unravel how
stress is perceived and propagated as a social norm in engineering and the
resulting impact on students. Specifically, the objective of the Engineering
Stress Culture project is to understand how students perceive stress as part of
the culture of engineering disciplines and how this impacts their development of
a sense of inclusion in engineering and identity as engineers. The perception
that stress is part of studying engineering or being an engineer is detrimental
to student persistence and success in engineering disciplines. Understanding
student perceptions of stress will improve student experience, performance, and
retain talented students in the engineering
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the Engineering Stress Culture
project is to characterize the role of stress and identify the ways in which
stress can impact students developing an engineering identity. Our study will
explore the overall research question: How does the Engineering Stress Culture
(ESC) impact students' perception of their engineering discipline or their level
of identification with engineering? This two-year project will involve both
quantitative surveys and qualitative interviews that will collectively elucidate
the relationships between engineering student stress, identity, and inclusion.
The results of the study will be used to understand how students experience
stress as part of their engineering education and its impacts on forming an
engineering identity. While sources of anxiety and stress for individual
students have been documented, students' perception of stress being part of the
culture of their discipline is not well-understood. Our proposed study will
enhance our understanding by 1) characterizing students' perceptions of ESC and
potential variation among majors and 2) determining the relationships between
constructs including anxiety, stress, perceptions of inclusion, and
identification with their engineering major. Understanding what students view as
stressful and how students identify stress as an element of program culture will
support the development of interventions to mitigate student stress.
Interventions to reduce stress through program design and administration will
benefit student recruitment, retention, and success, all of which will support
efforts to broaden participation in engineering.