* 1738752
* Phase I Site Addition:  I/UCRC for Multi-Functional Integrated System Technology (MIST) Center
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Avik Ghosh, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2020
* USD 633,135.00

This project involves a site addition of University of Virginia (UVA) to the
Industry-University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) for Multifunctional
Integrated Systems Technology (MIST). The semiconductor industry is grappling
with the end of Moore's Law and a slow-down in electronic scaling for
conventional digital logic. However, there is evidence of a parallel expansion
into new domains such as unconventional computing and embedded applications. In
particular the Internet of Things (IoT) promises by 2020 to connect up to 30
billion smart devices, buildings, vehicles and cities embedded with software,
sensors and electronics that can exchange data and react in real time. While
there is a lot of effort in IoT applications at the software level, the focus of
this center is to develop the hardware base for the IoT. This includes five
research thrusts ? computing, wireless, power, sensing and integration. The UVA
site proposes to add new expertise in functional materials, solid-state devices,
photonics, Terahertz sensing, thermal characterization, multiscale modeling and
heterogeneous integration. Pre-competitive research in this area will serve
industry interests by demonstrating proof-of-concept low power sensors and
devices, enable cutting edge scientific and technological research, provide a
platform for students to present research and facilitate recruitment, and target
minority students through workshops geared towards industry internship.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UVA Phase I site addition to the IUCRC center for
Multifunctional Integrated Systems Technology (MIST) will focus on pre-
competitive industry relevant research for smart systems innovations in the IoT
era. This includes five research thrusts computing, wireless, power, sensing and
integration ? targeting overall the hardware base for the IoT. This will need
scalable and embedded applications with small Size-Weight and Power (SWaP),
typically involving heterogeneous integration of materials, and integration of a
large signal bandwidth from Terahertz and RF-photonic detection to Gigahertz for
electronic processors. The UVA site proposes to add critical expertise towards
integrated detector-processor arrays, including functional materials, solid-
state devices, photonics, Terahertz sensing, thermal characterization,
multiscale modeling and material integration. Research in this area will serve
industry interests by demonstrating proof-of-concept low power sensors and
devices, enable cutting edge scientific and technological research, provide a
platform for students to present research and facilitate recruitment, and target
minority students through workshops geared towards industry internship.