* 1738679
* EAGER-Generation of Perpendicularly Polarized Spin Current from the Spin-Orbit Effects in Ferromagnetic Thin Film Structures for Memory Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Xin Fan, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 11/30/2018
* USD 79,547.00

To accommodate the ever-increasing demand of computational power, there has been
a great effort in searching for new types of memories that are fast and energy-
efficient. Magnetic random access memory, which uses magnetism to store
information and electricity to read/write information, is a potential candidate
as the new generation of memory because magnetism is intrinsically non-volatile
and switches fast. The main technical challenge is to reduce the amount of
energy it takes to switch the magnetization in the writing process of the
magnetic random access memory. This project aims to explore an efficient way to
switch the magnetization by using a spin current, i.e. a flow of electron spins,
with a specially engineered spin orientation. This work will provide
transformative information on how to generate perpendicular spins from magnetic
structures, which will significantly lower the power consumption in magnetic
random access memories with perpendicular magnetizations. The outcome from this
research will lead to a significant advance in data storage and information
technologies.

The spin-orbit effects have been demonstrated to be a promising way to convert
an electric current into a spin current that can efficiently switch a
magnetization. However, thus far the spin currents generated by the spin-orbit
effects are constrained by thin film geometries and therefore are only polarized
in-plane. It is inefficient to use an in-plane polarized spin current to switch
a perpendicular magnetization, which is technically attractive in the
application of memories due to their scalability and thermal stability. In this
proposal, the investigator plan to explore the generation of a perpendicularly
polarized spin current using the spin-orbit effects in ferromagnetic structures,
which is based on the hypothesis that the ferromagnetism provides an additional
control on the spin orientation. Two complementary structures will be
investigated: the spin filtering, where the spin polarization is aligned with
the magnetization, and spin rotation, where the spin polarization is rotated
about the magnetization. This project leverages on unique expertise in detecting
the spin torque on magnetization using the sensitive magneto-optic-Kerr-effect
magnetometry and ferromagnetic resonance-based magnetometry. The specific tasks
in the project are (1) quantifying the efficiency to generate perpendicularly
polarized spin current in the two ferromagnetic structures and (2) designing
efficient device for switching magnetization with a fast switching time. This
study will also provide important insights in the comprehensive spin-orbit
effects from magnetic structures.