* 1738913
* NSF-NERC The Future of Thwaites Glacier and its Contribution to Sea-level Rise Science Coordination Office
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2025
* David Vaughan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Cooperative Agreement
* Paul Cutler
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,887,850.00

This project contributes to the joint initiative launched by the U.S. National
Science Foundation (NSF) and the U.K. Natural Environment Research Council
(NERC) to substantially improve decadal and longer-term projections of ice loss
and sea-level rise originating from Thwaites Glacier in West Antarctica. The
Science Coordination Office will facilitate planning and coordination of the
science and broader impacts of several international research projects studying
Thwaites Glacier--one of the largest glaciers in Antarctica. The glacier is
located on the Pacific coast of the Antarctic continent. It is flowing almost
twice as fast now as in the 1970s, and is one of the largest likely contributors
to sea-level rise over the coming decades to centuries. Many of the factors that
will affect the speed and retreat of Thwaites Glacier will be addressed by the
set of projects funded by the Thwaites initiative. The Science Coordination
Office comprises a US-UK science and communications team that will work with
each project's scientists and students, logistics planners, and NSF and NERC to
ensure the overall success of the project. The Office will maintain an
informative website, and will produce content to explain the activities of the
scientists and highlight the results of the work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role
of the Science Coordination Office will be to enhance integration and
coordination among the science projects selected for the joint NSF-NERC Thwaites
initiative to achieve maximum collective scientific and societal impact. The
Office will facilitate scientific and logistical planning; facilitate data
management, sharing, and discovery; and facilitate and support web content,
outreach, and education for this high-profile research endeavor. The Office's
role will be key to enabling the program to achieve its scientific goals and for
the program to be broadly recognized and valued by scientists, the public, and
policymakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.