* 1738252
* Collaborative Research: AccessCSforAll: Including Students with Disabilities in High School Computer Science
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Richard Ladner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 516,471.00

The University of Washington, in collaboration with the University of Nevada Las
Vegas, proposes AccessCSforAll, a project to develop strategies, tools, and
curricula needed to bring an accessible version of Advanced Placement (AP)
Computer Science Principles (CSP) to students, including those with
disabilities. Approximately 7.5 million K-12 students are identified as having a
disability under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) or
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act. These students should have access to
quality computer science education, but there are often significant barriers,
including inaccessible tools (for example, programming languages, integrated
development environments not accessible to screen readers), or curricula that
include exclusively visual program output. Civil rights legislation requires
that curriculum be offered in a format that is accessible to students with
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AccessCSforAll will create a researcher
practitioner partnership (RPP) that includes practitioners at schools that serve
students who are deaf, blind, or learning disabled, as well as schools that
serve mainstream students. Building on previous work with more than 30 CS10K
projects, AccessforAll will provide professional development for CS teachers
that includes strategies for supporting students with disabilities. It will
partner with The College Board to ensure that they are ready to properly
evaluate students with disabilities, and it will partner with developers of
accessible tools and curricula. The project will develop and maintain resources
for computer science teachers to help them better include students with
disabilities in their classes, and to showcase solutions for universal design in
tools, curriculum, and pedagogy that appeal both to general education students
as well as students with disabilities. The project will build a community that
is focused on accessible K-12 computer science education.