* 1738607
* CSforAll: RPP: Medium: Understanding Equity and Access in a CSforAll Implementation
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2022
* Nigamanth Sridhar, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 10/31/2022
* USD 999,891.00

Cleveland State University (CSU) proposes to create a knowledge base, focused on
equity and access for all students, that will guide implementation of CSforAll
initiatives in schools and districts across the country. CSU has been assisting
the Cleveland Municipal School District (CMSD) as it begins implementation of
computer science (CS) for all students in district high schools starting in the
2017-18 academic year. CSU and CMSD are intentionally focusing on all students
with the goal of creating a model that, not only includes, but is targeted
towards students from groups that are traditionally underrepresented in CS--
students from African American, Hispanic and low socio-economic status
populations. The effort is built on an existing research practitioner
partnership (RPP) that includes CSU, CMSD, the Cleveland Foundation, and the
NEOSTEM Ecosystem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central aim of the research is to
investigate whether the implementation proceeds in a manner that preserves
equity across students. The expected outcomes include (1) the creation of a
replicable model for a CSforAll implementation, in diverse and high-needs school
districts, with equity as a primary design consideration, (2) an increased
research base on mechanisms for addressing achievement gaps among students from
groups typically underrepresented in CS, (3) a set of "adoption guides" for
principals and administrators that clearly outline various issues that arise
when implementing CSforAll in schools, and document best practices, including
course coding, teacher credentialing, scheduling, advising, etc., and a pathway
for CS teachers to receive highly qualified teacher status in Ohio.