* 1738770
* RII Track-4: Microscale processes controlling speciation and transformation of phosphorus in soils
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Deb Jaisi, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 08/31/2021
* USD 261,542.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Phosphorus (P) plays a pivotal role in the
often-competing demands of food and safeguarding water quality. Chesapeake Bay
is a national treasure and the nation's first estuary targeted by Congress for
restoration. Improved understanding of the composition and the amount of P in
the watershed leading to the Bay will enhance our ability to predict the
potential risk of movement of P from forest, agricultural, and urban sources to
the Bay waters. Scientific findings from this project will contribute to decades
of work conducted by the Chesapeake Bay Program, US Geological Survey, and US
Environmental Protection Agency in the Bay restoration plan. The PI and a
graduate student from the University of Delaware (UD) will work with scientists
at the California Institute of Technology to use a suite of sophisticated
instrumentation that will determine the specific forms and concentrations of P
in soils and waters. This work will greatly improve the current understanding of
the complex processes that govern the environmental fate of P in the Chesapeake
Bay watershed, and will enable the PI to employ techniques that are not
available at the home institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;Multi-scale interactions among forms of P and processes in
soils and waters that vary across spatial and temporal scales call for a toolbox
of advanced and innovative analytical methods capable of providing P structural
information, which can connect the structure to chemical reactivity and
transformation pathways. This research aims to identify the mechanisms of
formation and transformation of different P pools in soils and its transport to
open waters. It will utilize advanced analytical techniques, including spatially
resolved electron microprobe analysis (EMPA), secondary ion mass spectrometry
(nanoSIMS and magnetic SIMS), and laser ablation isotope mass spectrometer (LA-
IRMS). In addition, a series of theoretical and experimental developments in
light isotope systematics will be applied to identify and interpret microscale P
speciation, physico-chemical association and in situ distribution of phosphate
oxygen isotopes and their interrelationship in short- and long-term soil
incubation as well as in soil chronosequence studies. This fellowship will
maximize the PI's research productivity and leadership in several novel isotope
techniques, and the knowledge and experience gained will catalyze new research
fronts in the future. Findings from the project will be provided to the UD
Cooperative Extension and other state and local agencies for their collective
efforts to minimize the loss of nutrients from agricultural soils and to help
achieve pollutant reduction goals.