* 1738789
* RII Track-4: Comparative cityscape genomics of rats in four major cities
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Jonathan Richardson, Providence College
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 08/31/2019
* USD 125,310.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;With an increasing majority of the human
population residing in cities, urban habitats also represent an increasing
portion of the landscapes available to plants and animals. The relatively new
field of urban ecology studies how both native and invasive plant and animal
species are impacted by expanding cities. Norway rats are one of the most
successful invasive species, exploiting urban habitats across the globe, while
damaging infrastructure, contaminating food stocks, and transmitting diseases.
This project will determine: (1) how city habitats, infrastructure and
socioeconomic factors, shape the movement of urban rats; and (2) which specific
factors consistently influence rat movement across different cities. The PI will
use genetic data on rats from four cities to understand the specific effects of
urban habitat in four cities: Salvador, Brazil; New York City; New Orleans; and
Vancouver, British Columbia. This study will enable more effective rat
population control efforts and public health campaigns. The fellowship will
promote collaboration between the PI (at Providence College) and scientists at
Fordham University, who contribute expertise in DNA sequence analysis and
specialized statistics required for this project. The training in modern genetic
analysis gained by the PI and undergraduates students will be a resource for the
research community in the researcher?s home jurisdiction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate urban dispersal of invasive Norway rats by combining next-generation
spatial sequence data from Salvador, Brazil, New York City, New Orleans and
Vancouver. The research team will use double-digest restriction-site associated
DNA sequencing (ddRAD-seq) on the Illumina platform and curated bioinformatics
pipelines to generate single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data. With these
data, the team will: (A) estimate gene flow among the sampled areas within each
city; (B) use spatial statistical analyses in geographic information systems
(GIS) to compile and identify relevant geospatial data; (C) construct landscape
resistance models to isolate particular urban variables that either constrain or
promote gene flow in rats; and (D) directly compare rats from the four cities
through parallel analyses to determine which environmental and landscape
variables consistently impact the movement of rats. The implications of this
work are broad, and will fill important gaps in urban ecology (i.e., movement of
an urban species) and landscape genetics (replicated study design). This will be
the first time that movement and gene flow will be compared for multiple urban
landscapes.