* 1738695
* RII Track-4: Development of high-purity Ge detector technology with LBNL for dark matter and neutrino physics
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Jing Liu, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Eric Lindquist
* 08/31/2021
* USD 153,309.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Our understanding of the origins of the
universe and the fundamental nature of matter are linked; however, our knowledge
of those subjects is limited by the available instruments and their abilities to
detect processes that occur at subatomic levels. The goal of this project is to
initiate a long-term collaboration between the University of South Dakota (USD)
and the Lawrence-Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL) to develop novel detector
technologies for experiments that aim to solve some of the most difficult
questions in nuclear physics and cosmology, such as the true nature of dark
matter, and how atomic nuclei are bound together. The proposed project will
provide the PI with comprehensive training and experience on advanced detector
development, and will establish needed collaborations to further his career. The
proposed project also has the potential to establish a partnership between USD
and companies that are interested in developing radiation detection technologies
for a variety of applications, such as radiation therapy and/or homeland
security. Given the increased capacity to develop these advanced detectors, USD
may stimulate the interest of local industry in radiation detectors, thereby
contributing to local economic development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research has two specific objectives:
(1) measuring charge carrier drift mobilities in arbitrary directions for better
modeling of electronic signal formation in High Purity Germanium (HPGe)
detectors; and (2) investigating the possibility of particle identification
utilizing ionization signal alone in HPGe detectors. They will be achieved
through two years of collaborative development of a series of planar HPGe
detectors and a variable temperature cryostat with low-noise front-end
electronics by the PI and his graduate student in partnership with the host
scientist in LBNL. The knowledge transfer during the collaboration will improve
both the HPGe detector development capacity at USD, and the long-term
competitiveness of USD in fundamental physics research. Detailed study of
mobilities in different directions will lead to better theoretic understanding
and numerical modeling of electronic signal formation processes in HPGe
detectors, which is essential for signal/background discrimination in
neutrinoless double beta (0&amp;#957;&amp;#946;&amp;#946;) decay experiments and
for precise &amp;#947;-ray tracking in nuclear spectroscopy experiments.
Recently, a new collaboration, LEGEND, was formed as a merged effort of two
state-of-the-art HPGe based 0&amp;#957;&amp;#946;&amp;#946;-decay experiments,
GERDA and MJD, to establish a Large Experiment for Ge Neutrinoless double beta
Decay search, using HPGe detectors. Both the home and host institutes joined the
new collaboration. Their joint effort will help LEGEND obtain HPGe detectors
with innovative properties from affiliated academic institutions to improve
their sensitivities to 0&amp;#957;&amp;#946;&amp;#946;-decay signals.