* 1738992
* NSF-NERC: Thwaites-Amundsen Regional Survey and Network (TARSAN) Integrating Atmosphere-Ice-Ocean Processes affecting the Sub-Ice-Shelf Environment
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Martin Truffer, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 04/30/2019
* USD 667,660.00

This project contributes to the joint initiative launched by the U.S. National
Science Foundation (NSF) and the U.K. Natural Environment Research Council
(NERC) to substantially improve decadal and longer-term projections of ice loss
and sea-level rise originating from Thwaites Glacier in West Antarctica.
Thwaites and neighboring glaciers in the Amundsen Sea Embayment are rapidly
losing mass in response to recent climate warming and related changes in ocean
circulation. Mass loss from the Amundsen Sea Embayment could lead to the
eventual collapse of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet, raising the global sea level
by up to 2.5 meters (8 feet) in as short as 500 years. The processes driving the
loss appear to be warmer ocean circulation and changes in the width and flow
speed of the glacier, but a better understanding of these changes is needed to
refine predictions of how the glacier will evolve. One highly sensitive process
is the transitional flow of glacier ice from land onto the ocean to become a
floating ice shelf. This flow of ice from grounded to floating is affected by
changes in air temperature and snowfall at the surface; the speed and thickness
of ice feeding it from upstream; and the ocean temperature, salinity,
bathymetry, and currents that the ice flows into. The project team will gather
new measurements of each of these local environmental conditions so that it can
better predict how future changes in air, ocean, or the ice will affect the loss
of ice to the ocean in this region. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Current and
anticipated near-future mass loss from Thwaites Glacier and nearby Amundsen Sea
Embayment region is mainly attributed to reduction in ice-shelf buttressing due
to sub-ice-shelf melting by intrusion of relatively warm Circumpolar Deep Water
into sub-ice-shelf cavities. Such predictions for mass loss, however, still lack
understanding of the dominant processes at and near grounding zones, especially
their spatial and temporal variability, as well as atmospheric and oceanic
drivers of these processes. This project aims to constrain and compare these
processes for the Thwaites and the Dotson Ice Shelves, which are connected
through upstream ice dynamics, but influenced by different submarine troughs.
The team's specific objectives are to: 1) install atmosphere-ice-ocean multi-
sensor remote autonomous stations on the ice shelves for two years to provide
sub-daily continuous observations of concurrent oceanic, glaciologic, and
atmospheric conditions; 2) measure ocean properties on the continental shelf
adjacent to ice-shelf fronts (using seal tagging, glider-based and ship-based
surveys, and existing moored and conductivity-temperature-depth-cast data), 3)
measure ocean properties into sub-ice-shelf cavities (using autonomous
underwater vehicles) to detail ocean transports and heat fluxes; and 4)
constrain current ice-shelf and sub-ice-shelf cavity geometry, ice flow, and
firn properties for the ice-shelves (using radar, active-source seismic, and
gravimetric methods) to better understand the impact of ocean and atmosphere on
the ice-sheet change. The team will also engage the public and bring awareness
to this rapidly changing component of the cryosphere through a "Live from the
Ice" social media campaign in which the public can follow the action and data
collection from the perspective of tagged seals and autonomous
stations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.