* 1738824
* CSP4Hawaii: Deployment of Computer Science Principles Courses within Secondary Schools in Hawaii
* CSE,CNS
* 10/15/2017,09/30/2021
* Gerald Lau, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,019,239.00

The University of Hawaii (UH), in collaboration with the Hawaii Department of
Education (HIDoE), will conduct a 3-year study - Computer Science Principles
(CSP) for All in Hawaii (CSP4Hawaii) - aimed at improving state-level
initiatives to address diversity in computer science education. The project,
structured as research-practitioner partnership (RPP), will replicate and study
curriculum and teacher professional development for a CSP course, based on
previous work by UTeach. It will identify and remediate barriers to
participation of underrepresented groups.

The project will collaborate with the University of Texas and their UTeach
Professional Development (PD) program to utilize its curated CSP curriculum,
best practices, and resources. It will expand teacher knowledge of, and
practices with, computer science principles, creating a more diverse pool of
classroom teachers who can comfortably integrate CSP coursework into their
classrooms to broaden participation. It will use UH faculty, HIDoE high school
teachers, UTeach support technicians and industry/business mentors to provide
high school teachers with the skills and strategies to improve recruitment and
engagement of underrepresented students in CSP and computational problem
solving; and it will create Networked Improvement communities (NIC) throughout
the State of Hawaii to gather and use meaningful student and teacher demographic
information to monitor strategic decision-making for achieving equity of
opportunity for computer science learning.