* 1738340
* RII Track-4: Molecular understanding of salt-induced selective aggregation and selective sorption of dissolved organic matter to natural particles
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Mohammed Baalousha, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 286,370.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Dissolved organic matter (DOM) is ubiquitous
in natural soils, sediments, and waters, and is a complex mixture of several
thousands of organic compounds that were produced primarily from the decay of
plant matter. The amount and composition of DOM affects a range of critical
ecosystem functions, and plays important roles in regulating the chemistry of
environments as diverse as soils, surface waters, and marine systems. DOM can
selectively combine with salts and attach to natural particles, which would
change their chemical properties in complex ways. This project aims to determine
the molecular-level composition and properties of DOM compounds using advanced
analytical techniques available at the Environmental Molecular Sciences
Laboratory (EMSL) of the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. Obtaining
molecular-level properties for individual molecules will enable more specific
identification of the DOM molecules and improve our understanding of their
behaviors, fate, and transport in the environment. The outcome of the proposed
research has direct implications for environmental and human health as it may be
used by water and wastewater treatment facilities to develop novel approaches to
achieve more effective approaches for DOM removal. In addition to providing
access to the facilities at EMSL and expanding the PI's research capacity, this
project will provide training, mentorship, and continued collaborations for the
PI and a post-doctoral fellow at the University of South Carolina at
Columbia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Selective
aggregation and sorption of DOM to natural particles is highly relevant to a
wide variety of environmental processes, yet they are poorly understood. Such
understanding is currently hampered by the high diversity and complexity of DOM
and the limited resolution of available mass spectrometers. The intellectual
merit of this proposal lies in the application of ultrahigh resolution mass
spectroscopy techniques to identify DOM molecules that selectively aggregate or
selectively sorb to natural particles and the characterization of their
structural properties at the individual molecular level. The overall aim of this
proposed research is to characterize the molecular composition and properties of
DOM compounds susceptible to aggregation or sorption to natural particles as a
function of DOM composition, salt type and natural particle properties. This aim
will be achieved by characterizing the molecular composition and properties of
DOM molecules in solution (that is &lt;10 kDa) before and after mixing with
salts of Ca2+, Mg2+, Al3+, and Fe3+, and natural clay and metal (Fe, Mn, Al, and
Si) oxide particles using 21 T Electrospray ionization ultrahigh resolution-
Fourier transform-ion cyclotron resonance-mass spectrometry (ESI-FT-ICR-MS).
Molecular-level characterization of DOM will be performed at the Environmental
Molecular Sciences Laboratory (EMSL). The EMSL personnel will: facilitate the
EPSCoR-NSF fellow access to the molecular analysis facilities; provide hands-on
training for sample analysis, data collection, analysis, and interpretation; and
provide overall mentorship. This EPSCoR-NSF fellowship will provide a unique
training opportunity for the PI and a postdoctoral fellow by spending time at
the EMSL.