* 1738371
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Manihiki and Rakahanga: Persistence on the Margins of Oceania
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2017,10/31/2019
* Victor Thompson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2019
* USD 25,200.00

Human populations colonized and transformed many of the Earth's most marginal
environments including deserts, mountains, and remote islands. In doing so they
encountered unique environmental challenges and altered their behavior and the
environment itself to match their cultural ideals and needs. Manihiki and
Rakahanga, two remote and resource-poor atolls in the South Pacific Ocean,
provide a unique small-scale setting to investigate the ways that human
populations transformed and managed marginal environments to create long-term
sustainability. The research team will use archaeological methods to investigate
the processes of social and environmental transformation that sustained the
people of Manihiki and Rakahanga for nearly 1,000 years, while investigating the
role that the northern Cook Islands played in the colonization of East
Polynesia. By training local assistants in archaeological methods, principles of
site preservation, and highly applicable technical skills, this project will
also provide local education opportunities, while encouraging the protection of
local cultural resources. The completion of this research will result in a time
line for human/environmental interaction on the atolls that stretches from
island formation, during late-Holocene sea level fall, through to the historic
period (roughly 1849 AD). The perspectives of historical ecology and resilience
theory will be used to contextualize and explain how the long-term habitation of
these atolls was accomplished. Combined, these efforts will facilitate a deep-
time understanding of the ways that humans construct landscapes and develop
conservation/ management practices that can sustain populations in even the most
marginal environments. The results of this research will be shared through
presentations and publications aimed at academic audiences, as well as local
Cook Islands populations to inform and inspire conversations about local and
global challenges regarding landscape management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research draws from multiple socioecological perspectives. Historical ecology,
is a research perspective that accepts the challenges of environmental
conditions, while recognizing that humans can manipulate landscapes to create
long-term trajectories of continuity and change. Resilience theory offers a
complimentary viewpoint that contextualizes the processes that shape landscapes
in terms of key social and ecological variables. Combined these frameworks will
be used to address the following question: Through what processes and over what
time scales have humans transformed and managed marginal or emerging
environments to create resilient cultural landscapes? The research team will use
archaeological field methods, including the excavation of habitation and
resource procurement areas on Manihiki and Rakahanga to identify changing
settlement patterns and physical landform alterations (i.e., the construction of
horticultural fields). Laboratory analysis of the excavated materials will
include zooarchaeological analysis of faunal remains to trace changes in local
ecologies and resource use, foraminifera analysis to identify markers of atoll
formation, and an extensive AMS radiocarbon dating program to define time spans
for events in the landscape trajectories of the atolls. Combined these methods
will answer this research question by revealing the long-term patterns of
settlement, resource use, and landscape alteration that shaped long-term
sustainability on these marginal atolls.