* 1738834
* RII Track-4: Sharp arithmetic transitions and universality in one-frequency quasiperiodic systems
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Sasa Kocic, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 08/31/2023
* USD 161,681.00

Non-technical description&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics provides essential tools for the
study and description of many natural phenomena. An important area of research
in mathematics is the development of tools to study the movement of different
systems (termed dynamical phenomena), which range from the movement of celestial
bodies to heart function and fluctuations in the stock market. This fellowship
will initiate a new collaboration between the University of Mississippi (UM) and
University of California Irvine (UCI), enabling an extended research visit at
UCI. The project will develop state of the art tools for study of dynamical
systems, which will allow scientists to probe systems at different spatial and
time scales, revealing properties of systems that are universal. An example of
the type of research that has relied on these tools in the past is the
description of the transition between the liquid and gas phases (i.e., boiling
and evaporation). A particular focus of this project will be on sharp
transitions and universality in two types of systems: relatively simple systems
that underlie more complicated systems; and systems arising from quantum
physics. This project will lead to advancement of both areas, strengthen the
research program in dynamical systems and mathematical physics at UM, and
enhance its undergraduate and graduate education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;This project involves cutting-edge problems at the
interface of dynamical systems and mathematical physics, in particular the
spectral theory of Schrödinger operators, which will be approached using the
powerful idea of renormalization. The project will focus on sharp arithmetic
transitions and universality in quasiperiodic systems, specifically circle maps
with breaks and Schrödinger operators. Circle maps with an irrational rotation
number are a prototype of quasiperiodic dynamics and are closely related to many
other systems, including the Schrödinger cocycles arising from the spectral
analysis of Schrödinger operators. The objectives of the project are two-fold:
(i) to seek a sharp arithmetic transition for the rigidity of circle maps with a
break, i.e., the optimal set of rotation numbers for which a smooth conjugacy
between any two maps with the same rotation number in that set, and the same
size of the break, is guaranteed; and (ii) to develop a renormalization approach
towards explaining the self-similarity of the Hofstadter butterfly and
universality in the behavior of eigensolutions, arising when studying the
spectrum of one-frequency quasiperiodic Schrödinger operators. Both problems
will significantly advance the knowledge in these fields. The second problem
would represent significant advancement not only in mathematics, but also in
related areas of physics.