* 1738211
* EAGER:   Gut-Nav: A Gut Navigator for Real-Time Diagnostic Reporting on Gastro-Intestinal Health
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* William Bentley, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 05/31/2019
* USD 150,000.00

Recent advancements in the field of micro- and nano-electronics have enabled the
development of patient-friendly systems, for diagnostics and treatment of
diseases. They also bypass the need for invasive sample extraction and labor-
intensive laboratory analysis. Along these lines, this proposal demonstrates a
capsule-microsystem with sensors and integrated electronic components for
monitoring and wirelessly sharing the diagnostics on pancreatic health. The
sensors will be fabricated by standard lithographic processes and integrated
with bio-materials, sensitive to the pancreatic secretions. The two biomaterials
of choice will be (i) single-strand microRNA (Ribo-Nucleic Acid) sequences that
bind to microRNA markers secreted by pancreatic cells; and (ii) thin films of
naturally-derived macromolecules, such as starch, polypeptides, and
triglycerides, that can be digested by pancreatic amylase, protease, and lipase.
These biomaterials will be interfaced with capacitance and impedance based
electrical sensors, encapsulated within the ingestible capsule. The capsule
skeleton will be 3D printed with a bio-compatible polymer. As the sensors are
exposed to pancreatic secretions in the gut, they will collected diagnostic data
in real-time and transmit it wirelessly to the connected devices. The
fabrication of sensing systems utilizing these technologies can provide location
specific data on an array of analytes for a better understanding of the complex
biological interactions triggering a disease process. This knowledge will lead
to effective early detection strategies for the pancreatic health and other
pathological disorders of the gut. In addition to co-advising and training one
graduate student, this capsule technology and its parallels to the film the
Fantastic Voyage will be used to capture general public's imagination, serving
as a basis for many stimulating and educational outreach activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to demonstrate an ingestible
wireless capsule system capable of in situ sensing of enzyme and microRNA
biomarkers in the gastrointestinal tract for pancreatic health monitoring.
Capsule technologies do exist, but no ingestible technology is currently
available that allows for sensing of specific biomolecular analytes within
targeted regions within the gut. Pancreatic adenocarcinoma manifests in the form
of chemical and biomolecular changes in pancreatic secretions. However, these
secretions are difficult to access as they are emptied into the duodenum via the
pancreatic duct, and there is currently no method for effectively indicating
early stages of pancreatic adenocarcinoma. The proposed device involves
impedance and capacitive sensing of material degradation or marker probe
functionalization over electrodes in response to analyte exposure and specific
reactivity. The materials consist of naturally-derived macromolecules, such as
starch, polypeptides, and triglycerides, that have been deposited in the form of
thin films that are digested by pancreatic amylases, proteases, and lipases,
respectively. The probes are single-strand microRNA sequences functionalized on
an electrode surface that bind to microRNA markers secreted by pancreatic cells.
The electrical signals described above are read and transmitted via a network of
components, including an analog-to-digital converter, a Bluetooth low-energy
chip, a low power timer integrated circuit, and a lithium polymer battery. The
packaging consists of a 3D-printed biocompatible capsule, with micromesh
structures for retaining polymers that dissolve at a specified pH, thereby
allowing for GI location targeting. This tool represents a foundation for
sensing systems based on the biodegradation of polymer coatings, biomarker
detection, microelectronics integration, and packaging. The developed system
serves as a platform for a variety of other sensing applications and paves the
way for the design of smaller ingestible or implantable systems for use in
various segments within the body.