* 1738633
* RII Track-4:Acquiring and propagating expertise in closed-loop precision optical control of neuronal activity using spatial light modulation (SLM) combined with multiphoton imaging
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Scott Cruikshank, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 08/31/2019
* USD 162,105.00

Non-technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Brain function is largely determined by
complex circuits of interacting nerve cells. The arrangement of these circuits
and the ways that the nerve cells interact with each other is complex and poorly
understood at this time. This project will take advantage of the expertise and
facilities at the University of Michigan to develop the skills to utilize a
critical new technology that will yield insight into how these neural circuits
work. This technology allows for precise control of nerve cells in the brain
using light, allowing scientists to determine how neurons work together in
circuits. This will help scientists to understand the mechanisms of how we
sense, perceive, move, and think. Likewise, it will provide insight into
problems that occur in neurological and psychiatric disease and strategies to
treat those problems. Access to these critical new technologies will have broad
and long lasting impacts on the PI?s career. This project will allow the PI to
develop and improve his work in ways that would allow fundamental advances in
understanding of brain operation. Finally, transfer of this technology to other
scientists and students at Brown University, and will improve research capacity
in Rhode Island.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;An
important goal of neuroscience is to understand the causal role of neurons in
circuit behavior. This is being addressed to varying degrees using optogenetics.
Opsins can be expressed in genetically-targeted neuronal types, such that those
cells can be stimulated with light. Recent innovations in spatial light
modulation (SLM) have made it possible to precisely control optically selected
neurons. Using this technology, the PI will conduct experiments in the
somatosensory corticothalamic (CT) system. Using SLM optogenetics, the number of
CT cells that must be active for effective thalamic modulation will be
determined, and the degree to which non-synchronous activation of CT cells
alters outcome. As part of this project, the PI will receive training in use of
an all-optical closed-loop SLM system that is currently being developed at the
University of Michigan. In this system, neural activity will be assayed using
the indicator GCaMP6, which emits light signals in the presence of Ca. These
signals will be fed back to laser controllers in order to maintain ideal
stimulus levels. The improved capabilities will provide pivotal opportunities
for behavioral studies of neural function, and closed-loop SLM has potentially
transformative potential for this work. More generally, multiphoton microscopes
are becoming progressively more affordable, and are likely to be within reach of
many reasonably-funded neurophysiology labs within several years. The knowledge
gained by the PI will become ever more valuable as these microscopes become
available in local laboratories.