* 1738883
* Computer Science for Oregon
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* James Hook, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 08/31/2021
* USD 999,945.00

Portland State University, in partnership with the University of Oregon and
Tigard Tualatin School District, proposes a project--Computer Science (CS) for
Oregon--that aims to reboot high school CS education in Oregon with a statewide
initiative to provide more equitable access and participation in high school
computer science courses. The project will target schools with significant
populations of students under-served by Science, Technology, Engineering and
Math (STEM) education in urban, suburban, and rural environments. It will engage
counselors, administrators, and teachers in a Research-Practitioner Partnership.
CS for Oregon will identify and investigate the problems of practice that arise
when introducing the Exploring Computer Science (ECS) curriculum statewide.
Through this award, the proposers seek to shift the state strategy for computer
science education from CS in every district to CS for every
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team brings together the expertise of
a computer science researcher and university administrator, an education
researcher focused on inclusive computer science curriculum development, and a
high school teacher who has been engaged statewide efforts to improve STEM
education. This project builds on significant state investment in CS teacher
professional development. It will prepare teachers with computer science
conceptual knowledge, inquiry-based instructional skills, and culturally
responsive pedagogy. It will institutionalize CS and Computational Thinking (CT)
education by examining the key barriers and opportunities for CS education at
the school, district, regional, and state levels. The project will also provide
Counselors for Computing workshops to prepare counselors and administrators on
strategies to recruit historically underrepresented students to ECS. In
addition, the project will develop curriculum for teacher preparation programs
at the University of Oregon and Portland State University that incorporates CT
into existing education technology courses taken by pre-service teachers.
Together these efforts can inform other states seeking to identify whole-school
support strategies to broaden participation in computing.