* 1738384
* Geometric aspects of optical and transport phenomena in gapless topological phases
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Dmytro Pesin, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2018
* USD 205,853.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education on the interplay of geometry and topology with the quantum mechanics,
and consequence for the optical and transport properties of materials. Unlike
baseballs and other classical objects with motion described by trajectories,
electrons in materials are described quantum mechanically by mathematical wave
functions. The study of wave functions of systems of many electrons reveals
distinct classes leading to a new classification of electronic phases of matter
- one that goes beyond the usual classifications based, for example, on the
states of aggregation, or on the existence of macroscopic order, like
magnetization. These kinds of electronic phases are referred to as
topologically, or more broadly, geometrically nontrivial. In this project, the
PI aims to bridge the gap between the pure classification of electronic phases
and the physical properties of the phases. The PI will focus on developing
theory to describe the materials' optical and transport properties, for example,
how well the material can conduct electricity or reflect light. The PI will
investigate various optical and transport properties in chiral
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is focused on topological phases in
chiral materials. A chiral material has a "handedness", so it is distinct from
its mirror image. Chirality may arise because of the way the atoms are arranged
in the crystal, or induced by external perturbations, like electromagnetic
fields, or strain. Regardless of its origin, chirality strongly affects the
quantum mechanical behavior of electrons in a material, and so, its
experimentally measurable and technologically relevant properties. Examples
include magnetization induced by an electron current, and rotation of the plane
of transmitted or reflected polarized light. &lt;br/&gt;This award also supports
educational and training activities, aimed at improving the STEM education in
the state of Utah. The primary effort will be directed at the supervision of
summer research of high school physics teachers; creation of an extracurricular
club for high school students, aimed at introducing its members to collaborative
solving of research-type problems in physics; implementation of modern teaching
techniques with particular focus on creating an inclusive environment for
students from underrepresented groups. Further integration of the research and
educational activities will be accomplished through supervision of graduate and
undergraduate research, and establishing a journal club for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical research and education on optical and transport properties of
materials with nontrivial band geometry. The objective of this proposal is to
provide theoretical insights into electrodynamic, hydrodynamic, and transport
properties of disordered gapless topological phases, and to develop new
theoretical approaches that would help reveal various geometric aspects of
electron behavior in experiment.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research involves
three main directions, integrated into an effort aimed at understanding optical
and transport phenomena in gapless systems:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Nonlocal
electrodynamics and electron hydrodynamics of gapless topological phases,
including the theory of chiral electron hydrodynamics and the chiral vortical
effect in crystals. One focus will be on the study of the anomalous Hall effect
in the hydrodynamic regime.&lt;br/&gt;2. Theory of nonlocal transport in
disordered chiral metals. The activity will include a study of the extrinsic
contributions to the dynamic chiral magnetic effect; investigation of
nonperturbative instanton physics in disordered Dirac systems; development of
nonlocal transport theory in nonuniform and strained topological
systems.&lt;br/&gt;3. Nonlinear optical and magneto-optical phenomena in
nonequilibrium states of Weyl and Dirac metals. The study will focus on the
topological aspects of nonlinear phenomena in Weyl systems, including
topological mechanisms of magneto-photovoltaic effect in Weyl semimetals, and
building the theory of current-induced magneto-optical phenomena in metals with
nontrivial band geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out
using a wide spectrum of techniques: quantum kinetic equation for multi-band
systems, field-theoretic approaches to itinerant disordered systems, numerical
modelling, and ab initio studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports
educational and training activities, aimed at improving the STEM education in
the state of Utah. The primary effort will be directed at the supervision of
summer research of high school physics teachers; creation of an extracurricular
club for high school students, aimed at introducing its members to collaborative
solving of research-type problems in physics; implementation of modern teaching
techniques with particular focus on creating an inclusive environment for
students from underrepresented groups. Further integration of the research and
educational activities will be accomplished through supervision of graduate and
undergraduate research, and establishing a journal club for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.