* 1738677
* CT4EDU: Broadening Pathways into Computing by Developing Computational Thinking Competencies in Elementary Classrooms
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Aman Yadav, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 07/31/2023
* USD 998,737.00

Michigan State University, in partnership with the Oakland Intermediate School
District and the American Institute for Research, proposes a project--CT4EDU--
that will design, implement, and assess a high-quality, integrated curriculum,
and professional development that supports elementary school teachers in
embedding computational thinking (CT) into their classrooms. Currently exposure
to CT is too often limited to students participating in an accelerated
curriculum (i.e. gifted and talented) or in after school activities (i.e. coding
clubs). This is a highly inequitable system in which only those students who
have the resources and access can build on CT in their elementary years. By
embedding CT into 3rd to 5th grade, in-school science and mathematics
curriculum, this project aims to give all students early access to
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will establish a Research
Practitioner Partnership (RPP) using a Network Improvement Community approach to
identifying problems of practice and points of opportunity in
curriculum/teaching practices where CT can intersect with science and
mathematics at the elementary level. Teachers, curriculum directors, and
researchers will co-design CT activities and lesson plans in the context of
their elementary school classrooms. They will also collaborate in addressing
equity issues around engaging historically underrepresented students in CT,
focusing on student participation in classroom discourse during CT activities.
Finally, the researchers will examine the impact of the CT curriculum on student
thinking and teacher practices around computing.