* 1738811
* Phase II IUCRC  University of Texas at Arlington:  Center for Energy Smart Electronic Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2024
* Bahgat Sammakia, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 07/31/2024
* USD 505,992.00

Data centers are an integral part of life, providing services ranging from
social networking, e-commerce and entertainment to cloud infrastructures that
provide storage and computing capabilities for individuals and enterprises. Data
centers consume over 2% of the nation's electricity, generated mostly from
fossil sources. The Center for Energy-Smart Electronic systems (ES2) was
established to develop tools and methodologies for improving the energy
efficiency of electronic systems, primarily data centers. Much of the energy
expended by data centers is wasted due to operating inefficiencies, including
operating more servers than are needed to handle the workload and overcooling
the IT equipment, or deploying sub-optimal cooling and IT technologies. ES2?s
research focusses on developing intelligent and fully automated techniques for
operating data centers to match the IT and cooling resources to the workload
demands, avoiding energy waste while maintaining service quality. ES2 research
benefits society by: (a) providing solutions to reduce the demand on the
electrical grid and the carbon footprint and enabling the growth of data center-
based services in an energy-efficient way and (b) developing human resources by
training engineers and computer scientists in high-demand skills. ES2?s research
therefore enables the nation to maintain competitive, agile and energy-efficient
cyber services and infrastructures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of ES2 is to
dramatically reduce data center energy consumption. The Phase I funding from NSF
supported the development of models, metrics and infrastructures that would
realize this vision. At University of Texas, Arlington (UTA), Phase II research
focuses on improving energy efficiency at various scales of a data center
facility and addressing the challenges involved in implementing alternative data
center cooling technologies such as evaporative cooling and dielectric oil
immersion cooling. UTA utilizes purpose-built data center research facilities
and numerical analysis tools to evaluate and optimize the various cooling
systems. At chip level, a dynamic water cooled cold plate developed in Phase I
will be scaled to a chip scale package and integrated with robust flow control
devices to enable uniform temperature distribution and realize reduction in
pumping power. At the rack and room level, Phase II research focuses on
developing deeper understanding in implementing evaporative cooling systems and
address the corresponding particulate and gaseous contamination in data centers.
Also, Phase II studies will focus on evaluating cooling performance, reliability
and operability of systems implementing direct-to-chip liquid cooling and oil
immersion cooling. In Phase I, UTA has graduated ten ES2-funded PhD students and
over 60 students with master's degrees.