* 1738591
* RII Track-4:   A role for epigenetic modifications driving seasonal patterns of reproduction?
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Timothy Greives, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 05/31/2021
* USD 192,114.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Temperate and arctic regions experience
dramatic variations in environmental conditions across the year. For animals to
be able to successfully rear offspring in these environments, reproduction must
be limited to a short window of time that ensures favorable conditions (i.e.,
mild temperatures and abundant food resources). While prior research has
revealed how male animals prepare for mating, much less is known regarding how
females precisely time reproduction (and thus, the time when offspring are born
or hatch), even though it is female timing that ultimately dictates when rearing
of offspring will occur. Traits expressed by an individual (i.e., phenotype) are
shaped by interactions between an animal's genetics and the environment. This
project will enable training at Columbia University and knowledge transfer of
techniques and skills aimed at uncovering the genetic processes that are capable
of responding to the environment and regulating expression of key genes to
influence female reproductive timing decisions. This training and knowledge
transfer will enhance the research capabilities of the PI's laboratory and
facilitate future collaborations within the PI's home institution of North
Dakota State University and beyond. Such knowledge will not only contribute to
robust basic knowledge, but also has the potential to enhance animal livestock
breeding programs (e.g., sheep, which are seasonal breeders) to enhance economic
productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;An organism's
phenotype is the result of interactions between its genome and the environment.
Understanding the processes that influence an individual's evolutionary fitness
(i.e. lifetime reproductive success) requires investigations of the molecular
architecture that shape an individual's phenotype. One primary way whereby the
environment can influence which genes are expressed (which gives rise to the
phenotype) is via epigenetic modification. The ability of an individual to
produce and successfully rear young directly dictates an individual?s
evolutionary fitness. In animals inhabiting temperate or arctic clines,
reproduction must be limited to a short window of time that ensures favorable
conditions for rearing offspring. Seasonal epigenetic modification of the DNA
regulating production of yolk-precursor proteins may enable appropriate annual
responses, inhibiting production of yolk precursors when favorable conditions
are experienced at inappropriate times of year (e.g., the late winter warm
period) while enabling yolk precursor production when favorable conditions are
experienced in the appropriate season. Utilizing a songbird model of seasonal
breeding, the Dark-eyed Junco (Junco hyemalis), this proposal will test the
novel hypothesis that methylation of DNA in the regulatory region of an
important gene needed for yolking and final follicle maturation is seasonally
modulated. This project will provide training and transfer of knowledge of the
skills and tools utilized to uncover epigenetic modifications that may influence
an individual's phenotype and fitness. The training received at Columbia
University for methods of detecting methylation in the genome will allow our
group to test the hypothesis that seasonal information influences epigenetic
modulation of the promoter region of a gene the codes for a key yolk pre-cursor
protein, vitellogenin (VTG).