* 1738989
* NSF-NERC: Geological History Constraints on the Magnitude of Grounding Line Retreat in the Thwaites Glacier System
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Brenda Hall, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 03/31/2023
* USD 1,251,265.00

This project contributes to the joint initiative launched by the U.S. National
Science Foundation (NSF) and the U.K. Natural Environment Research Council
(NERC) to substantially improve decadal and longer-term projections of ice loss
and sea-level rise originating from Thwaites Glacier in West Antarctica. The
Thwaites Glacier system dominates the contribution to sea-level rise from
Antarctica. Predicting how this system will evolve in coming decades, and
thereby its likely contribution to sea level, requires detailed understanding of
how it has responded to changes in climate and oceanographic conditions in the
past. This project will provide a record of regional sea-level change by
establishing chronologies for raised marine beaches as well as the timing and
duration of periods of retreat of Thwaites Glacier during the past 10,000 years
by sampling and dating bedrock presently covered by Thwaites Glacier via
subglacial drilling. Together with climatic and oceanographic conditions from
other records, these will provide boundary conditions for past-to-present model
simulations as well as those used to predict future glacier changes under a
range of climate scenarios. Specifically, the project will test the hypothesis--
implied by existing geological evidence from the region--that present rapid
retreat of the Thwaites Glacier system is reversible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
team aims to utilize two approaches: 1. To reconstruct relative sea level during
the Holocene, it will map and date raised marine and shoreline deposits
throughout Pine Island Bay. Chronological constraints on sea-level change will
be provided by radiocarbon dating of organic material in landforms and sediments
that are genetically related to past sea level, such as shell fragments, bones
of marine fauna, and penguin guano. 2. To obtain geological evidence for past
episodes of grounding-line retreat, the team will apply cosmogenic-nuclide
exposure-dating of subglacial bedrock. Using drill systems recently developed
for subglacial bedrock recovery, the team will obtain subglacial bedrock from
sites where ice thickness is dynamically linked to grounding-line position in
the Thwaites system (specifically in the Hudson Mountains, and near Mount
Murphy). Observation of significant cosmogenic-nuclide concentrations--the team
will primarily measure Beryllium-10 and in situ Carbon-14--in these samples
would provide direct, unambiguous evidence for past episodes of thinning linked
to grounding-line retreat as well as constraints on their timing and
duration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.