* 1738734
* Planning Grant - University of Georgia: Center for Bioplastics and Biocomposites (CB2)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2018
* Jason Locklin, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2018
* USD 15,000.00

The proposed planning activity seeks to undertake planning of the establishment
of a new Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) site at the
University of Georgia of the existing Center for Bioplastics and Biocomposites.
The center currently involves Iowa State University (ISU) and Washington State
University (WSU), industry and government partners in the field. The University
of Georgia site intends to provide additional capabilities for the center in the
areas of sustainable packaging. Current members of CB2 will benefit from UGA
faculty expertise and the research tools and infrastructure being developed at
UGA. Likewise, the Site at UGA will increase the opportunities to leverage
research expertise and facilities at ISU and WSU, both of which have strong
programs in sustainability, bioproducts, and bioplastics. Bringing a new
synergistic industry sector to CB2 will benefit both incoming and current
members by facilitating new industrial interactions spanning the bioproducts
supply chain and enable CB2 members to lead their sectors in replacing existing
plastic and packaging materials with degradable alternatives. Students will be
educated and exposed to cutting edge research and outreach opportunities to
enter the workforce immediately ready to contribute and have positive impacts.

The vision of the center is to develop knowledge that will facilitate the
production of an array of high-value products, including plastics, coatings,
adhesives, and composites, from renewable feedstocks that are compatible with
current industrial manufacturing systems and thereby promoting rural development
as well as national growth. The center focusses on the development of jobs in
the area of sustainable manufacturing, focusing on conversion of agricultural
and woody crops to energy and materials which are crucial to lasting job
creation in the United States. The center also strives to support education and
diversity through engagement of K-12 educators, supporting a NSF Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) co-located at ISU and WSU where students
participate in research on sustainable materials. In 2014, global plastic
production reached 299 million metric tons (MMTs), with 5 to 12 MMTs estimated
to reach our oceans annually due to mismanaged waste (waste that is littered or
not handled in an organized system like a landfill). With increasing population,
plastic consumption, and waste generation, a cumulative input of up to 250 MMTs
into our oceans is predicted by 2025. Of all the plastics manufactured today,
about 40% are used in packaging, material that will be immediately thrown away
after use. The packaging industry employs over 5 million people worldwide and
will have estimated sales of $1 trillion by 2018, and the opportunities to
replace persistent plastic materials with those that are compostable and or
degradable are gaining market share in a variety of industry sectors. The UGA
site addition to CB2 is centered around developing alternative, biodegradable
plastics that can be used to replace petroleum-based plastics (polyolefins,
polyesters, styrenics, and polyvinyl chloride) used in the packaging industry,
including coatings, foams, nonwoven fibers, and novel thermoplastics with
excellent barrier properties for films, sheet goods, and filtration media.