* 1738737
* The CS Teaching and Learning Collaboratory (CS-TLC):  Building Capacity, Rigor, and Equity in Computer Science Education
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Thu Nguyen, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2019
* USD 250,000.00

Rutgers University proposes a Planning Grant that leverages and expands an
existing Research Practitioner Partnership (RPP) in order to lay the groundwork
for a project that will investigate best practices in computer science (CS)
teacher professional development (PD). The growing demand from companies for
professionals with computing experience, and from young adults wishing to pursue
CS and CS-enabled careers is driving major investments in CS education. Yet,
many high schools are still struggling to deliver rigorous CS curriculum. This
larger project will inform efforts to change that. It will help to build the
knowledge base needed to infuse high quality, engaging CS curriculum and
instructional practices into K-12 classrooms across diverse and geographically
dispersed school districts in Maryland, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned activities will include a needs assessment,
expand the existing RPP, develop initial research questions, and design and
pilot CS PD in the summer of 2018. This ground work is seen as Phase 1 of a
four-phase project, positioning the RPP for success in the larger project. Phase
2 will include 2 intensive, 5-day summer institutes--one for teachers that will
be differentiated by the participant's prior experience with CS, and the other
for administrators aiming to add CS to their school's curriculum. Phase 3 will
involve the RPP, functioning as a Professional Learning Community, in providing
continued engagement of participants via an online collaborative learning
platform, and Phase 4 will complete a summative evaluation. The inclusion of
administrators will position districts and schools to develop sustainable
systems and processes that will enable them to offer rigorous CS classes to all
of their students at the same time they are building the expertise of their
faculty. Process and outcomes evaluation will be carried out by an independent
evaluator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.