* 1738817
* RII Track-4: Enhancement of technical and analytical skills for the application of genomics to research in molecular ecology and comparative phylogeography
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2017,01/31/2020
* Ryan Garrick, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 01/31/2020
* USD 110,413.00

Non-technical description:&lt;br/&gt;Biodiversity, or the variety of species in
an ecosystem, is declining in many areas of the world due to climate change.
Many unanswered questions remain as to how ecosystems respond to changing
environmental conditions, including changing climates, and how biodiversity is
affected by large scale environmental changes. This fellowship will enable
research using genetic techniques to study how organisms have responded to past
and recent environmental change. The PI will collaborate with colleagues at the
Ohio State University to understand how the numbers and genetic variability of
four invertebrate species found in southern Appalachian forests change as their
environment changes. The new skills gained by the PI will provide long-term
benefits to the fellow, the home institution (University of Mississippi), and
home state. The fellowship will also generate new opportunities for sustained
collaboration with the host institution (Ohio State University). Findings will
advance understanding of whether whole communities have the ability to respond
to environmental change together, or as individual species. This information
will aid in conservation and management of US forest
fauna.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description:&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the impact of different historical events
and recurrent microevolutionary processes on how co-distributed species show
concerted versus independent responses to environmental change allows stronger
predictions about how ecological communities will respond to future change. Such
a comparative approach can probe the importance of the strength of ecological
co-associations among species in constraining or facilitating their responses.
As part of this fellowship, population genomic data will be generated and
analyzed for a set of four southern Appalachian forest invertebrate species that
together enable the impact of strength of ecological co-association on
phylogeographic congruence to be assessed. The host institution (Ohio State
University) will work with the PI in sequencing reduced representation
libraries, computational approaches for performing downstream bioinformatics
processing, and implementation of established and emerging phylogeographic
analyses. The PI and host will also collaborate on developing analyses that
extend the scope of comparative phylogeographic inference.