* 1738896
* NSF-NERC: Disintegration of Marine Ice-sheets using Novel Optimised Simulations (DOMINOS)
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Jeremy Bassis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 03/31/2024
* USD 918,171.00

This project contributes to the joint initiative launched by the U.S. National
Science Foundation (NSF) and the U.K. Natural Environment Research Council
(NERC) to substantially improve decadal and longer-term projections of ice loss
and sea-level rise originating from Thwaites Glacier in West Antarctica. There
is growing consensus that Thwaites Glacier is unstable and vulnerable to
collapse. However, there is significant disagreement in projections of rates of
mass loss, with some studies suggesting century to millennial scale retreat and
others forecasting more catastrophic disintegration. These disagreements are
significant because rapid disintegration of Thwaites and adjacent glaciers could
potentially trigger or accelerate collapse of significant portions of the West
Antarctic Ice Sheet with implications for global mean sea-level rise in the
coming decades. Predicting rates of ice loss from Thwaites Glacier is currently
hampered by a lack of reliable models of ice fracture and breakaway--called
iceberg calving--and the interactions between calving and climate change. This
study addresses this major knowledge gap, and is motivated by the need to
improve sea-level projections critical for policy and planning. Moreover, there
is also a gap between what scientists assert about the usefulness of sea-level
rise predictions and stakeholder's perceptions of the usability of that work.
This project is also geared to address this gap, by identifying the information
that is accessible and usable to a broad community of stakeholders whilst
proactively engaging with under-represented communities at nearby community
colleges and school districts, engaging community college students in research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Projected rates of sea-level rise from the West Antarctic
Ice Sheet (and Thwaites Glacier in particular) have large uncertainties due to
difficulties in understanding and projecting the calving and dynamic processes
that control the ice-sheet stability. This uncertainty is magnified by the
poorly understood connection between calving processes, ice-sheet stability and
climate. To address these uncertainties, this project seeks to explicitly
resolve the processes that could cause retreat and collapse of Thwaites Glacier
using a novel ice-dynamics model suite. This model suite includes a discrete
element model capable of simulating coupled fracture and ice-flow processes, a
3D full Stokes continuum model, and the continental scale ice-dynamics model
(BISICLES). Ice-dynamics models will be coupled to an ocean forcing model suite
including simple plume models, intermediate complexity 2-layer ocean models and
fully 3D regional ocean models. This hierarchical approach will use high-
fidelity process models to inform and constrain the sequence of lower-order
models needed to extrapolate improved understanding to larger scales and has the
potential to radically reduce uncertainty of rates of marine ice-sheet collapse
and associated sea-level rise. The large-scale modeling approach will be tested
and implemented within the open source BISICLES ice dynamics model and made
publicly available to other researchers via a "calving
package".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.