* 1738758
* ScratchEncore: Equity via a Flexible, Culturally-Relevant Advanced Scratch Curriculum for Upper Elementary Diverse Students and Teachers
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Diana Franklin, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,262,256.00

The University of Chicago, in collaboration with the Chicago Public Schools
(CPS), is providing an actionable and empirically-grounded answer to the
question: Can we create create advanced 4th to 6th grade Computer Science (CS)
instructional materials that give equal value to improving equity and student
learning outcomes? While there are solid introductory CS curricula for grades
4-6, more advanced materials are either commercial offerings that are expensive,
or free, ad-hoc activities that require experienced teachers. This
disproportionately hurts learners in under-resourced schools that often serve
underpresented minority students. Instructional materials that advance equity
cannot be designed for content and engagement alone, but instead must be
vehicles through which solutions to practical barriers to equity can be
mitigated. This research practitioner partnership is designing, developing, and
evaluating advanced Scratch-based CS instructional materials for upper
elementary students through a process that attends to practical barriers to
equity.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Researcher-Practitioner Partnership (RPP) uses
a process that includes close collaboration between practitioners and
researchers, studying existing introductory experiences, involving diverse
stakeholders in content design, and providing a learning path for teachers with
varying experience and professional development. It will result in instructional
materials, increase teacher and student capacity in computing, and provide a
blueprint for developing future equity-focused materials. More specifically,
this project is: (1) Exploring the current state of computer science instruction
in elementary school classrooms, including currently available classroom
materials and teacher and student outcomes; (2) Developing a process to manage
the complex tradeoffs involved in creating Scratch Encore, an equity-focused,
customizable set of advanced elementary CS instructional materials designed to
support students historically underrepresented in computing, their teachers, and
their schools; and (3) Researching the outcomes of Scratch Encore with respect
to equity goals, including student learning and affective outcomes, teacher
learning and affective outcomes, and the growth of the researcher-practitioner
collaboration. The outcomes of this project will include a validated set of
advanced CS instructional materials designed to broaden participation in
computing.