* 1738053
* ATD:  Understanding and Predicting User Mobility through Bayesian Models
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Abel Rodriguez, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 02/28/2021
* USD 482,237.00

The goal of this project is to develop novel mathematical and statistical tools
for the analysis of geospatial datasets associated with human mobility patterns.
The focus is on modeling and prediction of mobility using spatio-temporal data
from a moderate to large number of actors with the objective of identifying
either unusual behavioral patterns or abrupt changes in well-established
patterns (at either the population or individual level) that can serve as
leading indicators of critical events. The proposed models have implications for
the evaluation of sociological and anthropological theories, as well as for
defense and natural security applications.

The research revolves around three subprojects. The first one focuses on the
development of variants of Mattern repulsive point process models for high-
resolution geo-referenced data that are able to capture well-known features of
real-life mobility data. The PI considers both population-level and individual-
level models that are highly interpretable and allow for the evolution of the
process over time and the identification of structural changes in the system.
The second subproject focuses on (possibly hidden) Markov models for association
data in which only coarse geo-spatial information is available (e.g., it might
be known that the individual is within range of a fixed point, such as an
wireless access point, but not their exact location). Again, the focus is on
identifying changes in individual- and population-level behavioral patterns and
making short-term predictions about future patterns. Finally, the third
subproject focuses on the problem of combining multiple sources of high- and
low-resolution geo-spatial data to improve the accuracy of algorithms. In all
cases the emphasis is on Bayesian models, which simplify uncertainty
quantification and can be easily incorporate into formal decision analytic
frameworks.