* 1738566
* SBIR Phase II:  Science-Based Networked Tools for Effective Design and Manufacture of Green Buildings and Green-Building Products
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2017,10/31/2021
* Daniel Glaser, Light Foundry, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 10/31/2021
* USD 897,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project stems from the development and
commercialization of a networked-based, easy-to-use, fast and accurate tool that
will allow architects, consultants, manufacturers of green building products to
quickly compare, manipulate and optimize lighting strategies, perform whole-
building annual glare analysis and access recommended manufactured products as
solutions, to help make informed decisions for integrated design. Daylighting is
a crucial piece of the green building puzzle. With the appropriate tools,
daylighting is arguably one of the most cost-effective methods of achieving high
performance buildings (and happier, healthier occupants) throughout the design
process. World-wide green building is expected to double every three years. The
world's green building market is a trillion-dollar industry, moreover, the green
building materials market is expected to reach $234 billion by 2019. By 2018,
green construction will directly contribute 1.1 million jobs and $75.6 billion
in wages by 2018 in the United States. Between 2015 and 2018, LEED (Leadership
in Energy and Environmental Design) certified buildings in the United States are
estimated to have $1.2 billion in energy savings. Green buildings use fewer
energy and water resources; save money for families, businesses and taxpayers;
reduce carbon emissions; and prioritize environmental and human
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This projects proposes to create robust
software for measuring, analyzing, and for recommending solutions to glare in
buildings. A novel dynamic tree parallelization architecture is proposed to
manage complex, dynamic, and massive amounts of lighting calculations. This will
include building the first commercial grade 3 and 5 phase lighting analysis
engine. It will also produce a new generation artifact for creating and
manipulating data for glare analysis. It will conclude with a validation study.