* 1738669
* Phase I IUCRC Washington State University: Center for Bioplastics and Biocomposites (CB2)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Michael Kessler, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 355,074.00

The goal of the Center for Bioplastics and Biocomposites (CB2) is to improve the
basic knowledge of the synthesis, processing, properties, and compounding of
bioplastic and biocomposite materials, as well as to develop reliable material
characteristics data for industrial partners and support large-scale industrial
implementation of renewable materials. Sustainability is a rapidly growing
aspect of technology, driven partially by social factors; however, many
industries are struggling to effectively incorporate sustainability-related
practices. CB2 creates new knowledge, materials, and processes for sustainable
biobased plastics and composites. The vision of the center is to develop
knowledge that will facilitate the production of an array of high-value
products, including plastics, coatings, adhesives, and composites, from
renewable feedstocks that are compatible with current industrial manufacturing
systems and thereby promoting rural development as well as national growth. The
center focusses on the development of jobs in the area of sustainable
manufacturing, focusing on conversion of agricultural and woody crops to energy
and materials which are crucial to lasting job creation in the United States.
The center also strives to support education and diversity through engagement of
K-12 educators, supporting a NSF Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) ?
co-located at ISU and WSU ? where students participate in research on
sustainable materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of the Center for
Bioplastics and Biocomposites (CB2) is to develop fundamental knowledge related
to bioplastics and biocomposites, to dissemination research-based findings to
industry to promote sustainability and to educate future scientists and
engineers. The team of researchers includes experts from the fields of polymer
processing, polymer chemistry, materials science, and biomass utilization. It
combines a wide area of experience and expertise, allowing a well-rounded
interdisciplinary approach. In addition, both participating institutions (Iowa
State University and Washington State University) have state-of-the-art
facilities for polymer processing and characterization to facilitate the
development of a fundamental understanding of the influence of processing on the
properties of biopolymers and composites. Research focus and priority areas are
determined by industry partners through a process developed by the industry
partners to ensure the relevance to and positive impact on sustainable future
industry development. Individual projects are based on seed concepts generated
by the center?s industry partners and ultimately defined through an interactive
process between researchers and industry partners. The projects are then
mentored on a monthly basis by the industry partners, which serves as a model
for technology transfer.