* 1738443
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of a Rapid, Point-Of-Care, Diagnostic Technology Platform with the Diagnosis of Liver Cancer as the First Application
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Johann deSa, Instadiagnostics Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2020
* USD 888,123.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop
a platform technology for point of care (POC) detection of disease biomarkers
present in low concentrations in bodily fluids. This technology can greatly
impact the current standard medical workflow by reducing the time-to-results
from days or weeks to 15 minutes, allowing for disease screenings during routine
doctors visits supporting early diagnosis and improved treatment monitoring. It
will promote preventative care, and therefore lead to improved treatment
outcomes, patient satisfaction, and reduced healthcare costs. This technology
will be incorporated into a portable, low-powered device that can be operated
in-the-field, in low-resource settings in the US and internationally, supporting
better healthcare monitoring that is often absent in under-served segments of
society. The first target application is the detection of liver cancer, a
disease that, when diagnosed late, has an extremely high mortality rate and cost
of treatment. The proposed system may aid in the screening and early diagnosis
of liver cancer. Furthermore, due to the technology?s inherent potential for
multiplexing, it may be possible to simultaneous detect multiple biomarkers for
chronic liver disease (Hep B, C, and cirrhosis), increasing its applicability to
a global patient pool of over 500 million
patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Medicine is increasingly focused on personalized
and preventative care and hence there is an increasing demand for diagnostic
tools that can facilitate rapid screening, diagnosis, and treatment monitoring.
Most current POC tests on the market are lateral flow based and do not target
high sensitivity applications like cancer biomarkers, which require quantitative
results and are present in low concentrations in blood. The goal of this Phase
II project is to develop a standalone diagnostic system consisting of a portable
reader and disposable cartridges to rapidly diagnose hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) via the quantitative detection of AFP. During year 1, a 20-sensor very-
high frequency (VHF) biochip will be designed and fabricated, simultaneously the
whole blood processing component of the cartridge will be developed and
integrated to form an all-inclusive cartridge. A distributed standalone
electronic system will also designed and tested in year 1. Year 2 will involve
the integration of the reader components to form a standalone system,
additionally the all-inclusive cartridge will modified to interface with the
reader allowing for plug and play operation. The performance of the integrated
system will be evaluated via detection of HCC biomarkers in registry samples and
comparison to the current standard of care.