* 1738645
* Leveraging Multilingualism to Support Computer Science Education through Translanguaging Pedagogies
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Christopher Hoadley, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 07/31/2020
* USD 316,000.00

Expertise in technology is critical to our national economy and security, and is
knowledge that all citizens need to meaningfully participate in our digital age.
However, computer science education has failed to make progress at including
women, minorities, people with disabilities, and people of low income in
computing fields. In response, many states and federal agencies have joined an
effort called CS for All to ensure all K-12 students have a chance to learn
computer science concepts. In New York City, the city's Department of Education
(DOE) has committed to rolling out computer science learning opportunities to
all schools. One barrier the district faces is how best to teach computer
science to students who are learning English. Using an approach called
translanguaging, this project is a partnership between city educators,
researchers in computer science education, and researchers in language and
literacy. Translanguaging is an approach that allows teachers to tailor their
teaching to whatever language skills children bring to the table. There are
reasons to suspect that some of the skills multilingual kids use to learn
multiple languages may also be useful in helping them learn to program
computers. This project will explore whether that is the case, and will develop
and test approaches for bilingual educators to incorporate computer science
concepts in their teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project begins a research-
practice partnership between New York University, the City University of New
York, and three NYC public middle schools serving predominantly low-income
Latino/a students, many of whom are becoming bilingual. The project is
structured around a design-based implementation research approach, which
emphasizes shared problem definition, co-design between educators and
researchers, field-based scaling friendly testing of interventions, and
increasing capacity for partners to create sustainable change. The intellectual
merit includes addressing three research questions: How, when and why do
students translanguage as they learn computational thinking? How can teachers
support and leverage students' translanguaging in computer science education
through curricular design and adaptation approaches based on translanguaging
pedagogy and literate programming practices? And, are students' translanguaging
practices linked to learning processes or outcomes in computational thinking?
The research methodology is a three iteration, design-based research study
involving students in Science and English and Language Arts courses using
primarily qualitative data sources including analysis of design narratives,
classroom observation, and interviews and focus groups. The broader impacts of
the project include linking research in literacy education and computer science
education, which have not intersected much before; capacity building within the
NYC DOE which will help guide New York City's rollout of CS for All; and
creating ways to support emergent bilinguals that do not rely on fixed curricula
for speakers of particular languages, but rather on professional development
that helps teachers create and adapt curricula to support students whatever
their language backgrounds. The project will develop a draft toolkit for teacher
professional development which leverages translanguaging pedagogy for
integration of computational thinking topics in the middle grades. This toolkit
will be available both in NYC and nationwide.