* 1738165
* RII Track-4: In Situ and Surface Sensitive Characterization of Fe-Ni(OH)2 Bimetallic Catalysts
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Lauren Greenlee, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 08/31/2021
* USD 267,507.00

Non-technical Description Several important next-generation energy conversion
technologies (e.g., fuel cells and batteries) are based on electrochemistry,
where a metal-based catalyst is used to promote a desired electrochemical
reaction. Today, many of the catalysts used are comprised of precious metals,
such as platinum, and there is a need to replace these precious metals with more
abundant alternatives, such as nickel. This project aims to address a critical
gap in fundamental knowledge of the surface chemistry of iron-doped nickel
catalysts that operate in electrochemical environments. This research will
advance knowledge of electrochemistry and benefit energy technology development.
This project also provides a unique opportunity for the PI and a graduate
student to visit a premier research facility at the University of Nevada at Las
Vegas to learn new scientific knowledge and establish long-term productive
research partnerships.

Technical Description Nickel-based catalysts have long been thought to be well-
understood and highly useful for a wide range of electrochemical applications,
but a detailed understanding of bimetallic iron-nickel electrocatalysts is now
needed. The overall goal of this fellowship is to establish a long-term
collaboration between the University of Arkansas (UA), and its activities in
materials synthesis, and the University of Nevada, Las Vegas (UNLV), which is
one of the premier soft x-ray spectroscopy sites in the world. The specific
research goal of this proposal is to use soft x-ray spectroscopy to conduct a
detailed, surface sensitive characterization study of a suite of iron-nickel
oxide/hydroxide bimetallic thin film and nanoparticle catalysts. The research
objectives are to: (1) perform experiments to evaluate the surface chemistry and
electronic structure (including the conduction band, the valence band, and the
d-band structure) of synthesized catalysts under ultra-high vacuum (UHV) and as
a function of applied potential in an electrochemical environment with soft
x-ray spectroscopy techniques; and (2) learn the fundamental physics theory that
supports experimental soft x-ray spectroscopy; and (3) develop skills to analyze
and evaluate data obtained from soft x-ray experiments. The scientific research
of this project is expected to advance fundamental understanding of iron-nickel
catalyst surface chemistry, thereby enabling accelerated catalyst development
for the entire electrocatalysis field. The long-term relationship developed
between UA and UNLV is expected to enhance the research activities, expertise,
and education of the PI and the UA scientific community as a whole, thereby
creating a more vibrant, scientifically competitive, and economically prosperous
State of Arkansas.