* 1738554
* SBIR Phase II:  Onsite Production of Carbon Monoxide from Carbon Dioxide using Modified Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Electolyzers
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2017,02/28/2022
* Sichao Ma, Opus 12 Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2022
* USD 1,209,997.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in the development of new carbon dioxide
utilization technology for the commercialization of onsite gas production. The
impediment to electrochemical carbon dioxide utilization technology has been the
lack of an electrolyzer design capable of high production rates and high energy
efficiency. This project will yield a novel electrolyzer component to overcome
these challenges and demonstrate that cost-effective carbon dioxide utilization
is possible. This component can be integrated into existing electrolyzer
designs, and will enable such hardware to convert carbon dioxide into specialty
gases. The resulting solution will have higher safety and lower cost than
conventional packaged gas. Long term, this technology could be scaled up to
higher volume applications, and used as a means of converting industrial carbon
dioxide emissions into useful chemicals and fuels, thereby transforming a waste
product into a new revenue stream. This scalable technology could therefore be
the basis for the creation of new economic value and advanced manufacturing jobs
in the United States, while providing a profitable way for existing U.S.
industries to reduce their emissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research Phase II project will build upon the promising feasibility
results achieved in Phase I to increase the performance of a novel carbon
dioxide electrochemical cell along key performance dimensions, in order to
deliver a commercially-relevant, cost-competitive solution. A viable solution to
derive specialty gases from a low-cost feedstock like carbon dioxide will need
to have high performance on several dimensions: energy efficiency, high reaction
rates, long lifetime, and low capital cost. It will also need to operate at a
scale that is industrially relevant. In Phase II, the novel electrochemical
component will be scaled up to commercial dimensions, and the performance of the
component will be optimized to meet the performance requirements identified
during customer interviews. The final component will form the basis for a
commercial unit, capable of producing specialty gases from carbon dioxide at
cost-competitive rates. It will lay the foundation for future scale-up to even
larger membrane areas, which will enable industrial-scale applications of this
carbon dioxide conversion technology. Carbon dioxide emissions could be
converted into valuable products using this technology.