* 1738311
* Workshop: Creating a Guide for Programmatic Assessment, Review, and Improvement in Undergraduate Physics Programs
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Theodore Hodapp, American Physical Society
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 04/30/2018
* USD 47,620.00

In the United States there is a growing emphasis on accountability in higher
education, and departments are increasingly asked to set and assess learning
goals. At the same time, physics departments face several challenges: Physics
acts as a gateway for physics and engineering careers, yet it is among the least
diverse of all science disciplines and widely used traditional teaching methods
do not yield learning increases commonly obtained with newer methods. There is
an abundance of research-based pedagogies that have demonstrated improvement in
learning gains and student retention - especially of underrepresented groups,
but unfortunately there are obstacles that can make it difficult for physics
departments to implement these learning strategies. Furthermore, there is a need
for physics programs to better prepare graduates for a diverse range of non-
research careers, and to educate more well-prepared high school physics teachers
to meet national demand.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To address these concerns, the
American Physical Society (APS) recognizes that there is a unique opportunity to
develop meaningful assessments of physics programs required of nearly every
department, while fulfilling their desire to improve the education of their
students by implementing known best practices. APS leadership has formed and
formally charged a nationally recognized task force of leaders in physics
program evaluation and revitalization to create a guide for programmatic
assessment, review, and improvement, and to undertake the training of
departmental reviewers and department chairs in using the guide. The guide will
be an operational document designed to be immediately useful to a department
chair or faculty member engaging in programmatic assessment, review, or
improvement. The workshops funded through this award will allow the APS to lay
the groundwork to ensure that APS can achieve national impact.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;An initial workshop for the task force to meet in person will be held
May 18-19, 2017 in College Park, MD to plan project phases, and to construct a
comprehensive plan for engaging community leaders in adopting and shaping guide
practices. Outcomes of this workshop will include specific written plans for
each phase of the project, and clearly articulated positions on the underlying
framework of the guide and its implementation. In addition, the APS Committee on
Minorities will hold a special workshop with leaders from Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) in Atlanta, prior to their fall 2017 in-person
meeting to explore potential actions by the APS to address the devastating
reduction of African American participation in undergraduate physics. Specific
outcomes of this event will include recommendations to the task force, and plans
for synergistic efforts by the APS, the Committee on Minorities, and their
programs.