* 1738024
* WORKSHOP:   Doctoral Consortium at the 2017 ACM User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization Conference (UMAP 2017)
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2018
* David Chin, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2018
* USD 14,349.00

This is funding to support travel for about 8 students enrolled in PhD programs
in U.S. institutions, to present their accepted papers and posters and/or to
attend the Doctoral Consortium associated with the 25th International Conference
on User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization (UMAP 2017), to be held July
9-12 at the Faculty of Informatics and Information Technologies of the Slovak
University of Technology in Bratislava, Slovakia, and which is sponsored by ACM
SIGCHI and SIGWEB. User interfaces that adapt themselves to available user
information (such as special needs or individual preferences) are becoming
increasingly important, so much so that adaptability has become a selling point
for software products. A system with the ability to construct and consult a user
model (an explicit representation of properties of a particular user or group of
users) can adapt diverse aspects of its performance and enhance its
effectiveness, usability and/or acceptance in a variety of situations (e.g., to
reduce information overload, to improve the quality of information retrieval,
filtering and annotation, and to generate useful information visualizations).
Applications for user modeling range from electronic commerce and intelligent
learning environments to health care and assistive technologies. Relevant
platforms for user modeling include mobile and wearable systems and smart
environments, as well as individual desktop systems, groupware, adaptive
hypermedia, and other web-based systems. The annual UMAP conference is the
premier forum at which academic and industrial researchers from all these fields
gather to present their latest research and to exchange their complementary
insights on user modeling issues. To encourage student participation, UMAP has
established two annual awards valued at $1,000 each endowed by the family of the
late James Chen, an active User Modeling researcher, for best student papers
(papers that represent primarily student research work and where students are
lead authors). More information about the conference is available online at
http://www.um.org/umap2017/.

Attending and presenting their work at UMAP will have a significant impact on
the careers of the future generation of user modeling, adaptation, and
personalization researchers. First, they will have the opportunity to present
their work to a knowledgeable audience and through lively discussions get useful
comments at an early stage of their research when it will be most useful. Just
as importantly, they will have a chance to meet established researchers and
other graduate students doing similar work, to exchange ideas and to make
contacts that will be invaluable to them as they progress in their scientific
careers. Interacting with young researchers is also beneficial to experienced
investigators, by providing fresh ideas and new perspectives. Thus, the Doctoral
Consortium is a great confidence builder for the students involved, and highly
stimulating to the senior researchers as well. Many past participants in the
UMAP Doctoral Consortium have gone on to become well-regarded researchers and
practitioners in the field. Students whose work has been selected for
presentation at the Doctoral Consortium will benefit from that experience in a
number of additional ways. They will be invited to write a paper that will be
published in the UMAP 2017 conference proceedings, which will be included in the
ACM Digital Library. And they will have a 30-minute window in which to present
their work (with a short demonstration where appropriate), including time for
questions and discussion. During the question/discussion period and in
subsequent informal interactions, organizing committee members and other
participants will provide constructive comments on each student's work and
attempt to address aspects on which the student has requested advice. The
organizers have reaffirmed the long-standing and demonstrated UMAP commitment to
diversity; to this end, they will make special efforts to recruit women and
members of under-represented groups when selecting the candidates to receive
financial support.