* 1738399
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: College and Community Cultures and Upwardly-Mobile  of Mexican-Origin Students
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Alma Nidia Garza, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 11/30/2018
* USD 11,938.00

For students from low-income and working-class backgrounds, the process of
upward mobility involves adopting perspectives or developing practices that
contrast with the perspectives and practices of their communities of origin. The
objective of this study is to understand how college, family and community
cultures interact to shape the experience of students as they transition to
college. What role do students' racial/ethnic and community cultures play as
they assimilate into the college and university culture and the middle-class?
The methodology includes interviews with approximately 60 college students and
observations of eight students, all of whom grew up in the same Mexican-
American, working-class community. The interviews and observations will compare
students who attend a moderately selective school with students who attend a
less selective school. This study advances research surrounding the role that
the university plays in reducing inequality. Given the rapid expansion of higher
education and its greater accessibility to students from working-class
backgrounds, this project examines whether what it means to belong to the
middle-class differs across university contexts and the extent to which existing
social class hierarchies are reproduced. Moreover, whether student engagement
with their communities of origin varies across university selectivity also
carries important implications as it relates to policies surrounding academic
and student life on college campuses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous research
finds that unlike their middle-class peers, working-class college students
struggle to reconcile forms of speech, habits and practices associated with both
their middle-class and working-class cultures. Previous research, however, has
concentrated on the upwardly mobile college experiences of students attending
elite or selective universities and, with few exceptions, has not generally
assessed how culture rooted in students? racial-ethnic identity contributes to
their assimilation into the middle class. This study draws on Bourdieu and
colleagues? concept of habitus to understand how university, family and
community culture influence Mexican-origin students' class habitus. Using semi-
structured interviews and participant observation, this study takes a
comparative assessment of the experiences of students from one working-class
community who attended a moderately selective, flagship institution and students
from the same community who attended a less competitive, local university. The
lead researcher examines the role that race plays in mediating the way in which
the university influences students? development of a middle-class habitus as
well as whether university culture varies based on school selectivity and/or
community contexts. The project pushes theoretical debates to move beyond
assumptions that the middle-class culture of the university remains static
across school selectivity and community contexts and to consider that
understandings of what it means to belong to the middle-class likely vary across
social contexts as well. Because this study also examines how university
cultures help students build or break ties with their home communities, it
carries important policy implications as it relates to how colleges structure
academic curriculums and important aspects of campus and student life.