* 1738767
* Integrating the Computer Science and Computational Thinking in Three Rural Eastern North Carolina School Districts
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Ronnie Smith, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 09/30/2022
* USD 999,751.00

Rural youth and urban youth must be comparably well prepared to take their
places on the global stage at both the high school graduate and higher education
graduate levels. A large proportion of children are educated in rural school
districts, in which district administrators may be challenged both to recruit
and retain high quality teachers and to provide appropriate professional
development for teachers. The interest and motivation for this project emerged
from the rural school districts themselves, enhancing their stake in the future
of their students, as opposed to imposing outside solutions. The project builds
on the trust and relationships engendered by an existing Research Practitioner
Partnership (RPP) to enable middle school students to benefit from the
integration of specific computer science and computational skills into specific
classes (art and music). The RPP will have the following objectives: (a) prepare
and academically equip principals to lead the project, (b) prepare and
academically equip teachers to integrate computer science and computational
thinking into their subject content, (c) engage students in understanding the
salience of computer science and computational thinking to their lives and
careers, and (d) engage parents and caregivers in validating and sustaining the
project. In order to attain these objectives, (a) principals will engage, on an
approximately monthly basis, with ongoing professional development throughout
the three years of the project that includes education, supervised practice,
peer mentoring, and yearly 360-degree feedback on their learning-centered
leadership, (b) teachers will similarly engage with ongoing professional
development (both face-to-face and through completion of a massively open online
course) and on-demand/continual instructional coaching throughout the school
year, in addition to participating in approximately monthly ongoing guided peer
review processes, (c) students' understanding of computer science and
computational thinking will be solicited and reviewed on a regular ongoing
basis, and (d) parents and caregivers will be empowered through Community
Learning Exchanges to share with teachers and students the ways in which they
utilize computer science and computational thinking on an ongoing basis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance knowledge of how to introduce an
educational innovation in rural school districts. Through a combination of
ongoing education of principals, teachers, and parents, the project team will
research and develop an approach to enhancing students' understanding of the
salience of computer science and computational thinking to their lives and
careers. The project will explore the overarching research question: To what
extent can Computational Thinking (CT) and Computer Science (CS) principles be
integrated by teachers and learned by students in non-core subject areas such as
art and music? The project will assess students' understanding of CT/CS, conduct
instructional rounds and tuning protocols with teachers to assess the teachers'
implementation and effectiveness, assess principals' learning-centered
leadership, and assess the perceptions of all students, teachers, principals,
and parents/caregivers on the efficacy of the program using Q-methodology.