* 1738956
* EAGER:  Defining and Measuring University Economic Engagement: The Association of Public and Land Grant Universities Innovation and Economic Prosperity (APLU-IEP) Data Platform
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Ivan Garibay, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 12/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The Association of Public and Land-grant Universities (APLU) has offered a
voluntary program to encourage university community engagement since 2012. To
participate in the APLU program, universities conduct an intensive self-study
process that results previously unavailable information. The program has amassed
applications containing descriptive information about the structures, processes,
and outputs of university economic engagement. These application documents
represent a valuable source of information to help us better understand how
universities engage with their communities to foster economic prosperity, how
they view their role in their innovation ecosystems and how they measure their
progress in economic engagement. Defining, measuring and advancing university
economic engagement is a potentially transformative research initiative for
moving forward science and innovation policy that will result in a wide-range of
regional and national societal benefits.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
makes the APLU community engagement information readily accessible to
researchers. The collection of application documents will be converted into a
coherent, well-structured dataset that is easy to access and conducive to
further qualitative and quantitative research explorations. The project
identifies broad data trends and types of metrics used by universities to assess
engagement. This effort will leverage this rich data to advance our knowledge
and understanding, and spur potentially transformative research in university
economic engagement.&lt;br/&gt;