* 1738574
* Personalized Computational Thinking for Grades 3-8
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Jodi Asbell-Clarke, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2021
* USD 996,361.00

The Computer Science for All movement focuses on providing all students,
including those with special needs, with computational thinking and computer
science learning opportunities. This project is a Researcher Practitioner
Partnership (RPP) between Braintree Public Schools (BPS) and EdGE at TERC. The
shared purpose of this RPP is to build a strong foundation for the teaching and
learning of Computational Thinking (CT) in upper elementary and middle schools
throughout BPS, and in doing so, to inform a scalable and generalizable model of
personalized CT education for a broad audience of diverse learners in grades 3-8
with cognitive differences. To meet this shared purpose, the RPP will design and
develop CodePlay--a suite of digital tools, activities, assessments, and
professional development experiences that infuse CT into existing curriculum in
grades 3-8. CodePlay tools include a Playlist Generator for teachers to build
individualized playlists of activities that guide learners through a CT learning
progression, layered with opportunities for interest-driven and customized
learning. CodePlay activities are immersed within science, math, and other
existing disciplinary content; and prepare learners for project-based learning
using coding tools such as Scratch and BlocksCAD (for 3D printing).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A year of design-based implementation research (DBIR) will
enable the RPP to curate and co-design classroom activities that support
teaching and learning of CT for a diverse audience of learners in grades 3-8. A
subsequent pilot study of about forty classes in BPS will study how CodePlay can
support CT teaching and learning in elementary and middle school classes
throughout the district. CodePlay will leverage several facets of EdGE's
previous NSF supported research including: a growing partnership with BPS,
expertise from leaders in CT research, a preliminary CT learning progression and
curriculum activities; and a unique automated assessment data architecture
called Data Arcade. The RPP will also co-design professional development and
community support structures to build capacity that can sustain systemic change
within the district.