* 1738057
* I-Corps: Real-Time Big Data Based Decision Support System for Water Use
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Sen Chiao, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* cindy walkerpeach
* 09/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide
accurate and timely precipitation forecasts for water resource management during
rainfall and hydrological extremes including intense flooding and droughts
events. This I-Corps team has developed a unique high resolution weather
forecasting model using a high-performance computer framework that employed all
available local weather observations and state-of-the-art local doppler radar
data to improve local precipitation forecasts on a short-term basis. In
conjunction with precipitation forecasts, our system will support water
resources related decision-making. A web-based service to provide these pinpoint
rainfall forecasts and other related hydrological data products will be
available. Operations managers of businesses and government agencies (i.e.,
water districts, agricultural farms, insurance companies, energy companies) who
rely on very accurate and precise rainfall forecasts to make economic-based
decisions will be able to have quick access to customized rainfall forecasts and
hydrological products at their user-defined locations. During short-term
hydrological extremes, these pinpoint accurate rainfall forecasts and products
will improve the efficiency and decision-making abilities within the companies
and agencies themselves, and it will help them to better communicate their
decisions to their end-users and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project will employ a high-resolution weather forecasting model. It can have a
horizontal resolution of 1 km or finer and uses specific 3D-Variational data
assimilation methods which incorporate all available real-time weather
observations from multiple sources. These input sources include satellite data
(e.g., GOES-R), weather station and rain gauge data, quantitative precipitation
estimates from local doppler radars, and other global and regional forecasting
models (e.g., NOAA?s High Resolution Rapid Refresh and North American Model).
The model can be executed separately for any specific region and location of
interest to the end-user, can extract pinpoint rainfall forecasts, and can be
updated every 3 or 6 hours depending on the circumstance. Other hydrological
products available from the project that can also assist in decision support
such as drought conditions (e.g., soil moisture and drought severity indices)
and water levels of local reservoirs. It is anticipated that the products from
this high-resolution modeling and big-data system will provide guidance to
support water management and consumption decisions for government agencies and
the private sectors.