* 1738032
* The Lowell Observatory Navajo-Hopi Astronomy Outreach Program: the 2017-2018 School Year
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Deidre Hunter, Lowell Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Linda French
* 09/30/2018
* USD 88,699.00

The Lowell Observatory Navajo-Hopi Astronomy Outreach Program is a science
enrichment program for Navajo and Hopi elementary school (5th-8th grade)
students and their teachers. The program uses astronomy-Â­related activities in
order to help teachers inspire students about science. The high school
graduation rate of children in the Navajo and Hopi Nations is well below state
and national averages; this program aims to inspire Native children to stay in
school and to pursue careers in science. The investigators have taken the time
to build relationships with the Native communities and to understand cultural
differences that might hold children back from engaging in science. For example,
several Nations have taboos about looking directly at the Moon or at a solar
eclipse. The investigators build partnerships between astronomers and teachers
in Native communities with each astronomer making multiple visits to a school to
lead activities with the teachers and students. The school groups then visit
Lowell Observatory for tours and visit the telescopes for a night of observing.

The investigators plan to develop curriculum based on Project Based Learning and
to explore the possibilities of expanding their program. For example, Burt
Medicine Bull, a Northern Cheyenne educator, is interested in collaborating with
the group. Trying their methods with a different group of students from the
Northern Cheyenne Nation will help them determine how easy it will be to export
their program. Assessment and evaluation will be managed by an education
professor at Northern Arizona University who is an expert at working with Native
educational groups.