* 1738785
* RII Track-4: Using in-cell NMR to follow 13C-fluxomics in living cells
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Lisa Warner, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 193,997.00

Non-technical Description Metabolic pathways in living systems are complex
networks of chemical reactions that convert small molecules, known as
metabolites, into fundamental energy and chemical building blocks, such as
proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids. The study of metabolites produced in living
cells and tissues is broadly termed 'metabolomics'. Metabolomics can provide
information on how changes in a cell?s environment impacts those complex
biochemical networks. Monitoring the concentrations of metabolites over time can
provide essential information about the health of an organism. Metabolomics is
emerging as an integral technology to understand the function of a wide variety
of biological systems in response to a range of conditions, including disease,
drug treatment, and exposure to pests or pathogens. The PI will work with
colleagues at the National Renewable Energy Lab (NREL) to answer fundamental
questions about the flow of metabolites in bacterial cells, which will broadly
impact areas of research where understanding basic cellular metabolic processes
are important. The project will not only improve the PI's research trajectory,
but is also likely to result in significant advances in methods used to study
metabolic processes in industrially and environmentally important bacteria. This
project will provide interdisciplinary training and research opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students at Boise State University and regional high
school students from demographically diverse backgrounds.

Technical Description The goal of this project is to decipher carbon utilization
in the metabolic pathways of two strains of live fermenting bacteria,
Clostridium ljungdahlii and Clostridium thermocellum, both available at NREL.
Achieving this goal will provide insights into pathway reversibility and carbon
flux at the systems level. Information gained from this study will guide
rational bioengineering efforts to optimize biofuel and chemical product output,
and increase carbon utilization efficiency. The overarching strategy of this
project is to combine advanced in-cell nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) with
13C-isotope enriched metabolic tracers and paramagnetic relaxation enhancement
(PRE) to measure intra- and extracellular metabolic flux (13C-fluxomics) in
these microbes. The proposed research will: (1) expand basic science knowledge
of metabolic flux in living systems across the molecular, subcellular, and
cellular scales using in-cell NMR; and (2) unlock deep fundamental insights into
the cellular bioenergetics of fermenting biomass while mitigating CO2
production. This research integrates several novel approaches that will allow
real time analysis of 13C-fluxomics.