* 1738617
* I/UCRC:  Center for Advanced Design and Manufacturing of Integrated Microfluidics (CADMIM)
* ENG,EEC
* 12/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Ian Papautsky, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 02/29/2020
* USD 206,213.00

The I/UCRC for Advanced Design and Manufacturing of Integrated Microfluidics
intends emphasize design-oriented research that anticipates the need for cost-
effective manufacture and practical deployment. The center plans to undertake a
simultaneous, broad-front integrated strategy that seeks breakthroughs at the
interfaces of the thrust areas in material science, material processing,
biology, chemistry, device design, electronics, and component integration.
Proactive emphasis on volume production and on-chip interfaces to existing
communications infrastructure are new research priorities for microfluidics
prototypes. These considerations early in the research and design cycle are
viewed as key to transitioning technologies out of academic laboratories and
into the manufacturing sector for societal
benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The I/UCRC for Advanced Design and
Manufacturing of Integrated Microfluidics employ competitive recruitment
mechanisms and attractive cross-disciplinary collaborative graduate research
opportunities to engage excellent students, including members of
underrepresented groups. In addition to publications in archival journals and
conference proceedings, knowledge dissemination includes an open-source
"microfluidic function library" containing design specifications for
microfluidic "circuits" and interchangeable components organized by application
and chip manufacturing processes. Scalable prototyping processes&lt;br/&gt;also
will be targeted for dissemination to academia and industry, including
established companies and entrepreneurs, with the goal of dramatically
shortening the idea-to-product process.&lt;br/&gt;