* 1738431
* SBIR Phase II:  New Antimicrobial Technologies to Eliminate Salmonella Carriage in Poultry
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Kathryn Geldart, General Probiotics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 08/31/2021
* USD 905,622.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project, if successful, will be the development of a
probiotic treatment that may be used to reduce or eliminates Salmonella and
other infections in poultry. The recent FDA Veterinary Feed Directive will
result in the use of antibiotics being phased out of livestock production. New
technologies are needed to control pathogens in the absence of antibiotics. The
goal of this technology is the reduction of pathogens in pre-harvest poultry,
which may result in safer food and reduced foodborne illnesses. In addition,
this technology may help reduce the amount of antibiotics used in poultry
production, which has been cited as a major factor in the rise of antibiotic-
resistant bacteria.

This SBIR Phase II project will result in the development of novel antimicrobial
technologies using probiotics engineered to produce antimicrobial peptides
(AMPs). Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are small proteins with remarkable
bactericidal properties. During Phase I, probiotics were built successfully and
tested as AMP-delivery vehicles. Probiotics are bile-resistant microorganisms
that can be provided to animals safely in their food or water. The antimicrobial
probiotics will be used to test the reduction of pathogens in poultry guts.
Pathogens in poultry guts are considered the major source of contamination of
poultry meat during processing. The engineered probiotics will use synthetic DNA
promoter regions that are designed to precisely control the delivery of AMPs at
the site of infection. The impact will be examined in field trials of probiotics
with controllable AMP delivery on poultry challenged by Salmonella enteritidis
and Campylobacter jejuni, two common foodborne pathogens. Antimicrobial
probiotics also will be tested against Clostridia perfringens, the causal agent
of poultry necrotic enteritis, an illness that causes billions of dollars in
productivity losses every year in the US.