* 1738632
* RII Track-4: The distribution and origin of deep level charge trapping centers in large size high-purity germanium crystals
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Guojian Wang, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 08/31/2019
* USD 69,655.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Recent discoveries in astrophysics have
revolutionized our understanding of the fundamental nature of matter and the
cosmos, yet many mysteries remain. Astronomical observations of gravitational
phenomena indicate that 80% of the matter in the universe is composed of dark
matter (DM); however, this proposed material has not yet been directly observed.
Current approaches to the study of DM rely on sophisticated analyses of the
fundamental structure of atoms; however, these analyses are hindered by inherent
limitations of the instruments that are currently available. Through a
collaboration with the University of Tennessee, the PI will have access to
instrumentation that will provide a greater understanding of these limitations,
and it is expected that this will lead to significant advancements in
development of instruments capable of observing DM. This project will provide
training for the PI, establish needed collaborations for future development of
his career, and will strengthen the partnership between the PI's home
institution of the University of South Dakota and the University of Tennessee in
research on semiconductor materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description
&lt;br/&gt;High-Purity Germanium (HPGe) crystals have larger volume-to-surface
ratios for collecting signal, in particular from DM and
0&amp;#957;&amp;#946;&amp;#946; decay. Up to now, deep-level charge-trapping
centers have not been well studied in large diameter (&gt;10 cm) HPGe crystals.
Due to charge trapping by deep-level impurities in the HPGe crystals, the
degradation of energy resolution of HPGe detectors is a large obstacle for
germanium-based DM and 0&amp;#957;&amp;#946;&amp;#946; decay search experiments.
The goal of this proposal is to study the distribution and origin of deep-level
charge-trapping centers in large size HPGe crystals grown by the University of
South Dakota for future ton-scale 0&amp;#957;&amp;#946;&amp;#946; decay search
experiments. With the collaboration of the University of Tennessee, the PI will
study the distribution and origin of charge-trapping centers in HPGe crystals,
which include copper, copper-hydrogen complexes, di-vacancy hydrogen and unknown
defects, by Deep Level Transient Spectroscopy (DLTS). The results will help the
PI to design appropriate methods of reducing the level of charge-trapping
centers in purification and crystal growth beyond the award period. The
resulting large size HPGe crystals with lower charge-trapping centers will be an
ideal material for low background experiments, especially those searching for DM
and 0&amp;#957;&amp;#946;&amp;#946; decay.