* 1738760
* CS For All: RPP: A Scalable RPP for Preparing and Supporting Teachers to Teach Culturally Responsive and Rigorous CS Courses  in SC High Schools
* CSE,CNS
* 10/15/2017,09/30/2021
* Murali Sitaraman, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,146,316.00

Clemson University is broadening participation in computing in South Carolina by
preparing computer science (CS) teachers to effectively use culturally
responsive, inclusive pedagogies. The South Carolina Department of Education
(SCDE) has just launched K-8 Standards that aim to engage all students in
computer science and computational thinking and create a pipeline for high
school courses. These inaugural standards present a significant need for
qualified teachers and the knowledge to prepare them. This proposal would
develop an active community of high school CS teachers and researchers ahead of
this demand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project leverages an existing Researcher-
Practitioner Partnership (RPP), including computer science and education
researchers, along with administrators and teacher practitioners from the
Anderson Five Career Campus (which will offer computing courses to high school
students in Anderson School Districts), Pickens County School District, and
South Carolina's Coalition for Mathematics and Science (an organization
providing professional develoment to additional districts). Many of the
participating schools have significant underrepresented and/or economically
disadvantaged student populations. The project will investigate the
effectiveness of different models of teacher support (including just-in-time,
online only, versus a mixture of online and offline) on Pedagogical Content
Knowledge for Computer Science, self-efficacy, and teacher understanding and
implementation of culturally responsive computing, and teacher belief that all
students are capable of digital innovation. There has been strong coordination
between project activities and policy that is being adopted by the SCDE, which
could serve as a model for partnerships in other states.