* 1738141
* Research Initiation: The impact of engineering summer camps on middle school students' interest and identity
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Indira Chatterjee, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 12/31/2020
* USD 210,000.00

The objective of this proposal is to initiate research on how activities in
three engineering summer camps for middle school students lead to a change in
interest in engineering. This proposal also explores how engineering identity
(i.e. whether students identify themselves as becoming engineers) of these
students is linked to the pursuit of engineering as a major in college and as a
possible future career. Middle school is a critical time in a student's life
that frames student thinking about future career choices. It is important that
at this age students have accurate information about different career
opportunities. The middle school students participating in this study are
enrolled in three separate engineering summer camps: (1) Introduction to
engineering summer camp, (2) First-generation engineering summer camp, and (3)
Young women in engineering summer camp. The camps are identical in content and
are designed with the goal of increasing the understanding of different fields
of engineering and engineering careers. Research on interest and identity
related to engineering is just beginning to emerge and those studies that exist
are very diverse in scope and results. This proposal fills some of the gaps in
knowledge that exist, specifically on the impact of engineering summer camps on
the identity and interest development of middle school students from three
separate populations. The project also identifies which camp activities are most
impactful on identity and interest in engineering with the goal of developing an
intervention technique for inclusiveness in the engineering profession.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this mixed methods research study is
answering three research questions for the three populations: (1) How strongly
are engineering identity and interest linked to the pursuit of engineering as a
major in college and as a possible future career? (2) Which specific activities
in the summer camps lead to a change in identity and interest in engineering?
(3) To what extent and in what ways do the qualitative participant focus group
interviews and observations of participants engaged in camp activities
addressing research question #2 contribute to a comprehensive understanding of
the quantitative data obtained via pre- and post-surveys addressing research
question #1? The results will be used to impact STEM Programs in the greater
Northern Nevada region and extending to counties in Southern Nevada and Northern
California through the established contacts of the College of Engineering
outreach programs and K-12 community. Results will also reach national audiences
via the Women in Engineering ProActive Network, the Society of Women Engineers,
Mentornet, and presentations to engineering education researchers at American
Society of Engineering Education conferences.