* 1738214
* Research Initiation:   Enhancing the Learning Outcomes of Empathic Innovation in Longevity Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2020
* Nan Kong, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 10/31/2020
* USD 199,818.00

With a rapidly aging US population, smart healthcare technologies are critical
to the well-being and quality of care among the elderly and disabled.
Unfortunately, there are well-documented challenges in equipping students with
the technical and professional competencies for developing user-centered
solutions during the engineering innovation process. This project aims at
initiating boundary-spanning research for enhancing empathic innovation
abilities, which will support user-centeredness during the engineering design
process. In this project, the research team will examine how undergraduate
engineering students learn empathic innovation over time and how this learning
is affected by the nature of community-based learning projects and curricula.
The results will provide insights into effective teaching of empathic innovation
at the undergraduate level. Guided by the research findings, teaching and
learning techniques can be better designed to help students thrive and gain
valuable STEM knowledge and skills. Through knowledge dissemination and
community outreach, this research will impact multiple stakeholders and
institutions. Ultimately, this research will help successfully prepare students
for careers in an ever-evolving healthcare industry, which demands a workforce
from one eighth of the U.S population, consumes nearly one fifth of the U.S.
gross domestic product, and spends about $2.7 trillion annually.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific research questions for this project are (1) how
do undergraduate engineering students' empathic design tendencies and abilities
evolve during an engineering design project; and (2) to what extent, do
undergraduate engineering students' empathic designs relate to their engineering
innovation on various user-centered smart health engineering design projects.
For this research study, the research team will apply a mixed-methods approach.
The quantitative measures include individual empathic tendencies, innovative
tendencies, empathic design abilities, and team-based innovation potential.
Qualitative data collection involves surveys, real-time observations, and
videotaping of design review sessions. The team will exploit a suite of
statistical analysis methods, including structural equation modeling with latent
variables in passive longitudinal designs. The qualitative analysis will employ
thematic, content, and discourse analyses. The research team will work with
community project partners and domain experts to design and evaluate individual
and team-based performance evaluation tasks. This project will inform our
understanding of an individual's tendencies in innovative behaviors in
relationship to their empathic tendencies, examine how team-based innovation
potential is related to empathic design abilities presented by each member of
the team, and support current efforts in smart healthcare engineering by better
equipping students with the ability to innovate.