* 1738401
* RAPID support of Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center core missions
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* David Somers, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2018
* USD 185,000.00

An award is made to Ohio State University to support The Arabidopsis Biological
Resource Center (ABRC), which collects, curates and distributes resources of the
powerful plant model organism Arabidopsis thaliana. This collection of one
million stocks includes seed lines, DNA stocks and educational materials.
Hundreds of thousands of high quality stocks are annually shipped to the
international plant biology community of 27,000 researchers. The ABRC's
activities have a broad impact by enabling worldwide cutting-edge advancements
in agriculture, medicine and basic research. The ABRC performs rigorous quality
controls to ensure the uniformity and quality of stocks, which enables data
reproducibility and accountability within the field. The access to resources is
provided to researches, teachers, students, companies and the general public
through the online distribution system, and the ABRC leads in public education
through a number of outreach activities, conferences, workshops, and teacher
trainings. This RAPID funding allows the ABRC to continue to provide the plant
biology community with a large number of high quality stocks, without a
reduction in speed or quality control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
support the ABRC's workforce and its core functions to quickly distribute
stocks, perform quality control germination and genotyping, and curate the
donation of new community resources. As a Living Stocks collection, ABRC is a
biological infrastructure resource that is fundamental to a significant
community of researchers, including those funded by NSF, other agencies, and
internationally. This RAPID award will allow the ABRC to maintain the
availability of stocks at a cost that fosters an innovative and creative plant
biology community.