* 1738629
* Identifying the Origins of Summertime Arctic Cloud Condensation Nuclei Using Online Fine Aerosol Composition Measurements
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Michael Lawler, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 414,275.00

Clouds play a critical role in the radiation budget and climate of the Arctic,
but the origin of the particles on which these cloud droplets form is a relative
unknown. This research project will provide an opportunity to take specialized
measurements of microscopic particles onboard an ice breaker in the Arctic
Ocean. By understanding the sources of cloud particles, scientists will be
better able to determine whether cloud conditions will change in a world with
less sea ice, and thus improve long-term forecasts of climate in this critical
part of the world. Education and outreach activities will also be conducted
during the project, including an online photo blog during the research
cruise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will investigate the origin of
fine particle aerosols and cloud condensation nuclei over the summertime high
Arctic Ocean. Field measurements will be taken from the Swedish icebreaker Oden
during August-September 2018. The Thermal Desorption Chemical Ionization Mass
Spectrometer will be deployed to measure the composition of ambient size-
resolved 10-200nm diameter aerosols, targeting the accumulation, Aitken and
nucleation modes. Total ambient sub-micron aerosols will also be collected using
a Particle into Liquid Sampler (PILS) and subsequently analyzed offline. The
goal of the project is to measure the relative contributions to Arctic aerosol
of biogenic polysaccharide material, sea salt, other organics, and other salts,
on a size-resolved basis. A successful project would result in determining what
processes are responsible for aerosols of different sizes, which would lead to
the ability to infer the most important CCN sources in the region.