* 1738942
* NSF-NERC: THwaites Offshore Research (THOR)
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Julia Wellner, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,015,583.00

This project contributes to the joint initiative launched by the U.S. National
Science Foundation (NSF) and the U.K. Natural Environment Research Council
(NERC) to substantially improve decadal and longer-term projections of ice loss
and sea-level rise originating from Thwaites Glacier in West Antarctica.
Satellite observations extending over the last 25 years show that Thwaites
Glacier is rapidly thinning and accelerating. Over this same period, the
Thwaites grounding line, the point at which the glacier transitions from sitting
on the seabed to floating, has retreated. Oceanographic studies demonstrate that
the main driver of these changes is incursion of warm water from the deep ocean
that flows beneath the floating ice shelf and causes basal melting. The period
of satellite observation is not long enough to determine how a large glacier,
such as Thwaites, responds to long-term and near-term changes in the ocean or
the atmosphere. As a result, records of glacier change from the pre-satellite
era are required to build a holistic understanding of glacier behavior. Ocean-
floor sediments deposited at the retreating grounding line and further offshore
contain these longer-term records of changes in the glacier and the adjacent
ocean. An additional large unknown is the topography of the seafloor and how it
influences interactions of landward-flowing warm water with Thwaites Glacier and
affects its stability. Consequently, this project focuses on the seafloor
offshore from Thwaites Glacier and the records of past glacial and ocean change
contained in the sediments deposited by the glacier and surrounding
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Uncertainty in model projections of the future of
Thwaites Glacier will be significantly reduced by cross-disciplinary
investigations seaward of the current grounding line, including extracting the
record of decadal to millennial variations in warm water incursion, determining
the pre-satellite era history of grounding-line migration, and constraining the
bathymetric pathways that control flow of warm water to the grounding line.
Sedimentary records and glacial landforms preserved on the seafloor will allow
reconstruction of changes in drivers and the glacial response to them over a
range of timescales, thus providing reference data that can be used to initiate
and evaluate the reliability of models. Such data will further provide insights
on the influence of poorly understood processes on marine ice sheet dynamics.
This project will include an integrated suite of marine and sub-ice shelf
research activities aimed at establishing boundary conditions seaward of the
Thwaites Glacier grounding line, obtaining records of the external drivers of
change, improving knowledge of processes leading to collapse of Thwaites
Glacier, and determining the history of past change in grounding line migration
and conditions at the glacier base. These objectives will be achieved through
high-resolution geophysical surveys of the seafloor and analysis of sediments
collected in cores from the inner shelf seaward of the Thwaites Glacier
grounding line using ship-based equipment, and from beneath the ice shelf using
a corer deployed through the ice shelf via hot water drill
holes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.