* 1738249
* Workshop on Professional Development for University Research Computing Specialists
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Dana Skow, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 08/31/2017
* USD 49,004.00

This workshop intends to explore the training of the community of research
computing staff typically serving at smaller universities. In general, the
community of cyberinfrastructure processionals, which includes the targeted sub
community, is trained in an ad-hoc fashion. There is a constant pull from
industry to hire away such critical personnel, which specially impacts smaller
institutions with staff and training issues. There are plans for recruitment
from diverse backgrounds and institutions. This critical aspect of this workshop
will address better participation and training of underserved community for this
emerging profession. This is also expected to foster similar coordination
networks and training activities. The workshop will be collocated at Super
Computing conference (SC-16); thus is will impact and benefit from the SC
attendees. Such training activities are aligned with the presidential NSCI
initiative on workforce development of scientific workforce in high performance
computing, and serve the NSF's mission in promoting preparedness to advance
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will seek to identify community
needs and appropriate training material, creating a critical community network,
and developing a roadmap for long term strategy. Most educational institutions
have relatively small research computing support staff and typically recruit
their new staff from their user community. These staff are given on-the-job
training to learn the specialized skills of research computing. Because of the
small staff size, however, the loss of a single individual makes a significant
change on the workload of the remaining skilled individuals. There is rarely a
local expert remaining with whom to apprentice, as small staffs limit skill
redundancy options. This workshop will gather experts from across the US,
representing leaders of research computing centers, system administrators,
educational programs, and other national coordination activities related to
research computing, and discuss possible methods of addressing this shortage of
trained research computing professionals. One of the goals is also to prevent
the sense of professional isolation so common among smaller research computing
centers' staffs, particularly in times of travel restrictions.