* 1738305
* D3SC: EAGER: Data-driven development of fluorescent sensors for bio-imaging
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Ming Xian, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Chemical information is growing dramatically, fueled by the massive amount of
data generated by researchers in a variety of fields. Conventional approaches
require that scientists sift through data from many sources to try to develop a
comprehensive picture of the field when making a new chemical compound or
studying a chemical processes. This conventional approach is slow and difficult
as researchers can miss important trends. With the support from the Chemical
Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the Division of Chemistry and the
Cyberinfrastructure for Emerging Science and Engineering Research (CESER)
Program in the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure, Professor Xian at
Washington State University (WSU) and Professor Ji are teaching machines to
collect massive data from literature, analyze them, and come up with new design
principles to make new sensors. The project is in response to the Data-Driven
Discovery Science in Chemistry Dear Colleague Letter (D3SC-DCL). The team is
using data mining and computer learning to develop a new generation of sensors
for the detection of hydrogen sulfide (H2S). Hydrogen sulfide is an important
signaling molecule that is associated with biological processes such as high
blood pressure, atherosclerosis, coronary heart diseases. The coupling of
computer science techniques with chemical problems enables Professors Xian and
Ji and their students to predict the most promising sensor design without making
and testing a large number of sensors empirically. The research group "trains
their computer" by testing the predicted sensors designs and providing feedback
for the next iteration; this is machine learning. If successful, the machine
learning methods may be expanded to sensor development for the detection of many
different compounds, especially those that are important in biological and
chemical processes (such as biological warfare and pharmaceutical development).
The research provides unique training opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students by providing rich experiences in both chemistry and data
science. These activities build the workforce of non-traditional chemistry
trainees to meet data-driven research and development needs in industry and
academia. Professor Xian also actively works with undergraduate students from
underrepresented minority groups by participating the Pacific Northwest Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (PNW-LSAMP) Program at WSU.

Professors Xian and Ji are building a database of H2S sensors with searchable
parameters. They are carrying out data-driven optimization of the sensors based
on advanced machine learning and data mining techniques. A combined data-driven
discovery framework of unsupervised learning and supervised multi-task learning
is developed to predict the important properties of the sensors. This approach
is used to identify the most suitable fluorophores and H2S-reaction sites for
the design of optimal sensors, which can then be synthesized and validated.
These studies may advance our understanding of machine learning and data mining
as well as chemical predication and sensor development. This interdisciplinary
project provides a unique platform to attract students to chemistry and train
them at the interface of chemistry, data science, and computation science.
Broadening participation efforts include students from underrepresented minority
groups through the Pacific Northwest Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation (PNW-LSAMP) Program at WSU.