* 1739635
* E2CDA: Type I: Probabilistic Spin Logic for Low-Energy Boolean and Non-Boolean Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Ronald DeMara, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2021
* USD 2,485,754.00

Various components of hardware and software have come together to make this
electronic revolution surrounding smartphones and the like possible. To further
expand our capabilities, to enter a new era of even more comprehensive
networking between individual users and the cloud, as well as to solve problems
of a complexity level that cannot be tackled even with today's computers, there
is the need to push the frontiers of data processing beyond anything that can be
achieved through "conventional" electronics. One approach is to improve the
hardware further. However the latter has been historically mainly focused on
making devices ever smaller, thus gaining the benefit of a more compact but very
power hungry electronics. The current project revolves around a novel device
that uses electron spins rather than electron charges for information
processing, and holds the promise to achieve the above mentioned goals at a
power consumption level that is far smaller than what can be envisioned with
conventional technologies. At the same time the project aims at a new level of
education and dissemination through the concept that we call "atoms to systems".
A new generation of engineers requires skill sets and a knowledge base that is
different from what was learned previously. A high priority of the project is
thus to make the models and ideas that underlie them accessible across science
and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is increasing interest in a
fundamentally different form of brain-like logic based on probabilistic
inference that is far more effective and energy efficient in dealing with the
problems of search and recognition posed by the ever increasing amounts of "big
data". Probabilistic logic is currently implemented with software algorithms
that run on a deterministic computing platform. The goal is to lay the
foundation for a new P(robabilistic)-computing platform using unstable
multiferroics, a manmade material combination that combines distinct electrical,
mechanical and magnetic properties. Unlike quantum computers, P-computers should
operate robustly at room temperature, while providing some aspects of the
"quantum parallelism" that facilitates the solution of hard problems. The team
will work on the material, device and circuit development of this novel
probabilistic computing idea. Technical work related to the characterization of
novel material properties, the impact of various structural parameters and
architectural aspects will all be explored in parallel by the group of experts.