* 1739413
* CPS: TTP Option: Medium: Building a Smart City Economy and Information Ecosystem to Motivate Pro-Social Transportation Behavior
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Alexandros Labrinidis, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,439,999.00

The growth and expansion of cities since the mid 20th century has led to a
strong dependency on private automobiles. During the last years, urban planners
have started rethinking the mobility modes in a city and have finally realized
that a truly sustainable transportation and urban environment in general,
requires a shift to multimodal transportation. In the PittSmartLiving project,
we view the shift to multimodal transportation in a holistic way. In particular,
we will design, develop, deploy, and evaluate a platform that will integrate
information from and align the incentives of all involved stakeholders
(commuters, transport operators, and local businesses) towards increasing the
utilization and quality of public transportation. The resulting Cyber-Physical
system will (1) provide commuters with real-time information of arrival and
utilization of all relevant options of public transit (e.g., bus, subway,
shuttles, bikes, etc.), and (2) build a marketplace around multimodal mobility,
where businesses can offer time-sensitive incentives connected to this transit
information to nearby commuters (e.g., the next bus is too full, come in and
enjoy $1 coffee). This has the potential to improve not only the overall
ridership experience by balancing utilization across public transportation
networks (e.g., shifting some of the demand away from the peak hours), but also
to optimize customer flows in local businesses. Significant emphasis will be
given to the development of mechanisms that will be able to deliver the required
services while respecting the privacy expectations of the commuters. As part of
this project, an unprecedented experimental infrastructure will be deployed (in
the Oakland and Downtown areas of Pittsburgh) that will allow the PIs to
identify a set of incentive mechanisms that can shift commuters to public
transportation in a real urban environment. This is the first time that an urban
core truly becomes a laboratory, where scientists and engineers can run
experiments aimed at improving the quality of life of city-dwellers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main expected technical contributions of this project
can be summarized as follows. (1) Development of a holistic urban transportation
system that balances utilization across both public transportation networks and
local businesses, thus improving not only public transit but also general urban
living. (2) Design and evaluation of the market mechanism that integrates and
aligns the incentives of various stakeholders. (3) Shift of attention from
temporal efficiency (i.e., fastest route) to more sustainable commuting (e.g.,
public transit, biking etc.) as well as commuting options geared towards the
well-being of dwellers (e.g., "beautiful" routes, "clean" routes, "accessible"
routes etc.)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additional information about this project can
be found at http://PittSmartLiving.org