* 1739629
* CPS: Small: Sound Invariant Generation for Continuous and Hybrid Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Andre Platzer, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2022
* USD 479,117.00

This project considers the pragmatic challenge of broadening the reach and
general accessibility of cyber-physical system (CPS) analysis. It capitalizes on
logical foundations for cyber-physical systems to study automated analysis for
CPS without sacrificing correctness of the analysis results. While the
complexities of CPSs can be quite demanding, there is a considerable pragmatic
difference between rigorous reasoning techniques that are available to
verification experts compared to techniques that provide a vast amount of
automation support to become more accessible for novices and more productive for
experts. This project focuses on finding invariants, which convey crucial
insights about quantities or relationships, such as minimum safety distances,
that do not change while the CPS drives or flies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyber-
physical systems such as self-driving cars, advanced computerized car safety
technology, and drones have considerable potential to change the world for the
better. Their designs face intensive safety requirements, however, and feature
increasingly complex behaviors. The advanced but correct automation of CPS
analysis technology developed in this project is crucial to broaden the reach of
trustworthy verification and validation results. In the long run, there is a
chance that this technology will fundamentally change the way that CPS are
engineered by enabling CPS engineers to have increasingly comprehensive safety
analysis tools at their fingertips. As a demonstration with considerable impact
potential, this project studies safe control functionalities for quadrotors.
Quadcopters are a popular choice for realizing many applications, but their
safety is a nontrivial challenge. Not every company or grass-roots effort will
have the capacity to conduct a full verification and validation effort. That is
why a set of baseline functionalities that have been preverified are expected to
be a helpful basis for such designs. The results of this project, including CPS
models, controllers, proofs, and tools, will be made available on the KeYmaera X
web page: http://keymaeraX.org/