* 1739671
* CPS: Medium: Leveraging Honey Bees as Bio-Cyber Physical Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Alyosha Molnar, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 956,755.00

The goal of this project is to leverage and improve upon the capabilities of
honey bees as agricultural pollinators by incorporating them into Bio-Cyber
Physical systems. Rapid advances are needed to aid a dwindling agricultural
workforce, increase crop yield to sustain the growing population, and provide
targeted crop care to limit the need for broad pesticide treatments. These
challenges may well be addressed by autonomous mobile robots and sensor
networks; unfortunately, agricultural landscapes represent vast, complicated,
and dynamic environments that complicate long term operation. In contrast,
social insects are capable of robust sustained operation in unpredictable
environments far beyond what is possible with state-of-the-art artificial
systems. Colonies of honey bees are of particular interest in this project,
because they are the premiere agricultural pollinator bringing in over $150
billion annually. The U.S. has an estimated 2.4 million colonies, many of whom
travel the country every summer to help pollinate monocrops such as almond and
corn. A colony causes pollination by dispatching tens of thousands of scouts and
foragers to survey and sample kilometer-wide areas around their hive. Thus, the
colony as a whole accumulates vast information about the local agricultural
landscape, bloom and dearth -- information that would be very informative if
available to farmers and beekeepers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will
leverage social insects as environmental indicators by piggybacking on their
naturally existing capabilities. It involves sensors to record where bees focus
their foraging activity, and mechanisms to stimulate additional foragers. This
project will impact: 1) ultra-low power electronics and sensing, 2)
probabilistic inference from large scale distributed data sources, 3) feedback
control of biohybrid systems, and 4) gains to apiculture and entomology. The
proposed bio-hybrid technology may further inform models of how bees forage in
natural versus cultivated areas, and may lead to new insights on design of
agricultural multi-use landscapes for improved yield. Overall, this research
will improve engineers' understanding of Bio-Cyber Physical Systems able to
monitor and affect the environment, and may be applicable to scenarios including
search and rescue, detection of chemical spills, and targeted
pollination.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To harness the capabilities of a bee colony
while still providing control and sensing, the proposed work specifically
involves 1) novel submillimeter flight recorders with visual scene capture and
analysis, thermal and mechanical sensors, a clock, storage, processing,
photovoltaic chargers and short range communications; 2) algorithms and models
to estimate foraging maps, relying on bee motion models and feature extraction,
merging probability density functions of observed landmarks from thousands of
flights; and 3) feedback control via a bee-mimicking shaker device to recruit
foragers, in turn eliciting data collection and pollination, e.g. during brief
spouts of bloom that would otherwise go unnoticed by the colony. This research
represents a transformative step towards a new frontier in Bio-Cyber Physical
Systems, improving upon the abilities of social insects to sense and interact
with the physical world, while providing data acquisition and control on par
with explicitly engineered systems.