* 1739805
* Phase I IUCRC Florida International University: Center for Advanced Research in Forensic Science (CARFS)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2024
* Kenneth Furton, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,490,530.00

In recent decades, a rapid transition from fundamental discoveries to forensic
method development has improved the quality of evidence in many types of
forensic investigations. However, there has also been a call, at the national
level, for forensic disciplines to address their scientific limitations and
expand fundamental research that can underpin and improve existing and
developing forensic applications. Investigators at Florida International
University (FIU) and the University of South Alabama (USA), along with
affiliated collaborators at Northeastern University (NE), George Washington
University (GWU), Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU), and the University of North
Texas Health Science Center (UNTHSC), will address aspects of this broad
challenge through the formation of the Center for Advanced Research in Forensic
Science (CARFS). This Industry University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC)
will serve as a platform for innovative and, in many cases, interdisciplinary
forensic science research activities at the interface of academia, government,
and industry. CARFS will initially include digital forensics/data analytics
(USA), forensic chemistry (FIU/NE/GWU), forensic molecular biology (FIU/GWU),
and forensic microbiology (TAMU/UNT), with the possibility of future expansion
to include other forensic disciplines. The Center is anticipated to provide new
findings and tools to a range of stakeholders, including forensic science
practitioners, research laboratories, industrial partners, and government and
private forensic science end users, and will ultimately support safety and
justice for the nation. The Center's research sites will also provide training
opportunities to a diverse group of students, thus supporting the pipeline of
future forensic researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of CARFS, the FIU
site, including affiliates at GWU and NE, will focus on forensic chemistry and
molecular biology, with additional interests in computer science and psychology.
At FIU, research will focus on topics including epigenetic markers for age
estimation and trace forensic body fluid identification, rapid and portable
tools for the organic and inorganic characterization of materials, and
explosives detection techniques. FIU will collaborate with GWU and NE on topics
including rapid DNA profiling and mass spectroscopic characterization of
designer drugs. Fundamental research in molecular biology, separation science
and mass spectrometric detection at these institutions will address scientific
challenges in forensics as well as in other areas such as drug
discovery/development, homeland security, and the fuel industry. Across the six
institutions involved in CARFS there is also potential for innovative projects
that span and integrate digital and laboratory sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is jointly supported by NSF (Division of
Chemistry, Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate; and Division Of
Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences, Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences
Directorate) and the National Institute of Justice (Office of Investigative and
Forensic Sciences).