* 1739462
* CPS: Medium: A Unified Framework for IoT Privacy
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Amir Houmansadr, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,039,955.00

Smart cities, connected vehicles, smart homes, and connected healthcare devices
are examples of how the Internet of Things (IoT) are expected to revolutionize
our lives in the decades ahead by exploiting a wealth of user-specific data to
significantly improve user experiences. However, sharing of such data can
compromise a user's privacy, and this threat to user-privacy has emerged as a
critical risk to the widespread adoption of IoT. This highlights an important
and fundamental challenge critical to the Science of Cyber-Physical Systems:
even if IoT data is carefully anonymized, significant privacy leaks can occur
due to the sheer amount of the data generated and the use of powerful
mathematical techniques by an adversary to match current behavior with traces of
past user behavior. This project will develop a systematic approach to
understand the fundamental underpinnings of privacy in IoT systems, and develop
provably private IoT implementations that are robust to uncertainties in the
models. A key advantage of this approach is that it can achieve provable
privacy, i.e., no algorithm can break the privacy of the user. The project also
continues the team's education and engagement of a diverse set of students,
including the significant involvement of undergraduate students in the research
program, and creates and promotes free and open access educational
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical problems considered in the project
are organized into two main thrusts. In Thrust 1, the theoretical foundations
for IoT privacy are built. The main goal is to obtain a fundamental
understanding of the degree to which the utility of IoT approaches can be
maintained while employing privacy-preserving mechanisms to provably prevent an
adversary from compromising a user's privacy by matching a given trace to prior
user behavior. Critical to this thrust is achieving robust and model independent
design, i.e., achieving perfect privacy with the minimum sets of assumptions
about the system and data models. In Thrust 2, to validate the theory and
demonstrate the potential impact of the approach, the project leverages the
domain expertise of the team to apply the results of Thrust 1 in connected
vehicle applications. More generally, this will indicate the degree to which the
data of a given user can be kept private from an interested adversary while
still supporting the use of such services.