* 1739642
* CPS: Small: Statistical Performance Analysis and Resource Management for Cyber-Physical Internet of Things Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2021
* Walid Saad, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Realizing the vision of pervasive Internet of Things (IoT) that will endow a
myriad of physical objects that include sensors, wearables, mundane objects, and
connected vehicles, with cyber capabilities, is contingent upon effectively
managing the interwoven synergies across its cyber and physical realms. The
overarching goal of this project is to develop a novel cyber-physical system
(CPS) science that can enable effective modeling, optimization, and management
of the IoT as a fully-fledged CPS. Developing this science will, in turn,
catalyze the deployment of the IoT and its numerous services that range from
smart healthcare, to smart buildings and intelligent transportation, thus having
a broad societal impact. Enabling the IoT will also expedite the transformation
of cities and communities, into truly smart environments thus enhancing the
quality of life of their residents. The proposed research is coupled with an
educational plan that includes substantial involvement of graduate and
undergraduate students in cross-cutting CPS research, as well as IoT-centric
outreach activities targeted at local high school students from the under-
represented groups. This synergistic integration of research and education will
contribute to training a new workforce that is equipped with the necessary CPS
skills needed to work in the emerging IoT domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will develop a foundational framework for the modeling and
performance analysis of the IoT that will facilitate the management of
resources, such as energy and computation, jointly across its cyber and physical
realms. By leveraging interdisciplinary tools from stochastic geometry,
distributed optimization, and operations research, the proposed framework will
yield a number of results that include new statistical models and CPS
performance metrics for characterizing the cyber-physical operation of IoT as
well as novel distributed optimization algorithms that will adapt the cyber-
physical operational state of the IoT devices to the dynamics of the CPS
environment, while being cognizant of their stringent resource constraints. The
developed theory will be validated using extensive simulations as well as basic
experiments. The ensuing outcomes are expected to yield a fundamentally new CPS
science that will transform the way in which the IoT is modeled, analyzed, and
optimized. The foundational nature of this research will further ensure that its
impacts will cut across multiple CPS domains, ranging from energy to
transportation and healthcare.