* 1739977
* INFEWS/T3: Decision Support for Water Stressed FEW Nevus Decisions (DS-WSND)
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2017,12/31/2023
* Kurt Schwabe, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 12/31/2023
* USD 2,431,217.00

Society depends on food, energy, and water (FEW) availability. It has become
increasingly apparent, however, that actions focusing on any one of these
resources also affect the other two. Consequently, favorable actions for one
resource may result in unintended outcomes for the others thus raising concerns
over their interaction or Nexus. A situation for which FEW Nexus decision making
is critical occurs especially in arid/semiarid regions experiencing rapid growth
such as the US Southwest, Egypt, Pakistan, and India. While these regions face
severe water shortages, they often rely on irrigated food production, energy
production, transfers of large amounts of water using substantial energy and
aquifer depletion. Improved management of the arid-region FEW systems that
anticipate and preparesfor increasing pressures on resource availability and
population-associated demand growth requires an improved understanding of the
intricate connections between FEW resource decisions -- their Nexus. For arid
communities, typical possibilities under consideration include conservation
across agriculture, municipalities, and energy producers; use of recycled or
saline water; and water transfers. This project will analyze the potential
improvements arising from FEW Nexus-aware decision utilizing case studies
encompassing the San Antonio and Los Angeles/San Diego regions. Additionally,
the project will develop analytical systems for Nexus decision evaluation within
and outside these case study settings. A multidisciplinary team of hydrologists,
economists, energy engineers, water engineers, agricultural experts and outreach
specialists works on the project. The team both: (i) interacts with a broad
spectrum of regional FEW decision makers regarding Nexus analyses and
enhancement of the usefulness and implementation of the modeling system
presented, and (ii) trains graduate students and postdocs in FEW Nexus system
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses: 1) integrated and
coordinated domain modeling use in FEW Nexus tradeoff analysis, and 2) decision
support modeling and optimization regarding improvements in FEW Nexus decision
making, both in water scarce areas. The project employs case studies
encompassing the San Antonio and Los Angeles\San Diego regions. Project
activities examine mechanisms to improve food, energy and water systems joint
management using domain bias free modeling approaches. Such modeling is designed
to consider and evaluate alternative policy, management, and technology
strategies across domain boundaries. The modeling system represents and informs
water development, technology, conservation, policy, implementation, and
incentive-design. Core components include data storage and retrieval systems,
coupled with FEW domain models, an integrative multiple objective model, and a
highly visualized stakeholder interaction and tradeoff analysis system. The
project: 1) integrates data and analyses from agricultural, hydrologic and
energy system domain models within an overall systems framework that is embodied
in a multi objective, risk aware model designed to address decision-maker
preferences, strategy choices, consequences and trade-offs; 2) uses the
integrated systems framework to assess the added economic, social, and
environmental values that can be attained using Nexus-wide, coordinated decision
making versus sectoral focused choices; 3) evaluates how climate change and
increasing urban populations stress the case study FEW systems, and Nexus
decisions; 4) identifies economic, environmental, and income distributional
tradeoffs and possible incentive approaches to compensate potential losers so
they cooperate in Nexus strategy implementation; and 5) facilitates coordination
and communication between stakeholders and project personnel in an effort to
enhance awareness of FEW Nexus decision making and develop relevant decision
support tools for the locations of the case study and other settings.