* 1739320
* Texas Analysis and Mathematical Physics Symposium 2017
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Thomas Chen, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 07/31/2018
* USD 12,937.00

This award provides support for the 2017 Texas Analysis and Mathematical Physics
Symposium that will take place at the University of Texas at Austin in the 2017
fall semester. The Texas Analysis and Mathematical Physics Symposium is a
regional weekend meeting held annually, hosted in turn by Rice University, the
University of Texas at Austin, and occasionally other institutions in the
region. It is intended for the participation of around 60 people, including 25
non-local graduate students. The workshop brings together many senior
mathematicians from Texas and neighboring states, who may not otherwise have an
opportunity to discuss mathematics together throughout the year. Structurally
the symposium consists of 7 main lectures given by nationally recognized leaders
in the field, and contributed sessions (including a poster session) for advanced
graduate students and participating researchers from regional universities, to
present their work. This will provide graduate students with an opportunity to
obtain feedback from senior faculty from other departments. The networking
activities made possible by the Symposium will prove to be a valuable experience
for young researchers. The Symposium encourages and financially supports
participation by students, recent Ph.D. recipients, and members of groups
underrepresented in mathematics. The Symposium is a forum for regional
specialists in mathematical physics and related areas of analysis to become
familiar with the latest problems and present their own results; in addition it
introduces young mathematicians to the current state of the
subject.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This year's Symposium will focus on the areas
where dispersive partial differential equations, statistical mechanics, and
harmonic analysis intersect and interact. More information, including a list of
speakers and abstracts, registration information, and an archive of the past
symposium can be found at the website of the meeting:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;https
://www.ma.utexas.edu/users/tc/TeXAMP/TeXAMP-2017/TeXAMP-2017.html