* 1739473
* INFEWS/T3: Critical Nutrient Recovery and Reuse: Nitrogen and Phosphorus Recycling from Wastewaters as Struvite Fertilizer
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Greg Thoma, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,430,597.00

This project is supported by the Innovations at the Nexus of Food, Energy, and
Water (INFEWS) Program. It addresses the lack of nutrient recycling from
wastewater streams and the resulting strain on water resources, energy use, and
sustainable food supply. Two key nutrients, nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P), are
critical for all life on Earth, including humans, animals, and plants.
Worldwide, phosphorus supply comes from limited stores of phosphate rock.
Nitrogen comes from the energy- and capital-intensive industrial Haber-Bosch
process that makes ammonia. Phosphorus and nitrogen are transported from
fertilizers and human and animal waste to wastewaters via agricultural run-off.
There is an important opportunity for nutrient recovery and reuse rather than
treatment and disposal. This project develops innovative engineering technology
to recycle nitrogen and phosphorus nutrients as a high-value fertilizer,
struvite, while also enabling energy-efficient wastewater treatment. The
technology is developed within the context of an economic life cycle analysis.
In terms of broadening participation, a stakeholder-driven workshop takes place
yearly. In addition to lower energy use and increased nitrogen and phosphorus
recycling, the benefits are cleaner water, healthier watersheds, and sustainable
agricultural activities. Numerous undergraduate and graduate students receive
training in an interdisciplinary context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over-
fertilization and excess ammonia production in addition to a lack of nutrient
recycling contribute to an imbalanced N/P cycle. This situation leads to water
contamination issues, decreased agricultural viability in nutrient-saturated
watersheds, and excessive energy use. This research project addresses the
problem with an electrochemical reactor that recovers N and P as struvite, a
slow-release fertilizer. An electrochemical reactor is designed to study
kinetics and flow dynamics of struvite precipitation. This reactor is designed
to be energy-efficient with high potential for on-site power generation. Key
electrochemical components, including the magnesium alloy anode and a functional
peptide scaffold for accelerated struvite precipitation are developed. The
peptide-functionalized mesh is designed to enhance struvite precipitation
kinetics and purity. The energy requirements for this process are evaluated and
the economic costs and benefits of the new technology are determined. The
project also addresses the impact of struvite composition and morphology on soil
composition and crop fertility, studies the efficacy of struvite as a
fertilizer, and develops a life cycle assessment of the technology including a
system energy balance. For application to municipal wastewater treatment
facilities, the technology integration is evaluated in terms of scalability,
water quality/liquid composition, and cost-effectiveness.