* 1739409
* CPS: Small: RUI: Incentive Mechanisms for Mobile Crowdsourcing, Reaching Spatial and  Temporal Coverage Under Budget Constraints
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Luis Jaimes, Florida Polytechnic University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 06/30/2022
* USD 182,069.00

Crowdsourcing is a computational paradigm to leverage the power of crowds by
outsourcing the solution of a specific task. These crowds are composed of
regular citizens. The potential of crowdsourcing has been proven in fields such
as environmental sciences, transportation systems, and social sciences. Well-
known examples include the mobile applications for the community-based traffic
and navigation, which help drivers take the most efficient routes based on
information provided by other drivers. Some other crowdsourced applications are
the periodic measurement of environmental variables, monitoring of roads,
traffic, and civil infrastructure. A crowdsourced system may be a Cyber-Physical
System (CPS), which includes incentive mechanisms to encourage user
participation in a given task. The typical elements of such a system are the
data buyers, contributors and a platform for data storage and processing. The
contributors may take the form of people who use their smartphones for data
collection or autonomous vehicles with the attached sensors. These contributors
have natural patterns of daily movement, which covers only specific paths in the
target area at specific times. However, a sensing task may require data from all
parts of the target area in different times to ensure representative sampling.
Therefore, coverage in terms of both space and time may be critical for
crowdsourced applications. This proposal addresses the problem of spatial and
temporal coverage for sampling in a target area, in particular the coverage of
isolated sub-regions where participants' density is very low. This problem is
tackled by an incentive mechanism that dynamically assigns compensation for data
collection in the sub-regions of the target area based on the density of the
contributors in that sub-region. To achieve this goal, a sensing market is
modeled using a game-theoretic approach. In the sensing market, a data buyer
announces a task per sub-region and the corresponding compensation. Then, the
interested participants who decide to visit that region, submit their current
locations and final destinations as well as the amount of time they are willing
to spend on the sensing task. Similar to any other market, the members of a CS
market want to maximize their utilities. The contributors maximize their utility
by strategizing their trajectories while data buyers maximize their utility by
predicting the contributors' behavior and setting the optimal rewards per sub-
region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting information of the proposed
incentive mechanism may be leveraged by people and other rational participants
such as autonomous vehicles to better plan their daily activities. For example,
individuals can avoid environmental conditions that represent a risk for their
health or change their daily commute to produce the lowest stress level. Other
potential applications include autonomous vehicle scheduling and navigation,
smart robots navigation and smart utilization of transportation resources. The
proposed project will facilitate and encourage interdisciplinary collaboration
among the disciplines of computer science, transportation engineering and
environmental science. Specifically, interdisciplinary courses and laboratories
will be developed while employing peer-to-peer Web technology, such as Wiki
pages, to facilitate instant and direct access to ideas and data related to the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.