* 1739800
* CPS: Medium: Integrated control of biological and mechanical power for standing balance and gait stability after paralysis
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Musa Audu, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 999,396.00

Wearable exoskeletons are one of the primary advancements that help to alleviate
the effects of spinal cord injury (SCI) including degenerative changes in organs
of the body. Artificially stimulating the wearer's muscles to move his or her
limbs has the additional benefit of maintaining musculature and improving
circulation. The exoskeleton system developed in this project will use this
"muscles first" approach with additional assistive power from electric motors on
an as-needed basis. The major contribution of the project is that it will ensure
stability of the person during standing and at normal walking speeds. The result
will be that persons with SCI will be more comfortable standing and walking more
erect and, therefore, be more socially engaged. The societal impact of this will
be that persons with SCI will be better able to work and participate in social
and leisure activities and in other behaviors associated with independent and
productive lifestyles. In addition, Cleveland area high school students will be
involved in the project and learn about human biomechanics and engineering
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses how cyber physical walking
systems (CPWS) can be designed to be safe, secure, and resilient despite a
variety of unanticipated disturbances and how real-time dynamic control and
behavior adaptation can be achieved in a diversity of environments.
Specifically, a CPWS will be developed that seamlessly integrates: (1) a person
who has a spinal cord injury (SCI) with intact and excitable lower motor nerves;
(2) an exoskeleton with controllably locked/unlocked and/or passively damped
joints; (3) DC motors for need-dependent joint power assistance; and (4)
computational algorithms that continuously and automatically learn to improve
standing and walking stability. In this "muscles first" approach, functional
neural stimulation (FNS) provides most of the joint torques for walking and for
maximum health benefits and, thus, as-needed assistive joint motors may be small
and lightweight. The specific aims are 1) Assist the user's muscles on an as-
needed basis and for high-bandwidth stability control by adding small, low
passive-resistance motor/transmission pairs to our CPWS; 2) Develop
computational algorithms for system estimation, machine learning and stability
control for SCI users standing and walking with a CPWS while minimizing upper
extremity effort; 3) Verify system performance with able-bodied individuals and
assess upper extremity reduction and balance control in individuals with SCI
using the CPWS for standing and ambulation.