* 1739909
* INFEWS/T1: Impacts of Deglobalization on the Sustainability of Regional Food, Energy, Water Systems
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Elena Irwin, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 05/31/2023
* USD 2,431,141.00

Increased globalization through international trade, migration, and
technological innovation has generated substantial wealth in the U.S. economy
over the past 50 years. These gains , however, have been accompanied by job
losses in the manufacturing sector, growing wealth inequality in society and
environmental impacts abroad. Counter social and political trends reveal a
potential for deglobalization, i.e., diminished integration of the U.S. with
global markets. The goal of this project is to examine the potential effects of
deglobalization on the sustainability of regional food-energy-water systems
(FEWS) and well-being of FEW producers and consumers. We develop a new
integrated modeling framework that accounts for individual land use and
management decisions, regional demands for land, energy and water resources, and
water quality and greenhouse gas emissions impacts. We apply the model to a
five-state Great Lakes region: Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Ohio, and Wisconsin
and evaluate the implications of varying future deglobalization scenarios and
policies for regional FEWS sustainability and societal well-being. Local and
regional stakeholders are engaged throughout the research process via a
participatory modeling approach to guide model specification, develop future
scenarios, and identify sustainability metrics. The research results are used to
guide discussion of potential Great Lakes regional futures with policymakers and
other stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The modeling framework builds from a
Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium model that accounts for both the time
evolution of key resource stocks and the behavioral dynamics of individuals. The
model quantifies the effects of uncertain future changes in environmental,
economic, or policy conditions at national and global scales on the regional
production of food and energy services that use land, water, and energy
resources and that depend on farmer, land use, and watershed heterogeneity. We
account for these local heterogeneities using individual farmer behavioral and
spatially explicit land data from the Maumee River basin. By creating a dynamic
stochastic integrated modeling framework that also accounts for individual
decision making and spatial land use-watershed heterogeneity, this research
advances the integrated modeling of regional FEWS. The research team also
devises a novel approach to sustainability assessment that builds on the unique
features of the Dynamic Regional Food, Energy, Water Systems modeling framework
to identify policies that are robust in achieving desirable outcomes under a
range of uncertainty conditions. The participatory modeling approach with
stakeholders improves model validity and generates innovations in how scientific
knowledge is created, disseminated, and applied to the management of regional
FEWS with specific application to the Great Lakes region.