* 1739795
* E2CDA: Type II: A new non-volatile electrochemical transistor as an artificial synapse: device scaling studies
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Alberto Salleo, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2020
* USD 210,087.00

One way to move computational power beyond the limits imposed by Moore's Law is
to build computer architectures that mimic the brain. Indeed the brain is able
to perform certain classes of complex computations, such as pattern recognition,
very efficiently and using low power in spite of its inherent low speed. A novel
device that exhibits some of the useful properties of the synapses found in the
brain, such as ultra low-power switching, is explored in this proposal. Its
working mechanism will be studied in detail and arrays of devices will be
fabricated and miniaturized in order to provide a first step towards brain-like
integrated circuits. Neuromorphic electronics, as these devices are often
called, are a growing area of interest, therefore the research developed in this
award has the potential to impact the future of the microelectronics industry
and to produce a workforce trained for this emerging area. Finally, the optical
properties of the device, which changes color upon operation, will allow to
develop an outreach activity connecting art and science with the ultimate goal
of attracting a more diverse student population to the area of materials science
of electronic devices.&lt;br/&gt;A new device based on polymeric semiconductors
that mimics the functions of synapses, called ENODe (electrochemical
neuromorphic organic device), will be studied. ENODes with ultra-low switching
energy (&lt;10 pJ), sub-mV switching voltage, retaining &gt;500 individual
states in a non-volatile fashion were demonstrated. The physical origin of such
low switching energies and voltages will be investigated with the goal of
optimizing the architecture of the ENODe. Furthermore, ENODes will be fabricated
with an array of different materials that may enable a higher level of
integration making use of solid-state technology to increase the switching speed
beyond 1 kHz into the MHz range. Finally, using the same process used in
traditional microelectronics, arrays of ENODes will be fabricated to test the
reproducibility and the scaling laws of these new devices.