* 1739835
* INFEWS/T1 Towards Resilient Food-Energy-Water Systems in Response to Drought Impacts and Socioeconomic Shocks
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Michael Hayes, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,547,959.00

Unless we fully understand how food, energy, and water (FEW) components are
interconnected and how humans interact with them, especially during times of
water shortage, these components will not be sustainable. The research supported
by this award seeks to advance the knowledge of how FEW components are
interconnected, interact, and operate in response to drought and economic
shocks, and how humans can utilize these components to meet their livelihood
demands in a sustainable way. Humans, exemplified in this project by New Mexico
(NM) residents, seek to meet their needs for food (e.g. agricultural products,
milk, and beef), energy (e.g. electric power, industry, and transportation), and
water (e.g. irrigation for agriculture, drinking water supplies, and food
processing). These components are strongly interconnected as water is needed for
food and energy production, energy is needed for food and water production, and
effective food production will reduce and allow efficient use of water and
energy. During periods of drought and high oil and gas prices, the competition
between food and energy sectors over water resources intensifies. Farmers and
ranchers must follow strategies that tend to reduce economic risks such as
reducing traditional water consumption such as by selling water rights to the
oil and gas industry. However, such strategies could result in reduction of food
production. The proposed research will have direct societal benefits by engaging
stakeholders and decision makers. Feedback from these activities will be used as
guidance to develop resource management tools that are tailored to societal
needs. Moreover, the proposed research activities will directly support
underrepresented minorities in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) as it will be conducted at New Mexico State University, which is a
minority serving-institution. Research fellowships will help graduate students
and post-doctoral fellows gain STEM research experience while supporting
research activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A knowledge gap exists due to
insufficient understanding of strongly interconnected FEW systems and their
ability to resiliently adapt to external stresses. Allocation of adequate
quantities or stocks between food, energy, and water systems in a meaningful and
resilient way goes beyond following simple and traditional socioeconomic
practices because these practices are not evaluated within the context of FEW
systems behavior and functionality. This research will develop tools to
evaluate, adequately allocate, and manage available resources within a resilient
FEW systems context that maintains responsiveness to drought and socioeconomic
shocks. The project will develop: a systems dynamics model to identify,
describe, and simulate linkages, stocks, and exchanges of fluxes between FEW
systems components; a framework for evaluating coupled drought impacts and
socioeconomic responses to shocks from oil and gas price fluctuations; and
statistical model and evaluation criteria based on thresholds of indicators of
FEW systems resiliency. These tools will account for human livelihood demands so
that it can be used by researchers, stakeholders, and decision makers to help
better understand the behavior of, and appropriately manage, FEW systems at any
given point in time. This research is unique as it will provide an improved
understanding of interconnected FEW systems by utilizing a systems dynamics
modeling approach. The proposed research will also advance the knowledge about
FEW systems by offering an explicit and quantitative description of linkages
between of FEW systems components and external stresses imposed by drought and
socioeconomic shocks for an improved and proper evaluation of FEW systems
resiliency. While developed for New Mexico, the findings and tools that will be
developed will also be applicable to other parts of the United States and the
world as they will be transferable and adaptable.