* 1739503
* CPS: TTP Option: Medium: Collaborative Research: Low-Cost, High-Throughput, Cyber-Physical Synthesis of Encrypted DNA
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Mohammad Al Faruque, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 09/30/2022
* USD 357,923.00

The project will research a new process for manufacturing large-scale libraries
of synthetic DNA oligonucleotides, which are widely used in genomics research
and are now being considered as a medium for long-term archival data storage.
The current price for synthesizing DNA using microarray technology is 10 cents
per base, equivalent to about $3,500 per Megabyte of storage. This project
attempts to reduce the cost of DNA synthesis from 10 cents to around 0.007 cents
per base using computer-controlled, high-throughput sorting. The DNA synthesis
method will also include automatic data encryption. While the development of
conventional digital data storage technologies (e.g., hard disk, flash memory)
preceded the integration of encryption, pursuing encryption as part of the DNA
synthesis process ensures that future DNA-based archival storage modalities will
be robustly protected from tampering. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project builds
on systems engineering principles and the foundations of Cyber-Physical Systems
(CPS). DNA will be synthesized on a laser-light activated microtransponder chip
(p-Chip) that transmits a unique ID by radio frequency (RF) or optical
signaling, and can be used as a solid-phase support for DNA synthesis. Of
particular importance is the design of a high-throughput microfluidic
sorter/manifold, that can rapidly sort p-Chips in real-time, delivering them to
reservoirs which apply the appropriate DNA chemistry to synthesize and append
the next oligonucleotide to the sequence being grown on each p-Chip. Three
12-inch silicon production wafers carry enough p-Chips to synthesize a library
of 5,000,000 unique DNA sequences, or a genome of 300,000,000 base pairs.
p-Chips are chemically inert, compatible with DNA synthesis, and dense enough to
allow high-speed mechanical separation. The intellectual significance of the
work involves: (1) investigation of fluid modeling algorithms for p-Chips
flowing through the high-speed microfluidic p-Chip sorter/manifold, including
the needed corrections to the computational fluid flow models produced by
commercial software, (2) investigation of a co-design process for fluidic CPS
and its application to the creation of a sorter/manifold for current-generation
(500 x 500 x 100 cubic micrometers) and next-generation (50 x 50 x 100 cubic
micrometers) p-Chips, (3) real time software and/or Field Programmable Gate
Array (FPGA) control for the sorter/manifold to enable ultra-high throughput DNA
synthesis, (4) support for encrypted DNA synthesis, and (5) integration of the
sorter/manifold and control mechanism into a commercial DNA synthesizer.