* 1739188
* Collaborative Research: Impacts of Ion-Neutral Coupling on Ion Upflow and Outflow in the Polar Cusp
* GEO,AGS
* 01/11/2016,06/30/2020
* Binzheng Zhang, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 06/30/2020
* USD 122,543.00

Numerical modeling is one of the popular tools of modern space and atmospheric
sciences. Computer simulations and numerical experiments allow the investigation
various processes in the Earth environment and predict outcomes of these
processes. Comparison with actual observational data allows the tuning of
numerical models and improving this scientific tool. Many noted institutions are
working on creating and constantly improving these models allowing scientists to
utilize them for their research. Thus, the objective of the research will allow
better understanding of the solar wind - magnetosphere interaction and improving
global-scale coupled geospace models. This recommended collaborative effort is
to investigate the dynamics and features of the interaction between ions and
neutral atoms of the ionosphere and thermosphere during geomagnetic storms. The
research focuses on how this interaction affects the upflow and outflow of ions.
This investigation will consist of a series of numerical experiments applying
global-scale geospace numerical models. Coupled Magnetosphere Ionosphere
Thermosphere model (CMIT) will be used in combination with Ionosphere / Polar
Wind Model (IPWM) to analyze how thermospheric changes can affect the ion upflow
and outflow simulated in the IPWM. CMIT model is a combination of the Lyon-
Fedder-Mobarry (LFM) Magnetospheric MHD model, the Magnetosphere Ionosphere
Exchange (MIX) model of high-latitude electrodynamics, and the Thermosphere
Ionosphere Electrodynamics General Circulation Model (TIEGCM). The research also
concentrates on studying how the solar wind features and dynamics affect the
ion-neutral interaction in the cusp and cleft and on finding specific
distinctive signatures of this coupling, which could be recognized by ground-
based instruments, for example, incoherent scatter radars at high latitudes.