* 1739328
* CPS: Small: Integrated Reconfigurable Control and Moving Target Defense for Secure Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Zhenkai Zhang, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2021
* USD 406,989.00

Cyber-physical systems (CPS) are engineered systems created as networks of
interacting physical and computational processes. Most modern products in major
industrial sectors, such as automotive, avionics, medical devices, and power
systems already are or rapidly becoming CPS driven by new requirements and
competitive pressures. However, in recent years, a number of successful cyber
attacks against CPS targets, some of which have even caused severe physical
damage, have demonstrated that security and resilience of CPS is a very critical
problem, and that new methods and technologies are required to build dependable
systems. Modern automotive vehicles, for example, employ sensors such as laser
range finders and cameras, GPS and inertial measurement units, on-board
computing, and network connections all of which contribute to vulnerabilities
that can be exploited for deploying attacks with possibly catastrophic
consequences. Securing such systems requires that potential points of compromise
and vehicle-related data are protected. In order to fulfill the great promise of
CPS technologies such as autonomous vehicles and realize the potential
technological, economic, and societal impact, it is necessary to develop
principles and methods that ensure the development of CPS capable of functioning
dependably, safely, and securely. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In view of these
challenges, the project develops an approach for integration of reconfigurable
control software design and moving target defense for CPS. The main idea is to
improve CPS security by making the attack surface dynamic and unpredictable
while ensuring safe behavior and correct functionality of the overall system.
The proposed energy-based control design approach generates multiple
alternatives of the software application that are robust to performance
variability and uncertainty. A runtime environment is designed to implement
instruction set randomization, address space randomization, and data space
randomization. The heart of the runtime environment is a configuration manager
that can modify the software configuration, either proactively or reactively
upon detection of attacks, while preserving the functionality and ensuring
stable and safe CPS behavior. By changing the control software on-the-fly, the
approach creates a cyber moving target and raises significantly the cost for a
successful attack without impacting the essential behavior and functionality.
Demonstration and experimental evaluation will be performed using a hardware-in-
the-loop simulation testbed for automotive CPS.