* 1739259
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Trustworthy Cyber-Physical Additive Manufacturing with Untrusted Controllers
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Raheem Beyah, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2021
* USD 313,504.00

Additive manufacturing is finding increased application in industry. Safety-
critical products, such as medical prostheses and parts for aerospace and
automotive industries are being printed by additive manufacturing methods, but
there currently are no standard methods for verifying the integrity of the parts
that are produced. Trustworthy operation of industrial additive manufacturing
depends on secure embedded controllers that monitor and control the underlying
physical manufacturing processes. This research will investigate a perfectly
air-gapped intrusion detection solution for cyber-physical industrial additive
manufacturing infrastructures in which some of the controllers may be infected
by malicious code. The research will provide guidelines to: i) tie together
resilience solutions in software security, control system design, and signal
processing, and ii) incorporate reliable and practical cyber-physical attack
detection into real-world manufacturing. Educational and technology transfer
activities will address the need to improve the applicability of training
methods to ensuring the safety and cyber security of physical control systems.
Activities will involve The Society of Women Engineers and a large population of
underrepresented and low-income minorities with diverse cultural backgrounds and
improve the security of existing, real-world, additive manufacturing systems in
industry.

Next generation cyber-physical additive manufacturing enables advanced product
designs and capabilities, but increasingly relies on highly networked industrial
control systems that present opportunities for cyber attacks. The predominant
approach to defending against these threats relies on host-based intrusion
detectors that sit within the same target controllers, and hence are often the
first target of the controller attacks. This project will research contact-less
and perfectly air-gapped intrusion detection by analyzing physical side-channels
to protect against cyber-physical attacks. This solution requires no runtime
overhead on real-time controllers, requires minimal change to legacy systems,
and reliably identifies intrusions even if the target system is completely
compromised. The work will address solutions for: i) air-gapped intrusion
detection on cyber-physical systems while maintaining a perfect air gap, ii) a
comprehensive understanding of the types of side-channels available for analysis
in different industrial systems, and iii) empirical validation of the various
perfectly air-gapped intrusion detection tools, both independently and working
in tandem.