* 1739577
* CPS:Small: Imposing Recovery Period for Battery Health Monitoring, Prognosis, and Optimization
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Liang He, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

The prevalence of battery-powered systems such as electric vehicles,
smartphones, and IoT devices has made batteries crucial to everyone's daily life
and business. Battery health, however, degrades over time, not only decreasing
system reliability such as unexpected system shutoffs, but also causing
overheating/gassing which, in turn, increases safety risks such as thermal
runaway or even battery fire/explosion. To address these problems, we must
monitor, prognose, and optimize battery health throughout the physical system
life. However, existing battery management systems (BMSes) are usually treated
as complementary system components attached/embedded to/in batteries, and are
unable to make optimal health management decisions adaptively based on system
dynamics or user requirements. Our approach tightly integrates the cyber
(battery management software) and the physical (sensing of battery state) to
enable significant improvements in battery life and performance. The research,
outreach, and education activities of this project will have broader impacts on
the CPS research and industry communities, bridging the gap between them,
providing environment-friendly solutions, increasing the awareness of CPS, and
developing skilled human resources. It will also make significant economical and
environmental impacts by enabling longer battery life and improved performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop R-AWARE, a recovery period-
assisted battery health management that schedules system operation while
considering both system/user requirements and battery health. R-AWARE will
improve battery health via relaxation-aware battery scheduling of battery
charging/discharging, and recovery-based thermal control. It will advance the
science of CPS by uncovering a thorough understanding of battery recovery and
exploiting it via a recovery-aware scheduler during system operation.
Specifically, R-AWARE is grounded on a thorough understanding of the physical
recovery effects on battery health -- a new dimension for system optimization
existing BMSes fail to exploit. R-AWARE then takes a cyber-physical approach for
battery health management by adapting its decisions based on various physical
properties of batteries/systems/environment. Finally, R-AWARE improves battery
health by exploiting the opportunities offered by user behavior/requirements
without degrading user experience. A performance goal of the project is to
enable a 40% slowdown in battery health degradation.