* 1739551
* INFEWS/T2: Cyber-Based Decision Support Strategies to Achieve  Consensus for FEW System Sustainability using Incentive and Policy  Structures
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2024
* Ali Abbas, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,399,279.00

The Midwest is quite different from other parts of the country in that little to
no irrigation is required for farming. In fact, soils and topography in the
Midwest, and particularly Iowa, trend toward waterlogged conditions. Farmers
fertilize fields to maximize crop yield for both food and biofuel production,
but a mismatch in timing between periods of high drainage water flux and
nitrogen movement in early spring and crop uptake in the summer, results in
excess nitrogen being transported through waterways to the Gulf of Mexico,
causing detrimental environmental, societal and economic impacts. Driving much
of the decision-making at local levels are policies and incentives implemented
at higher levels, and vice versa, with no real understanding of the potential
unintended consequences. This project aims to enable understanding of the impact
of such policies and incentives on separate stakeholders associated with Food,
Energy, and Water (FEW) sectors, as well as overarching system stakeholders,
such as the federal government. More importantly, the research has the potential
to impact the ways in which decisions are made in and about FEW system so as to
ensure resilience and sustainability.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project focuses
on research questions pertaining to understanding the FEW inter-dependencies,
modeling the value statements of each FEW stakeholder, developing new multi-
attribute utility models to enable consensus building among FEW stakeholders,
enabling coordinated decision making through incentives and policies designed to
achieve the desired behaviors at the FEW system level, and developing
visualization and simulation-based decision support tools to support consensus
building of stakeholders using the methods developed.