* 1739012
* EXP: Linguistic Analysis and a Hybrid Human-Automatic Coach for Improving Math Identity
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Matthew Labrum, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2020
* USD 556,047.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
support envisioning the future of learning technologies and advance what we know
about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Cyberlearning
Exploration (EXP) Projects explore the viability of new kinds of learning
technologies by designing and building new kinds of learning technologies and
studying their possibilities for fostering learning and challenges to using them
effectively. This project addresses the effect of students' social identity on
learning, an important factor in math and science education. Specifically, it
will advance the scientific understanding of math identity (i.e. "I'm (not) a
math person") by studying the over 100,000 diverse students who use Reasoning
Mind, a blended learning system for K-8 mathematics with demonstrated results.
Reasoning Mind supports math identity with an innovative design that allows
students to email an animated character (aka the Genie) and receive a human-
crafted response. This study will show how math identity manifests and changes
during students' use of Reasoning Mind in order to inform software designers and
classroom teachers on best practices for encouraging math identity. This will
have the broader impact of strengthening our nation's ability to supply science
and technology fields with a well-trained workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study examines two components of math identity: self-efficacy and interest in
mathematics. Both self-efficacy and interest can be enhanced by curricula that
are individualized to appropriately challenge each student (a strength of
educational technology), but social stereotypes (i.e. "Girls aren't good in
math") may decrease math identity or otherwise interfere with its development.
This study investigates how educational technology can reverse these trends. In
the first phase of this study, a combination of survey methods, Natural Language
Processing (NLP), and Educational Data Mining (EDM) techniques will be used to
identify how poor and/or changing math identity emerges in the linguistic
patterns of student interaction with GenieMail (as well as in other parts of
Reasoning Mind). These findings will then be used to enhance GenieMail and other
instructional interactions with the Reasoning Mind system by creating a hybrid
human/AI system, with the goal of improving math identity across diverse
populations of students.