* 1739452
* CPS: TTP Option: Medium: Synthetic, Distributed Sensing, Soft and Modular Tissue (sTISSUE)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* James Humbert, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,250,000.00

The goal of this research is to gain a fundamental understanding of the
integrated actuation, embedded sensing, reactive control, and distributed
control needs of a cyber-physical, synthetic, distributed sensing, soft and
modular tissue (sTISSUE). Realizing this cyber-physical, physiological testbed
will enable surgically relevant tasks, procedures, and devices to be much more
refined ahead of animal testing, which can be dramatically reduced with such
high-fidelity simulators. Furthermore, such simulators could open an entirely
new approach to medical resident training that could not only improve surgical
performance skills, but also establish a new paradigm in patient-specific
surgical practice before the actual procedure. The proposed strategy will also
harness the excitement surrounding autonomous systems, robotic control, and
embedded sensing, and leverage it with the investigators' infrastructure for
education innovation and outreach to provide new, inspirational educational
experiences for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program will
formulate the techniques required for a synthetic tissue to autonomously sense
and react to external stimuli, thereby replicating smooth muscle's sense and
actuation capability. In essence, an autonomous tissue will be created that
simulates in vivo behavior, while maintaining scalability and modularity. The
intellectual merit of this research lies in 1) addressing current shortcomings
in embedded sensing and actuation that ensure modularity and distributed
control, 2) modeling the dynamics of, and creating global and distributed
control strategies that account for, the unconventional in vivo environment
requirements, and 3) enabling a paradigm-altering platform that will allow
technology developers to both quickly and reliably apply this sTISSUE to
numerous applications. More broadly, this research will establish a crucial body
of knowledge needed for the design of synthetic tissue materials that integrate
sensing, actuation, computation, and control. While the proposed approach
includes the goal to transition the fundamental research into a gastrointestinal
simulator, numerous other applications in the field of medicine and co-robotics
exist. Finally, the proposed research in modularity and scalability design can
broadly impact a number of other areas that would benefit from the developed
novel methodologies in integrated sensing, actuation, computation and control.