* 1739869
* CPS: TTP Option: Medium: Identifying, Characterizing, and Shaping Multi-Scale Cyber-Human Interactions in Mixed Autonomous/Conventional Vehicle Traffic
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Dan Negrut, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,200,000.00

The promise of intelligent transportation systems is safety, mobility, and
efficiencies well beyond current technologies. Yet, transportation engineers and
planners must anticipate future transportation needs for which the enabling
technologies are rapidly evolving while the change-over from old to new
transportation technologies will take decades. This project seeks to understand
the impact of these trends for transportation engineering, offer approaches for
effective shared control between autonomous vehicles and drivers, and provide
insight into strategies to realize the promise of intelligent transportation
systems. The approach to studying traffic uses driving simulators, built on a
high-performance computing architecture, that enables high-resolution, physics-
based, realistic, interactive simulations, necessary for detailed modeling of
vehicles and drivers under changing traffic conditions and various assumptions
on autonomy, control, and connectedness, and for monitoring human driving
behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project identifies, characterizes, and
shapes human cyber-physical interactions, bound to emerge in future mixed
autonomous and conventional vehicle traffic. Its aims are to: (1) better
understand human-cyber-physical interactions in mixed traffic, particularly
driver trust in vehicle automation; (2) develop analytical and computational
methods to assess the impacts on traffic capacity and regime transition for
scenarios in which a driver switches from autonomous vehicle mode to
conventional vehicle mode (e.g., loss of trust in automation scenarios); and (3)
develop engineering solutions to enhance cyber-human interactions and traffic
flow. The research embraces a multi-scale analysis approach anchored in human
behavior analysis and interface design, modeling of mixed traffic and vehicle
control, and system-level analysis of interdependency among human, vehicles, and
traffic. Understanding of human cyber-physical interactions through this project
will enable better future designs of autonomous vehicles and the ways in which
humans interact with these evolving systems safely and
dependably.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.