* 1739095
* CAREER: Creation, Visualization, and Mining of Domain Textual Graphs: Integrating Domain Knowledge and Human Intelligence
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Wei Jin, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 390,205.00

It is understood that textual information is growing at an astounding pace,
creating an enormous challenge for analysts trying to discover valuable
information that is buried within. For example, new non-trivial trends,
patterns, and associations among entities of interest, such as associations
between genes, proteins and diseases, and the connections between different
places or the commonalities of people, are such forms of underlying knowledge.
The goal of this research is to explore automated solutions for sifting through
these extensive document collections to detect interesting links and hidden
information that connect facts, propositions or hypotheses. In addition, a more
comprehensive view of discovered knowledge will be provided by generating an in-
depth and concise cross-document summary explaining the underlying meaning of
each connection, along with relevant links and explanations acquired from the
Wikipedia knowledge base, which serves as the primary means of complementing or
enhancing existing information in text collections. The project will impact many
areas, such as homeland security, aviation safety, biomedical and healthcare
applications. The techniques will have the potential to expose new information
available in large document collections and to provide a multi-view perspective
of discovered hypotheses by integrating domain knowledge and relevant
information acquired from Wikipedia. Research-based education and training
opportunities will be offered by this project to prepare students at all levels
in information analysis and discovery. Specific attention will also be paid to
promoting the participation of underrepresented groups in the research
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the exploration of a novel
textual knowledge representation, integration, and mining framework that will
cover the following areas: (i) automatic construction of graphical frameworks
for entity relationship discovery, a new representation conducive to fine-
grained information search and discovery; (ii) effective integration of
information from multiple sources, including knowledge contained in
representative data collections, domain-specific knowledge (e.g., domain
ontologies), and world knowledge (e.g., lexical resources such as WordNet and
large-scale knowledge repositories such as Wikipedia); (iii) new discovery
algorithms and tools that identify hidden connections among entities; (iv)
enhancement of domain modeling through enabling automatic ontology-driven
scenario detection and topic-level modeling; and (v) interactive visualization
tools for the graphical framework and discovered hypotheses. This research
proposes that next-generation search tools require the capability of integrating
information from multiple interrelated units and combining various evidence
sources,Â which will make fundamental advances in the current state of the art
for information search and discovery. A combination of techniques in Natural
Language Processing (NLP), Information Extraction (IE), Information Retrieval
(IR), Data Mining, Machine Learning, and Semantic Web will be explored to attack
critical information discovery problems. For further information see the project
web site: http://www.cs.ndsu.nodak.edu/~wjin/WSD-RelMiner.