* 1739355
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Demand Response &amp; Workload Management for Data Centers with Increased Renewable Penetration
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Steven Low, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2020
* USD 250,000.00

The confluence of two powerful global trends, (1) the rapid growth of cloud
computing and data centers with skyrocketing energy consumption, and (2) the
accelerating penetration of renewable energy sources, is creating both severe
challenges and tremendous opportunities. The fast growing renewable generation
puts forth great operational challenges since they will cause large, frequent,
and random fluctuations in supply. Data centers, on the other hand, offer large
flexible loads in the grid. Leveraging this flexibility, this project will
develop fundamental theories and algorithms for sustainable data centers with a
dual goal of improving data center energy efficiency and accelerating the
integration of renewables in the grid via data center demand response (DR) and
workload management. Specifically, the research findings will shed light on data
center demand response while maintaining their performance, which will help data
centers to decide how to participate in power market programs. Further, the
success of data center demand response will help increase renewable energy
integration and reduce the carbon footprint of data centers, contributing to
global sustainability. The PIs will leverage fruitful collaboration to
eventually bring the research to bear on ongoing industry standardization and
development efforts. The PIs teach courses spanning networks, games, smart grid
and optimization, and are strongly committed to promoting diversity by providing
research opportunities to underrepresented students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Built
on the PIs expertise on data centers and the smart grid, this project takes an
interdisciplinary approach to develop fundamental theories and algorithms for
sustainable data centers. The research tasks are organized under two well-
coordinated thrusts, namely agile data center DR and adaptive workload
management. The strategies and decisions of data center DR will be made based on
the workload management algorithms that balance quality of service and energy
efficiency and determine the supply functions. The workload management
algorithms will optimize quality of service under the electric load constraints
imposed by DR accordingly. This project will make three unique contributions:
(1) new market programs with strategic participation of data centers in DR,
instead of passive price takers, (2) fundamental understanding of the impacts of
power network constraints on data center DR and new distributed algorithms for
solving optimal power flow with stochastic renewable supplies, and (3) high-
performance dynamic server provisioning and load balancing algorithms for large
scale data centers under time-varying and stochastic electric load constraints
and on-site renewable generation.