* 1739823
* INFEWS/T2: Sustainable Agriculture in the Nexus of Food, Energy, Water and Nutrient on National and Global Scales
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Cathlyn Davis, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,252,467.00

To meet the growing global demand for food and bioenergy, agricultural
production must nearly double by 2050, placing additional pressures on land and
water resources. How and where to increase agricultural production is critical
for the sustainability and resilience of food and energy supply, but is poorly
understood. Therefore, we will synthesize multidisciplinary data and develop
models to assist decision making on agricultural intensification strategies,
including technology advancement and international trade. This project will
advance the knowledge in the food-energy-water system regarding sustainable and
resilient agricultural production on national to global scales, while providing
timely inputs to ongoing changes in national policies regarding agriculture,
trade, environment, and national security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
goal of this project is to develop and evaluate strategies on national and
global scales that increase agricultural production sustainably with an
integrated cyber-human-physical system. To achieve this goal, the project will:
1) develop an indicator system and a database to measure several aspects of
sustainability and resilience of agricultural production; 2) analyze and model
the impacts of technologies and management practices, resource inputs, and
climate on yield; 3) improve the representation of crop management in the Global
Change Assessment Model to project the impacts of agricultural intensification;
4) develop a decision-support tool to optimize domestic intensification and
international trade for sustainable agricultural production; and 5) pilot a
cross-cultural learning exchange program to engage American and Chinese high
schools in system thinking in the context of agriculture sustainability.