* 1739315
* CPS: Medium: Enabling Real-time Dynamic Control and Adaptation of Networked Robots in Resource-constrained and Uncertain Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Jingang Yi, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,015,904.00

Near-real-time water-quality monitoring in rivers, lakes, and water reservoirs
of different physical variables is critical to prevent contaminated water from
reaching the civilian population and to deploy timely solutions, or at least to
issue early warnings so as to prevent damage to human and aquatic life. In order
to make optimal decisions and "close the loop" promptly, it is necessary to
collect, aggregate, and process water data in real time. Therefore, the goal of
this project is to design a Cyber Physical System (CPS) where drones such as the
Rutgers multi-medium Naviator, a Hybrid Unmanned Air/Underwater Vehicle
(HUA/UV), and autonomous underwater robots (e.g., modified BlueROVs) can (i)
first identify Regions of Interest (RoIs) and take measurements and well as, if
needed, collect biosamples from them; (ii) and then, through collaborative
information fusion and integration, perform in-situ transformation of these
measurements/raw data into valuable information and, finally, into knowledge. To
achieve the above goal, this project will need to solve the problem of
uncertainties that arise in in-situ processing of data from sensors in any CPS.
This project will provide greater autonomy and cooperation in CPSs and, at the
same time, will improve scalability, reliability, and timeliness in comparison
to traditional sensing systems. The challenges to achieve dynamic collaboration
between local and cloud resources will be handled in Task 1, in which novel
adaptive-sampling solutions that minimize the sampling cost of a RoI (in terms
of time or energy expenditure) will also be developed. In Task 2, novel
solutions will be designed to handle model uncertainties in the local resources
due to the unpredictable behavior of computational models to input data and
resources' availability. In Task 3, the project aims at developing a biosampler,
i.e., "lab-on-robot", that uses in-situ measurements and communicates with the
cloud resources to give results in real time on the water quality; also, new
solutions to optimize the Naviator's current hybrid air/water multirotor
platform/propulsion system will be designed in order for it to be able to carry
and perform testing with the biosampler while also increasing its endurance.
Finally, in Task 4, integrated field testing on the Raritan River, NJ, will be
performed so as to validate the algorithms as well as to analyze their
scalability (from an economical and feasibility perspective) and
confidence/accuracy performance. Specifically, the Naviators will identify the
RoIs via multimodal operations, i.e., in water and air; and then the BlueROVs
(which, during the course of the project, will be made autonomous and will be
modified to carry on-board water-quality sensors) will perform underwater
adaptive sampling in each of those RoIs using the algorithms designed in Task
1.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of broader impacts, the collaboration between
cloud and local resources can benefit any CPS in the following ways: (i)
outsourcing computation to the cloud will allow resource-constrained vehicles
(in terms of computational capability) to meet mission deadlines, and (ii) using
clouds comes at a price, hence, in order to accomplish the mission goals within
budget constraints, the computational tasks composing a workflow should be
migrated from the local network to the cloud only when the former does not have
enough computational resources to execute successfully the tasks (outbursting).
In terms of outreach, this project will develop a pipeline of diverse and
computer literate engineers who will be able to solve self-management CPS
problems. The PIs will 1) create a course on real-time in-situ distributed
computing (for graduate computer engineering and undergraduate non-engineering
majors); 2) develop teaching modules for incorporation into key high-school
activities; 3) leverage existing minority student outreach programs and networks
at Rutgers; 4) incorporate exchange programs and team-teaching approaches; and
5) utilize distributed education technologies with application to robotics and
networking. Our electrical/computer and mechanical engineering team has the
theoretical and system-level skills, cross-disciplinary expertise, as well as a
verifiable history of fruitful collaboration to exploit fully this project's
research and educational potential.