* 1739723
* CPS: Small: Scaling Cyber-Physical Systems to the Low-Power Internet of Things
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Fadel Adib, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2020
* USD 338,586.00

Battery-free sensors are annually attached to billions of items including
pharmaceutical drugs, clothes, and manufacturing parts. The fundamental
challenge with these sensors is that they are only reliable at short distances.
As a result, today's systems for communicating with and localizing battery-free
sensors are crippled by the limited range. This research proposes a cyber-
physical system architecture that can overcome this challenge to enable sensing,
communicating with, and localizing these sensors at an unprecedented scale. In
doing so, the research promises to address multi-billion-dollar challenges
facing multiple industries today in shrinkage, inventory control, and finding
misplaced items. It can also drastically reduce energy consumption in the
internet-of-things by demonstrating how to boost the communication range of
battery-free sensors. The research results will be disseminated by publishing in
academic venues, working closely with industry, public outreach initiatives,
interdisciplinary classes, and releasing software libraries and hardware
schematics to the research community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Realizing this
vision requires addressing challenges along three fronts: power, accuracy, and
interference. First, the low-power nature of battery-free sensors fundamentally
limits their communication range to within tens of centimeters to few meters.
Second, mapping these sensors to the physical world not only requires the
ability to detect them but also to accurately localize them. Finally, cyber-
physical systems at scale need to manage wireless interference from thousands or
tens of thousands of sensors. The proposal pioneers a cyber-physical system that
combines the agility of drones with the sensing capabilities of radio signals to
address these challenges. Technically, it introduces a new breed of
communication relays, designed particularly for cyber-physical systems, and
describes the algorithms that enable localization, sensing, and navigation
through drone-mounted relays. The resulting system will be evaluated empirically
via software-hardware implementation and real-world deployment.