* 1739884
* INFEWS/T3: Closing the Loop: An Integrated, Tunable, and Sustainable Management System for Improved Energy, Nutrient, and Water Recovery from Biowastes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2017,02/28/2022
* Spyros Pavlostathis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 02/28/2022
* USD 2,430,953.00

Phosphorus is an element that, along with nitrogen and potassium, has enabled
large increases in food production in the U.S. and globally. Phosphorus is mined
from natural deposits, but these deposits are diminishing. Contemporary reports
indicate that there is a pending phosphorus crisis, as global supplies dwindle
and demand for food increases. Currently, the utilization of phosphorus for
fertilizer is energy intensive and expensive. Phosphorus supply is limited, and
its recovery from food and other wastes and water bodies is virtually non-
existent. Traditionally, agricultural production has been optimized with little
or no consideration of the losses of phosphorus beyond its use in producing
crops. This practice leads to large energy needs for fertilizer production and
for treatment of phosphorus waste in agricultural run-off, and food and animal
wastes. The other side to this problem is that some phosphorus applied to
agricultural fields is lost to lakes and rivers causing considerable
environmental damage. These phosphorus issues significantly influence our food,
energy, and water (FEW) systems. Two key approaches to achieve sustainable
phosphorus management are agriculture fertilization systems that more
efficiently use phosphorous for plant growth and systems that recover phosphorus
from food and animal wastes and from biowastes in contaminated water.
Unfortunately, we do not have suitable recovery systems due to technological
limitations and economic and infrastructure constraints. This project aims to
develop an integrated and sustainable management structure that can
simultaneously address the major technical challenges in biowaste management and
agriculture fertilization systems. This management structure will enable
recovery of phosphorous, energy, and water, thus increasing resource use
efficiency and providing a new source of phosphorus for agricultural food
production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates novel technologies in
multiple fields, including hydrothermal treatment, anaerobic digestion, membrane
distillation, struvite production, and magnetic nanoparticle separation to
collect and recycle more phosphorous as struvite. The various systems are being
analyzed and optimized to fit a number of waste-stream settings in order to
reduce overall energy input. This approach offers many benefits such as reduced
waste volume, decontamination of pathogens, as well as the production of clean
water, energy, and slow release fertilizers. The method is also sufficiently
flexible to accommodate different biowaste feedstocks and tunable to produce
different recycled nutrient, energy, and water products, sustainable with low
resource and energy input, and scalable to suit different levels of management
needs. This system is being developed and tested at bench scale, up-scaled to
prototype level, and optimized through systems modeling. Crop utilization
efficiency and soil retention of the produced struvite fertilizers are being
evaluated by growing corn, soybean, and wheat in both potted greenhouse
experiments and in field trials. In order to identify the costs and benefits of
these combined waste and fertilization management techniques, the researchers
are performing a life cycle assessment (LCA) of the phosphorous removed from the
various waste streams and recycled for agricultural applications. This analysis
includes an evaluation of the phosphorous recovery and recycling efficiency,
examination of the overall energy balance of the systems, a cost estimation of
the systems, and an environmental assessment of the system. The project is
combining student and postdoctoral researcher training with undergraduate
education and promoting STEM research in underrepresented groups and K-12
education on integrated approaches to promote sustainable communities. Finally,
the project is promoting awareness, knowledge, and practice of "Sustainability
at the FEW Nexus" to a broad range of audiences including both academic and
public sectors.