* 1739146
* JST-NSF-DFG-RCN Workshop on Data-driven Real-time Control for Distributed Energy Management, Tokyo, Japan, June 11-14, 2017
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Sairaj Dhople, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 04/30/2018
* USD 45,000.00

The bulk power network is widely regarded as one of the most complex engineered
systems. With the growing integration of distributed energy resources and the
modernization of computing and communication systems, the complexity of
interactions between constituent cyber and physical layers of the power system
has vastly increased. Nevertheless, it is widely accepted that the systematic
utilization of large data sets to inform distributed decision making can improve
operational efficiency, power quality, and availability. Along these lines, this
workshop will outline the foundational science for data-driven real-time control
of distributed energy management systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will
bring together stakeholders with domain expertise in power systems and broader
interests in related areas of data science, nonlinear systems, optimization,
control theory, and circuit theory to address data-driven real-time control for
next-generation power networks. Synthesis of distributed and decentralized
control and optimization tasks while acknowledging large data streams is indeed
a challenging task, and calls for complementary expertise in broad system-
theoretic areas. Engagement with participants from Japan, Germany, and Norway
will be critical, and it is anticipated that the workshop will highlight
cutting-edge NSF-funded research on a truly international scale, and connect
researchers from Germany, Japan, and Norway to those in the US towards realizing
sustainable collaborative initiatives.