* 1739423
* SI2-SSE: A parallel computing framework for large-scale real-space and real-time TDDFT excited-states calculations
* CSE,OAC
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2022
* Eric Polizzi, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 01/31/2022
* USD 485,854.00

The ability to control electronic materials and understand their properties has
been a driving force for technological breakthroughs. The technology for
electronic devices has been on a rapidly rising trajectory since the 1960s with
the ability to fabricate ever smaller silicon transistors (`Moore's Law'), with
today's device sizes in the nanometer range. With the rise of nanotechnology,
atom-by-atom quantum simulations of emerging materials are becoming increasingly
important to reliably supplement the current experimental investigations.
Modeling and simulations of atomic systems are essential to assist the everyday
work of numerous engineers and scientists and can universally impact a wide
range of disciplines (engineering, physics, chemistry, and biology) spanning the
technological fields of computing, sensing and energy. This project will
accelerate the development of quantum technologies and their impacts in the
global economy. A new software will be produced to help capture many fundamental
quantum effects which are increasingly important in nanotechnology for exploring
and prototyping new revolutionary electronic materials and
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at developing and offering a new
open source software, NESSIE, that can address the modern challenges encountered
in material and device nano-engineering applications. NESSIE will use the most
cost-effective method to perform excited states calculations, the time-dependent
density functional theory (TDDFT), in conjunction with a novel combination of
numerical algorithms and physical and mathematical modeling techniques. NESSIE
will be capable of performing excited-state TDDFT calculations using full-
potential (all-electron) in real-space (using finite element) and real-time. A
new hierarchical parallelization strategy will allow NESSIE to tackle
unprecedented atomistic finite size systems at this level of theory. The outcome
of this project will open new perspectives for addressing the numerical
challenges in real-time TDDFT excited-states calculations to operate the full
range of electronic spectroscopy, and study the nanoscopic many-body effects in
arbitrary complex molecules and very large-scale finite-size nanostructures. It
is expected that the NESSIE software and associated numerical components will
become a new valuable new tool for the scientific community, that could be
applied to investigate the fundamental electronic properties of numerous
nanostructured materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the
Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer &amp;
Information Science and Engineering and the Division of Materials Research in
the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences.