* 1739092
* RESEARCH-PGR: Genomic and Epigenomic Analyses of Fiber Development in Allotetraploid Cottons
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Jane Grimwood, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2022
* USD 2,176,787.00

Cotton is the largest source of renewable textile fiber and the U.S.A. is the
world's top exporter of cotton, generating ~200,000 domestic jobs. Improving
cotton production will help provide U.S. jobs, sustainable agriculture, and
adaptation to a changing climate. Traditional breeding efforts have given rise
to several types of economically valuable cotton strains such as American and
Egyptian cotton. These two strains of cotton were independently formed by the
combination of two wild species, yielding cotton strains with four sets of
chromosomes (two from each parent). This doubling of chromosomes is known as
polyploidy, and this project is focused on understanding how polyploidy shapes
how genes are used to generate improved strains of cotton. This project
leverages and develops cutting edge technologies in DNA sequencing to understand
polyploidy. In addition, this project produces new biological materials for
cotton breeding and improvement. The research goals are augmented by promoting
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) education in the
Mississippi Delta through active collaborations with two Historically Black
Colleges and Universities. These educational activities train college students
and K-12 teachers in cutting-edge plant biotechnology techniques, knowledge, and
skills to advance their careers and use in their
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cotton is an excellent model system not only
for understanding cell differentiation, elongation, and cellulose biosynthesis,
but also for elucidating polyploid genome evolution and crop domestication.
Upland cotton (Gossypium hirsutum L.) and Pima cotton (Gossypium barbadense L.)
were independently domesticated from two of five or more allotetraploid species
that arose from interspecific hybridization between diploid cotton species. It
is important to understand how polyploidy-induced changes in genome structure
and organization, epigenetic modifications, and gene expression have enabled
selection and domestication of wild allotetraploids for worldwide cotton
production. The project goal is to develop high-quality genomic and epigenomic
resources for cotton improvement. Comparative analyses of sequence features and
gene expression diversity among domesticated and wild tetraploid and diploid
relatives will reveal genomic signatures for selection and domestication of
agronomic traits, including fiber yield and quality and adaptation to the
environments. Laser-capture microdissection and single-cell approaches will be
used to reveal genomic and epigenomic networks during the transition from
protodermal to fiber cells. Functions of the selected candidate genes for fiber
development and epigenetic pathways will be determined using virus-induced gene
silencing and CRISPR/cas9 gene-editing tools. Genomic sequences and epigenetic
resources will be released to public data depositories, including National
Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI), Phytozome, and CottonGen. Plant
materials including chromosome substitution lines and transgenic cotton will be
available for the cotton breeding community. The methods, principles and
resources being developed from this project will also advance the research on
other polyploid crops such as wheat and canola.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.