* 1739696
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research:  Cyber-Enabled Online Quality Assurance for Scalable Additive Bio-Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Prahalada Rao, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 01/31/2023
* USD 216,000.00

Close to one million lives could be saved each year in the United States alone
by organ transplantation if a sufficient number of organs were available,
potentially preventing 35% of all deaths in the nation. In contrast, due to
critical shortages of organs, only about 28,000 organ transplants are performed
each year, with a waiting list of 120,000 people. A promising potential solution
to this shortage is the high quality and production-scale 3D printing of human
organs by bio-additive manufacturing (Bio-AM). However, as articulated in the
2016 NSF workshop on Additive Manufacturing for Healthcare, the current use of
Bio-AM is impeded by poor organ quality, resulting in part from inadequate
process monitoring and lack of integrated process control strategies. As a
result, despite enormous strides, it is still not possible to scale Bio-AM to
the stringent quality standards mandated for organ transplants. This research
will address the compelling need to incorporate advanced process models into
sensor-based process control strategies needed to prevent cell damage, decrease
cell placement errors, and improve tissue functioning in Bio-AM. If successful
methods for reliable, high-volume, high-quality, and safe Bio-AM can be
realized, it will have profound socioeconomic benefits in terms of public
health, medical safety, and drug discovery. The project will engage grade 6-12
STEM teachers through the Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) Innovation-
based Manufacturing Program by providing opportunities for teachers to engage in
cutting edge research in Bio-AM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project
is to reliably produce viable 3D printed biological constructs (mini-tissues).
The central approach is to couple in-situ heterogeneous sensor-based monitoring
and real-time closed-loop process control approaches for ensuring the reliable
printing of biological constructs. The work involves the following four
objectives: (1) using experimentation and modeling to understand the causal
effect of process-material interactions on specific Bio-AM defects, (2)
employing sensors to detect incipient defects during printing, (3) diagnosing
the root causes of detected defects by analyzing sensor data using real-time
decision-theoretic models, and (4) preventing propagation of defects through
closed-loop process control. The investigation will contribute: (1) fundamental
understanding of the causal bio-physical process interactions that govern the
quality of printed biological tissue constructs through empirical investigation
and sensor-based data analytics, (2) new mathematical models for predicting the
layer quality by taking into consideration the complex and dynamic tissue
maturation phenomena, (3) real-time and computationally efficient decision-
making for accurate classification of defects from sensor data, and (4) a two-
stage, real-time, closed-loop quality control approach for preventing
propagation of defects by executing smart corrective actions during the printing
process.