* 1739032
* CICI: CE: Implementing CYBEX-P: Helping Organizations to Share with Privacy Preservation
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Mehmet Gunes, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,018,067.00

In response to the increasing number of attacks on cyberspace, public and
private organizations are encouraged to share their cyber-threat information and
data with each other. Although there are long-term interests in sharing security
related information, it places organizations at risk regarding the protection of
their data and exposure of other vulnerabilities. This project designs, develops
and implements a CYBersecurity information EXchange with Privacy (CYBEX-P)
platform using trusted computing paradigms and privacy-preserving information
sharing mechanisms for cybersecurity enhancement and development of a robust
cyberinfrastructure. The outcome of this project has a broader impact on the
development of a novel cybersecurity information-sharing platform with privacy
preservation and a robust governance structure. The project also has direct
impact on undergraduate and graduate student education and training, emphasizing
the engineering development of minorities and women, by providing a real-world
platform for investigation and management of cyber threats.

Envisioning that effective and privacy-preserving threat intelligence sharing
can be instrumental for auditing the state of the threat landscape and helping
to predict and prevent major cyber-attacks, this project provides a service for
structured information exchange. The CYBEX-P platform provides valuable
measurable information about the security status of systems and devices together
with data about incidents stemming from cyber-attacks. To develop and implement
such an environment across statewide organizations, then across the nation, this
research project incorporates blind processing, privacy preservation and
integrity of shared incident data by ensuring that only trusted processes access
the raw data and only anonymized data are shared with other operators. Blind
processing enables the advantages of additional information exchange while
respecting organizational constraints and trust boundaries. This research also
establishes a flexible governance framework that includes both policies and
procedures to protect the data and provide all customers with the tools to
demonstrate they are complying with both regulatory and internal data governance
requirements. Specifically, the outcomes of the project demonstrate: i) CYBEX-P
infrastructure development with affordable scalability, secure data exchange,
and analytic components, ii) Privacy-preserving information sharing via blind
processing and anonymization, and an iii) CYBEX-P governance framework.