* 1739724
* INFEWS/T1: Intensification in the world's largest agricultural frontier: Integrating food production, water use, energy demand, and environmental integrity in a changing climate
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Christopher Neill, Woodwell Climate Research Center, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 2,430,984.00

During the last 20 years Brazil became a major producer and exporter of soybeans
and corn mainly by expanding cropping into its Amazon rainforest and savanna
woodlands. Brazil is now second only to the United States and its goal is to
double agricultural production to meet increasing global demands. This project
investigates how water and energy may be affected by, and potentially limit,
further agricultural intensification. The project will consist of three main
parts. The first part will be farm-scale field experiments to evaluate how more
intensive crop management influences emissions of greenhouse gases from soils,
water quality and habitats in streams, and demands for energy. The second part
will investigate how the distributions of crops within this agricultural
frontier region respond to farm management decisions, government policies,
global greenhouse gas concentrations, and climate. The final part will use
computer models to investigate the potential responses of the food production
system, the water cycle, and energy use and demand to changing climate and
different potential pathways of agricultural intensification. This proposal
addresses the globally important issue of how to conserve the rich biodiversity
of Amazon forests and Cerrado woodlands, maintain a stable climate, and
contribute to global food security. It will provide new knowledge about the
implications of the intensification of soybeans and other crops for regional
climate, the quality of water and stream habitats in tropical watersheds, and
energy production. Results will be transmitted to policymakers and producers in
Brazil through direct communication with state and federal government agencies;
a 10-week immersion Policy Lab in which US and Brazilian graduate students will
use science from this project to create policy papers; and direct interactions
with a major Brazilian soybean producing company to study crop management
options.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project evaluates the tradeoffs
inherent in balancing increased food production ? and its associated demands for
water, energy, and land ? with the conservation of the Amazon and Cerrado
environments of Brazil, the Earth?s largest remaining tropical forests and
woodlands. The overarching question is whether this balance can be achieved
through rapid and sustained intensification of food production on already
cleared lands. Achieving this transition, while avoiding the environmental costs
associated with intensive agriculture in other regions, and minimizing
vulnerability to a changing climate, is one of the world?s greatest food, water,
and energy challenges. This project will develop new understanding of how
increased food production will impact and depend upon water, nutrient, and
energy. It will advance the development of state-of-the art prognostic
computational models of tropical meteorology, ecology, hydrology, and cropping
to analyze the impacts of deforestation, agricultural intensification, and
increasing greenhouse gasses on mesoscale convection, total and seasonal
rainfall, land surface, forest health, and crop production temperature. It will
lead to more accurate predictions of the downstream effects of intensive
agriculture that will be relevant across tropical South America where the least
information is available and greatest agricultural land transformations on Earth
now occur. This project will contribute to the development of new fine-scale
climate modeling and a tropical crop version of the Community Land Model 5, one
of the most widely used land surface models. Data from this project will be made
widely available using the cyberinfrastructure built by NSF and other federal
agencies for sharing and moving large amounts of data. It will advance
understanding of climatic thresholds for tropical crops, the vulnerability of
crops to climate extremes, and how those will change in the future as cropping
intensifies and expands.