* 1739253
* Assessing the Influence of Zero-Deforestation Supply-Chain Commitments on the Conservation of Ecosystems
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Kimberly Carlson, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 08/31/2021
* USD 399,999.00

Deforestation has multiple socioenvironmental impacts including land conflict,
increasing rural income inequality, biodiversity loss, and hydrological changes.
New conservation policies developed by the private sector are being applied to
global supply chains to tackle the challenge of deforestation in the tropics
through zero-deforestation commitments. Yet there is limited knowledge about the
impact of these policies or the enabling conditions that may promote their
effectiveness. This project will provide new knowledge on the complex global
telecouplings and public-private governance interactions of how zero-
deforestation commitments influence land cover change. The research will enhance
our fundamental understanding about the conditions under which zero-
deforestation commitments lead to ecosystem conservation. The research will
directly inform public and private environmental policy as well as civil society
efforts toward tropical forest conservation. Through open data sharing and
archiving, this project will contribute to improving transparency in food supply
chains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will study the soy, oil
palm, and cattle industries in multiple regions globally and analyze how the
socioeconomic and agro-ecological variation across these regions differentially
influence outcomes associated with zero-deforestation commitments. The research
will investigate four core questions: 1) Are zero-deforestation policies being
applied in the most urgent locations of deforestation? 2) How do corporate zero-
deforestation policies interact with public policies to influence agricultural
profits and inhibit local incentives to deforest? 3) How do differences in
timelines and forest definitions in these policies influence land cover
outcomes? and 4) To what degree does leakage of land cover change to other
regions offset local reductions in deforestation? To answer these questions the
investigators will collect and synthesize a comprehensive dataset of land cover
maps, supply chain commitments, sourcing behaviors, trade flows, and producer
costs of compliance or noncompliance with supply chain commitments. A model will
be developed to assess the regional land cover outcomes at a high spatial
resolution. Outcomes from this model with be coupled with existing regional
models and a global trade model to evaluate impacts of regional commodity-
specific commitments on other commodities and biomes. The broader implications
of this research will help establish the conditions under which zero-
deforestation commitments are likely to achieve ecosystem conservation, and
inform the development of effective policy mixes across the private and public
sectors.