* 1739132
* 2017 Gordon Research Conference on Neuroethology: Behavior, Evolution &amp; Neurobiology : Neural, Behavioral and Evolutionary Strategies for Survival
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Melissa Coleman, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2018
* USD 10,140.00

Understanding how neurons in the brain control complex functions is a primary
goal of neuroscience. Advances in genetics have increased the precision with
which we can understand those cells and how they interact, but most of that work
has been developed in a small number of laboratory organisms. This makes it
difficult to assess how representative the findings about brain functions that
have emerged from such studies are, and whether or not similar processes are
operative in other animals, including humans. The conference supported by this
award brings young researchers together who study the brain mechanisms that
allow a more diverse group of organisms to solve complex problems in their
natural environments. Focused talks and discussions allow them to share ideas
about and thus identify the common brain properties that make it possible for
different animals to solve problems related to survival. The conference also
includes participants with expertise using the genetic approaches that have been
developed in laboratory organisms to encourage their colleagues to consider how
to adapt such approaches in their own future studies in a more diverse group of
species. A high proportion of the speakers and participants are women, and the
conference includes a workshop about the unique challenges faced by women in
science and how to overcome them. Ultimately, this meeting thus encourages our
nation's future scientists, particularly some of the most promising young women
in science, to move in directions that will ultimately help us identify the
fundamental properties of the brain that make complex functions possible.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a small meeting of approximately 130 participants,
most of whom are graduate students, postdoctoral associates, and beginning
investigators. It takes place over 5 days in a semi-remote setting to foster
intensive and extensive discussions about the brain mechanisms that have allowed
a diverse group of organisms to survive in complex natural environments. The
meeting includes 9 sessions, each of which focuses on a particular topic in the
field of neuroethology, with 1-2 talks per session and extensive time for
discussion after each talk. Several invited participants who have used some of
the genetic and molecular tools that have been developed in model organisms in
other species are included in the program to push young scientists to think
about how they might also take advantage of those tools to increase the
precision with which they can study the nervous systems in non-laboratory
animals in naturalistic environments. Over 2/3 of the participants and speakers
are women, and there is a special workshop that addresses the unique challenges
associated with advancement in science for women. Ultimately, the conference
encourages young scientists to compare the mechanisms that have evolved in
different groups of organisms to solve the challenges to survival present in the
environments in which they evolved, and in so doing to identify the fundamental
principles of brain function that are critical for the regulation of complex
processes.