* 1739210
* Sparsity-promoting optimal design of large-scale networks of dynamical systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/04/2017,07/31/2018
* Mihailo Jovanovic, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2018
* USD 113,190.00

Sparsity-promoting optimal design of large-scale networks of dynamical
systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal introduces new methods for the design
of large-scale networks of dynamical systems. Systems of this type arise in
applications ranging from distributed power generation, to coordination of
unmanned aerial vehicles and deployment of teams of robotic agents, to control
of fluid flows around wind turbines and vehicles, to control of segmented
mirrors in extremely large telescopes. One of the major challenges in systems
with large number of degrees of freedom is the development of analytical and
computational methods for their tractable analysis and
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interactions between subsystems often induce
complex dynamical responses that cannot be predicted by analyzing subsystems in
isolation. Blackouts in power networks, congestion in transportation networks,
spatio-temporal oscillations in biochemical networks, turbulence in fluid flows,
and the spread of information in social networks illustrate the complex and
seemingly unpredictable behavior that arises in systems of high dynamical order.
The broader impacts of the proposed work range from improved performance and
suppression of blackouts in power systems to systematic design of sensor
networks and multi-agent systems. The educational aspect of the proposal is to
develop a new introductory course on analysis and design of networks. This
course will be aimed at attracting students from diverse engineering departments
at senior undergraduate and first year graduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit lies in the development of theory and techniques for
structure identification and optimal design of large networks of dynamical
systems. The PI will combine tools and ideas from control theory, optimization,
and compressive sensing to achieve an optimal tradeoff between network
performance and controller sparsity. The proposed approach involves both
structure identification and structured optimal design steps. In the structure
identification step, sparsity will be induced by regularizing an optimal control
problem with a penalty on communication requirements in the distributed
controller. In contrast to previous efforts, this penalty will reflect the fact
that sparsity should be enforced in a specific set of coordinates. After having
identified a controller structure, the structured optimal design step will
optimize the network performance over the identified structure. Alongside the
sparse feedback synthesis, the PI will address the critical question of optimal
sensor and actuator selection in large-scale
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although, in general, finding the solution to
this problem requires an intractable combinatorial search, this award will draw
upon recent developments in sparse representations to cast it as a semidefinite
program (SDP). While the resulting SDP can be solved using general-purpose
solvers, the PI will develop customized algorithms to exploit the problem
structure and reduce computational complexity. Such customized solvers will be
capable of dealing with large problems.&lt;br/&gt;that general-purpose solvers
are not able to handle.