* 1739474
* EAGER: FEWSTERN: US-China Food-Energy-Water Systems Transdisciplinary Environmental Research Network
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2017,12/31/2021
* Virginia Dale, University of Tennessee Institute of Agriculture
* Continuing Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 12/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Food production and quality are closely linked to use of energy and water and
overall ecosystem health. As demand for food, energy, and water all increase due
to increased population and changes in diet, it is essential to consider the
balance of energy, water, and land resource uses to achieve food and nutrition
security, economic goals, and essential ecosystem functions and services.
Typical research projects are rather narrowly-focused and carried out by
individual disciplines. However, in order to address broad challenges and enable
sustainable solutions, collaboration among different disciplines is essential.
This grant aims to increase the understanding among different academic
disciplines in the US and China of approaches for addressing increasingly
important challenges related to competition among food, energy, and water
systems (FEWS). Typically, development of technologies, policies, and management
systems for food, energy, and water systems are done without considering various
tradeoffs that may occur, competing demands for resources for each of these
basic human needs, and potential conflicts in policies that regulate each of
them. The goal of this project is to enable networking and meetings among
different science and engineering disciplines to identify food, energy, and
water systems to be studied holistically so that increases in productivity and
efficiency can be achieved for systems that provide for increasing demands for
these resources. The project will enable scientists and engineers to develop
teams to address specific FEW systems and to develop interdisciplinary
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support activities that will
enable innovative ideas to be developed through interactions among different
disciplines involved in various aspects of food, energy and water research.
These will range from technological to social and policy innovations for FEWS
program development beyond national borders, and contribute concepts for local,
national and global solutions to achieve sustainable intensification of natural
resource exploitation and use. The project will establish a US-China
crosscutting research coordination network to (i) identify transdisciplinary
environmental grand challenge research opportunities at the FEWS nexus, (ii)
develop a framework to overcome hurdles to interdisciplinary research both
between and among collaborating US and China researchers, and (iii) establish
model platforms for education, training, communication and efficacy evaluations
of the outputs of international cooperation. Over a 2-year period of strategic
research planning, identification of grand challenges, and teaming workshops,
FEWSTERN will generate technical whitepapers and guidance documents supporting
international collaboration and research. US and Chinese graduate students will
communicate project outcomes and goals via social media outlets. Novel system
level research will generate opportunities for academia-industry partnerships at
the FEWS nexus.