* 1739451
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Constantly on the Lookout: Low-cost Sensor Enabled Explosive Detection to Protect High Density Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,03/31/2023
* Sule Ozev, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Vishal Sharma
* 03/31/2023
* USD 480,136.00

This project aims to empower ordinary citizens to take charge in collecting real
time environmental data that can be used to serve a common interest. The target
application of the project is a cyber-physical system for detecting small
amounts of explosive vapor in the air so as to protect large-area public
gatherings. In this system, extremely low-cost explosive sensors, handed out
free of charge, will be connected to the smart phones of the willing
participants, effectively turning each one of them into a look-out sensor node.
Although the primary application of the proposed cyber-physical system is
explosive detection, problems with similar technical challenges include air
pollution monitoring systems, pandemic prevention, fire and/or gas leak
monitoring. Successful completion of this project will generate a plethora of
new applications that target problems with the aim of reaching a common goal by
leveraging computation, power, and communications capacities donated by willing
participants. Understanding that interest in STEM (science, technology,
engineering, math)-related careers begins in elementary school, the project will
use a sensor-based system that aims at locating a heat source, as part of K-12
outreach activities that explore crowd-sourced data collection, processing, and
scheduling. The researchers work regularly with undergraduate and high school
students through Fulton Undergraduate Research Initiative (FURI), Barrett Summer
Scholars (BSS), National Science Foundation-sponsored National Nanotechnology
Infrastructure Network Research Experience for Undergraduates (NNIN REU), and
Arizona State University's Summer Research Experience for High School Students
program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Designing a system based on extremely low-cost
sensors for crowd-sourced monitoring has several unique technical and scientific
challenges that the project tackles. First, cost/power requirements and the need
to detect tiny amounts of explosive vapor are at odds with each other. Second,
the system will be designed to tolerate inevitable sensor inaccuracies and false
positives/negatives in a stable manner. Third, since the entire system hinges on
willing participation from the public, sensor operation will be made transparent
to the user, and not create a negative user experience. Finally, privacy
concerns of the users will be addressed by keeping them anonymous, and the
security threats generated by this anonymity will be addressed.