* 1739416
* The 2017 international conference on systems biology; Virginia Tech; August 6-12, 2017
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2017,11/30/2017
* Yang Cao, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Devaki Bhaya
* 11/30/2017
* USD 15,000.00

This award will provide support for The 2017 International Conference on Systems
Biology (ICSB) to be held August 6-12, 2017 at the Squires Student Center in
Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia. This conference will host three keynote
talks (one hour), twenty plenary talks (30 minutes), 24 parallel sessions (each
with four 20 minutes contributed talks) and two poster sessions. The conference
is designed to stimulate exciting interdisciplinary research in systems and
synthetic biology, while also supporting systems biology education and the
development of young researchers in the field. The prospective attendees are
expected to come from a broad spectrum of disciplines and career stages.
Research talks will be given by both established experts in the field and young
researchers alike. ICSB 2017 will provide career-building opportunities for
young and early-career scientists, as well as a forum for students and
researchers in related fields to consider how best to overcome current
challenges.in systems biology education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological
sciences are currently undergoing a historic transition from a reductionist
paradigm to an integrative "systems" paradigm. For the past two decades,
computational and mathematical modeling of complex molecular regulatory systems
have played pivotal roles in this transition. Today, interdisciplinary
collaborations that combine both in silico and in vivo experiments are
emphasized and encouraged. However, the rapid growth of systems biology presents
great challenges in bringing together experimentalists and modelers to overcome
the barriers separating the conventional disciplines. To facilitate this
transition, it is critical to train a new generation of interdisciplinary
researchers with the abilities to combine experimental and theoretical
approaches to biological systems. This conference will create a platform for
exchanging ideas and fostering collaborations between experimentalists and
theoreticians, and provide a rare opportunity for undergraduate and graduate
students, postdocs, and young researchers to interact with and learn from
leading scientists in the field. ICSB 2017 will also maximize the visibility of
talented young researchers by selecting the best abstracts for oral presentation
in parallel sessions and by highlighting the poster sessions that showcase
everyone?s research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Systems
and Synthetic Biology Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.