* 1739732
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Against Coordinated Cyber and Physical Attacks: Unified Theory and Technologies
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Petros Voulgaris, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 700,000.00

Coordinated cyber-physical attacks (CCPA) have been touted as a serious threat
for several years, where "coordinated" means that attackers have complete
knowledge of the physical plant and status, and sometimes can even create
physical defects, to assist cyber attacks, and vice versa. In recent years,
these attacks have crept from theory to reality, with attacks on vehicles,
electrical grids, and industrial plants, which have the potential to cause
destruction and even death outside of the digital world. CCPA raise a unique
challenge with respect to cyber-physical systems (CPS) safety. Historically,
technologies to defend cyber attacks and physical attacks are developed
separately under different assumptions and models. For instance, cyber security
technologies often require the complete profile of the physical dynamics and the
observation of the system state, which may not be available when physical
defects exist. Similarly, existing system control techniques may efficiently
compensate for the physical damage, but under the assumption that the control
software and the sensor data are not compromised. There is a lack of unified
approaches against CCPA. With this observation, this project focuses on the
development of unified models with coherent set of assumptions, supported by
integrated technologies, upon which CCPA can be defended much more
effectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To establish theoretical foundations and
engineering principles for resilient CPS architectures, this project will
investigate unified models and platforms that represent the scientific
understanding of resilient CPS against CCPA. Engineering of CPS will be
addressed through the development and integration of complexity-reduced software
architectures, along with their design principles, which lead to verifiable and
certifiable architectures with higher level of system resilience. Technology of
CPS will be addressed through the design of new attack detection, isolation, and
recovery tools as well as timing and control techniques to ensure appropriate
responses to CCPA. The proposed inherently interdisciplinary research will
ensure predictable performance for resilient CPS, by leveraging the disciplinary
advances in (i) the design and evaluation of robust fault-tolerant control
systems yielding significantly enhanced levels of safety in highly unpredictable
environments; (ii) the design and implementation of complexity reduction
architecture yielding a significant reduction in the verification time from
hours to seconds; (iii) the development of multi-rate sampled-data control and
robust reachability-based attack detection techniques ensuring that the sensor
data is reliable; and (iv) the development of cyber-physical co-adaptation that
optimizes control performance and computation task scheduling to guarantee
system safety and efficient recovery from CCPA. The target application of this
project is unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). The research results will be
evaluated in three different testbeds: UAV testbed, generic transportation model
(GTM) aircraft, and power system virtual testbed (VTB). The technological
advancement from this project will provide solutions for the safety and
reliability issues faced by today's CPS and deliver dependable CPS that are
applicable without sacrificing functionality or accessibility in complex and
potentially hostile networked environment. The results of this project will be
communicated in archival journal publications, conference venues and various
workshops and lectures, and will be integrated at different academic levels.