* 1739308
* CPS: Small: Geometric Self-Propelled Articulated Micro-Scale Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Matthew Travers, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2021
* USD 457,548.00

Sub-millimeter scale cyber-physical systems will have a major impact on future
applications.  For example, targeted drug delivery or materials conveyance for
micro-scale construction are two important application areas on which small-
scale systems will advance the current state of the art.  However, conventional
actuator, sensor, and computational units are generally not available at
extremely small scales.  This project thus explores the relationships between
novel microfabrication, system design for articulated locomotion, and active
control of micro, cyber-physical systems.  More specifically, this project
develops a common analytical framework to understand, express, and reason about
the connections, as well as demonstrate on a novel problem, the benefits of
self-propelled articulated micro-scale devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
is developing elasto-magnetic filaments formed by linked ferromagnetic beads. 
These filaments can serve as the basis for functionalized structures, employing
protein-coatings, that are flexible and controllable through actively
manipulated distributions of magnetic dipole moments.  This approach uses dual
laser polymerization to construct templates that enable the magnetization
profile of chains composed by single micron diameter ferromagnetic spheres,
bonded by DNA origami strands, to be actively programmed.  These elasto-magnetic
bodies are then articulated by changes in an externally applied magnetic field,
i.e., when subjected to a constant but oscillating weak magnetic field, the
local alignment of dipole moments to the field will actively "actuate" the
systems.  The analysis, based on a geometric framework, will determine the
optimal distribution of magnetization profiles across the filaments; thereby
linking fabrication to analysis and the geometry underlying locomotion
in dissipative fluids to novel maneuvering capabilities.  Guided by this
framework, as a demonstration, microrobots with these magnetized bodies will be
designed to achieve specific locomotion objectives in sufficient numbers to be
made to move purposefully in uncertain environments.