* 1739662
* Demographic Inversion in U.S. Metropolitan Areas
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Kyle Walker, Texas Christian University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 08/31/2023
* USD 283,983.00

This research project will investigate whether and how a model of population
dynamics termed "demographic inversion" characterizes large metropolitan areas
in the United States. This model suggests that affluent, educated populations
are increasingly populating urban cores, while more socioeconomically diverse
groups populate the suburbs. The project will provide new information and
insights regarding how demographic characteristics like age, race, income, and
education relate to residential location within cities and suburbs, and it will
enhance understanding about how these relationships vary over time and across
different types of metropolitan areas. By generating new insights on the current
dynamics of demographic change within U.S. cities and suburbs, project results
will benefit business owners, government officials, and researchers who require
up-to-date information about the characteristics of their communities. Project
results and materials will be publicly shared in several ways, including
interactive maps and data visualizations, tutorials for practitioners to help
analyze and interpret U.S. census data, and public workshops on data analysis
and mapping. The project also will provide advanced education and training
opportunities in data science for undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An understanding of contemporary trends in urban
and suburban demographic change is essential for professionals in both the
private and public sectors. Information about these shifts often is limited by
the coarse resolution of public demographic resources. The investigator will
develop models of neighborhood-level demographic shifts and metropolitan
migration patterns using confidential census microdata available at a federal
statistical research data center. He will conduct highly precise analyses of the
contemporary demographic structure of American cities in order to assess how
processes of demographic inversion are consistent with or challenge theories of
urban demographic structure. The results of these analyses will be cross-
referenced with analyses using public census data, thereby providing new
methodological insights into the accuracy of public data for the study of
metropolitan demographic change. By developing reproducible software and
visualization tools for working with census and other demographic data in this
project, the investigator will help businesses, policymakers, and communities
understand the ways in which contemporary metropolitan demographics are changing
and equip them with new approaches for integrating demographic data into their
own inquiries.