* 1739419
* SI2-SSE: An Ecosystem of Reusable Image Analytics Pipelines
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Andrew Connolly, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Astronomy has entered an era of massive data streams generated by telescopes and
surveys that can scan tens of thousands of square degrees of the sky across many
decades of the electromagnetic spectrum. The promise of these new experiments -
characterizing the nature of dark energy and the composition of dark matter,
discovering the most energetic events in the universe, tracking asteroids whose
orbits may intersect with that of the Earth - will only be realized if we can
address the challenge of how to process and analyze the tens of petabytes of
images that these astronomical surveys will generate per year.  With the
increasing capacity for scientists to collect ever larger sets of data, often in
the form of images, our potential for scientific discovery will soon be limited
not by how we collect or store data, but rather how we extract the knowledge
that these data contain (e.g. how we account for noise inherent within the data,
and understand when we have detected fundamentally new classes and interesting
events or physical phenomena).  This project is to develop an open source
scalable framework for the analysis of large imaging data sets. It is designed
to operate as a cloud service, incorporate seamlessly new or legacy image
processing algorithms, support and optimize complex analysis workflows, and
scale analyses to thousands of processors without the need for an individual
user to develop custom solutions for a specific computer platforms or
architecture. This framework will be integrated with state-of-the-art image
analysis algorithms developed for astronomical surveys  to provide an image
analytics platform that can be used by future telescopes and cameras and the
astronomical community as a whole. Beyond astronomy, the framework will be
extended to enable scientists from the physical and life sciences that make use
of imaging data (e.g. neuroscience, oceanography, biology, seismology) to focus
their work on developing scientific algorithms and analyses rather than the
infrastructure required to process massive data sets&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over
the last decade, there have been many advancements in astronomical image
analysis algorithms and techniques; driven by new surveys and experiments. The
complexity of these techniques and the systems that run them has, however, meant
that the number of users who make use of these advancements is small; typically
restricted to the experiments themselves or to a small group of expert users.
Because of this, the community as a whole does not benefit from the significant
investment in image analytics for astronomy.  In this project, the PIs address
these issues by developing and deploying a scalable framework for the analysis
of small and large imaging datasets. This cloud-based system will be able to
incorporate new and legacy image processing algorithms, support and optimize
complex analysis workflows, scale applications to thousands of processors
without users needing to develop custom code for specific platforms, and support
efficient sharing of algorithms and analysis results among users. It will enable
state-of-the-art image analysis algorithms (e.g. those developed for surveys
such as the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope; LSST) to be used by the broad
astronomical community and in so doing will leverage then tens of thousands of
hours that has been invested in the development of these techniques. To
accomplish this the team will extract key data analysis functions from the LSST
data analysis pipeline into a standalone library, independent of the LSST
software stack and data access mechanisms.  They will integrate this library
with the Myria big data management system. Myria is an elastically scalable big
data management system that operates as a service in the Amazon cloud that
wedeveloped at the University of Washington. Compared with other big data
systems, Myria is especially attractive because it integrates PostgreSQL
database instances within its storage layer and thus provides access to
PostgreSQL's rich libraries of spatial functions, which are frequently used in
astronomical data analysis pipelines. At the same time, it has rich support for
new and legacy Python code and for complex analytics. By integrating the library
of LSST image analytics functions with Myria, new image analytics pipelines will
become significantly easier to write. The skeleton of the analysis pipeline will
be expressed in the MyriaL declarative query language (i.e. SQL extended with
constructs such as iterations and others). The core data processing functions
will directly map to Python functions, enabling the reuse of legacy code and the
easy addition of new functions. The resulting code will be amenable to
optimization and efficient execution using the Myria service. By doing so, they
intend to reduce barriers to adoption. Users will be able to express their
analysis in Python without worrying about how data and computation will be
distributed in a cluster.  The image analysis framework developed as part of
this proposal will be made publicly available as open-source software. The PIs
will utilize the use case of neuroscience to demonstrate how their system,
developed for astronomy, can be deployed across multiple
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Office of
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer &amp; Information
Science and Engineering, the Astronomical Sciences Division and Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.