* 1739966
* CPS:SMALL: Privacy-preserving Network Congestion Control: Theory and Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Nikita Borisov, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Roy
* 09/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

The goal of this project is to enable greater sharing of crowd-sensed data,
while achieving provable privacy guarantees. Our approach is to limit knowledge
of the location traces of crowd-sensed data to exclude the origin and
destination, and then consider the system using techniques from distributed
control and differential privacy: this enables exploration of the theoretical
bounds on the cost of privacy. The achieved results will create a new approach
for building and analyzing networked cyber-physical systems (CPS) that permits
users to make decisions on crowd-sensed data, and at the same time protects
their privacy in a rigorous sense. The project has focused outreach activities
in developing a software environment for students to explore privacy-performance
trade-offs in transportation operations and an advanced course on security and
privacy of CPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In our technical approach, we focus on the
privacy of user inputs, such as the origin (initial state), destination
(preference), and utility functions. This enables us to model and analyze how
the crowd-sensed data can be used to infer these sensitive inputs, using
techniques adapted from the fields of distributed control and differential
privacy. The various notions of privacy will support a broad research program,
including performance limits of private network control, design principles for
different classes of cyber-physical systems, and new location privacy metrics
that take into account location popularity. These contributions advance the
field of formal analysis of probabilistic models, and the burgeoning subfield of
privacy in control and optimization. The theoretical research will be motivated
by and evaluated on simulations and proof-of-concept implementations in the
context of crowd-sourced congestion detection.