* 1739219
* I-Corps: Hardness and Virtual Fatigue Test Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2017,11/30/2018
* Daniel Kujawski, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 11/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be focused
on improving design process efficiency for product development teams. This
project will explore implementation of a web-based software that will be
scalable, cost effective and comprehensive. Currently, many small to medium
manufacturers cannot afford long-term simulation software due to high licensing
and operating costs. To ensure durability, they rely heavily on a series of
full-scale physical tests. Manufacturers who can afford existing software suites
still utilize extensive physical testing, as simulation results are not solely
adequate. This innovative technology allows for intelligent design changes and
improvements to be implemented prior to prototyping and testing at an affordable
rate for all manufacturers. This can significantly reduce the industry's
reliance on physical testing, which can increase design time and product
development costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps Project relies on an
innovative relationship between the multi-scale hardness properties of a
material and its long-term fatigue performance. By measuring the hardness of
material, the technology can predict long-term product life. Currently,
durability simulations are performed utilizing finite element analysis
simulations and experimentally obtained material fatigue properties, neglecting
important processing properties such as hardness and roughness. As a result,
such simulations are often not accurate enough to predict the long-term
performance of a product and thus necessitating physical testing for
verification. The inclusion of processing parameters obtained through hardness
testing in such simulation allows the designer to take into account many other
contributing material factors and create a more robust and comprehensive
simulation. This more accurate prediction of long-term product performance can
drastically reduce the amount of physical testing necessary to verify a product
is ready for the market. Using the multi-scale material properties from the
hardness test, the proposed web-based software solution will be able to assist
product engineers in design decisions regarding long term performance in any new
or modified part.