* 1739085
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Augmented reality for control of reservation-based intersections with mixed flows
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Linda Boyle, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2022
* USD 226,412.00

In urban environments, signalized intersections are a major cause of congestion
since their actual capacity is very low. Autonomous vehicles are a possible leap
forward: by receiving coordinated guidance information from the intersection
system itself, these vehicles could navigate through the intersections with
minimal speed reduction or wait times, resulting in far more efficient
intersections. These smart intersections can reduce wait times by orders of
magnitude, though they only work if all vehicles are autonomous: the presence of
even one percent of non-autonomous vehicles would negate almost all benefits.
This project investigates augmented reality technology as a scalable means of
improving flow through these smart intersections by coordinating human driven
vehicles with autonomous vehicles, maximizing intersection throughput while
minimizing collision risks. This research will benefit the U.S. economy by
providing an inexpensive, scalable way of reducing congestion without the need
to ban human-driven forms of transport (pedestrians, bicycles), and without the
cost of having only autonomous vehicles. This research is at the interface of
several disciplines including transportation engineering, control theory and
human factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The guidance of human-driven vehicles is
critical to improve the capacity of future smart intersections safely. While
these intersections show considerable potential benefit in a fully automated
world, their performance strongly degrades if even a few vehicles are human-
driven. Given a high penetration of augmented reality devices (smart glasses),
and measurement data from human-driven and autonomous vehicles, including the
predicted paths of autonomous vehicles, can human-driven vehicles be guided
through a smart intersection as quickly and safely as possible? The answer
requires one to simultaneously solve real-time estimation and control problems,
in a dynamic environment, with uncertain actuation given the performance of
humans. The project develops efficient algorithms to learn the expected
performance of each driver. The routing of vehicles in a reservation-based
intersection system takes into account human behavior and the physical
limitations of vehicles. Strategies are developed to effectively communicate
guidance information to drivers in a mixed-reality setting. These results will
be validated on an experimental setup involving vehicles driven by humans and
equipped with augmented reality devices. This project is jointly supported with
the Department of Transportation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.