* 1739206
* CPS: Small: Fusion of Sensory Data and Expansivity of System Dynamics for Detection and Separation of Signature Anomaly in Energy CPS Wide-Area Monitoring and Control
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Nilanjan Ray Chaudhuri, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2022
* USD 315,329.00

The proposed research focuses on innovation in the area of detection and
separation of anomaly in sensory data used for real time monitoring and control
of cyber-physical systems (CPS). In this work, bulk power grid is considered as
an example CPS, which is a critical infrastructure of our nation. The problem of
spurious or maliciously injected sensor data originating from cyber-attacks is
very important, because it can seriously jeopardize the monitoring and
stabilization controls of power grids. This can lead to system-wide blackouts
and cost our economy billions of dollars. This project aims to solve this
problem by leveraging the system's expansive dynamic behavior to distinguish
disturbances from data anomalies. To that end, the aim of this research is to
bridge the gap between the developments in the area of singular value
perturbation theory and Principal Component Analysis (PCA) -- traditionally
focused on the 'signals' side of the CPS, with the intrinsic properties from the
'systems' side of the CPS. Fusion of sensory data with the dynamic properties of
the physical system will help in gaining fundamental insight into the coupling
between the cyber and the physical layer and use this knowledge to detect and
separate spurious signals or malicious data manipulations originating from
cyber-attacks. A successful conclusion of this project will quantify the effect
of Phasor Measurement Unit signature anomalies on Principal Components in the
higher versus lower dimensional subspaces. In addition, emerging concepts of
Robust PCA will be explored to separate the anomalous signatures and correct the
data for real-time application. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In today's world of
'Industrial Internet' where sensory data is being utilized for system health
monitoring and controls, this work has the potential to make significant strides
in understanding data quality and anomaly. Therefore, a successful completion of
this project can help protect critical infrastructures from cyber-attacks and
facilitate improved system diagnosis, lower downtime, better service, and higher
resiliency. The proposed research can potentially benefit a wide range of CPS
including process control, oil and gas, energy, and probably other systems
involving robots or even future transportation systems employing autonomous
vehicles. This project will integrate its research outcome with power systems
course modules to broaden the undergraduate experience on the newer developments
in energy CPS. In addition, this project will integrate the proposed research
into iTech: Summer Technology Camp for Teens, which is a free week-long
interactive day camp, designed to introduce high school students (9th -12th
grades) to information technology. All materials created and developed in this
project including software data, primary research data and metadata, and
teaching material will be publicly available on an open source basis at the
following site: https://sites.psu.edu/nilanjan/. For faster dissemination of the
research results, published papers will be made available in PDF format in this
site.