* 1739191
* INFEWS/T3:  Innovations for Sustainable Food, Energy, And Water Supplies In Intensively Cultivated Regions: Integrating Technologies, Data, And Human Behavior
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2017,03/31/2023
* Axel Garcia, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 03/31/2023
* USD 2,429,500.00

To keep pace with the demands of a growing global population, innovations are
needed to meet the unprecedented challenge of producing more food in intensively
cultivated regions with less energy and lower environmental impacts. In this
project, researchers from the biophysical, socioeconomic, and computational
sciences investigate two types of innovations using data from the northern U.S.
Corn Belt. First, a novel oilseed crop, winter camelina, is being studied for
its potential incorporation into existing corn-soybean rotations to produce a
new supply of biodiesel energy while lowering water resource impacts and
creating positive ecological benefits. Second, emerging systems of
sustainability certification are being studied for their potential to lead to
broad-scale adoption of this new cropping system. Detailed computational models
are being evaluated and applied for systems-level assessments of two
innovations: developing novel approaches to influence beneficial land use, and
accounting for energy and environmental impacts within food supply chains.
Because of the importance of the project results on the local economy, outreach
activities are targeted towards the rural community, policy makers, the general
public, and local watershed planners. Although this project focuses on the
Northern Corn Belt, the approaches used in the research could be adopted to
achieve beneficial outcomes for food, energy, and water systems elsewhere.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project I scomprised of four overlapping and
interdependent research teams. The biophysical research team conducts cropping
systems studies of corn-soybean in rotation with winter camelina at two
Minnesota research stations. Experimental treatments vary by winter timing of
planting and harvest and fertilization rates. Meteorological data along with
soil, water, and crops data is being collected to develop management strategies
for producers and to calibrate and evaluate the crop models that will be used.
The socioeconomic research team collects data from surveys and randomized
control trials to study the forces determining whether, and by whom, new
cropping systems are likely to be adopted under different policy and market
conditions. Of particular interest is the role of incentives from certification
programs, including the feedback effects of using producer data for peer
benchmarking. The data science team applies novel deep learning computational
approaches to identify crops, including winter cover crops, from satellite
imagery. Study plots for the biophysical plots provides training data for crop
identification and the final statewide datasets are being incorporated in the
socioeconomic analysis. Finally, the integrated modeling team develops a suite
of connected modeling tools to quantify systems-level outcomes. These
simulations shed light on the feasibility and impacts of innovations in the
food-energy-water system under different scenarios, including spatial patterns
and the role of socio-economic drivers.