* 1739047
* SBIR Phase II:  A Novel Electroless Nickel/Immersion Gold (ENIG) Surface Finish for Better Reliability of Electronic Assemblies
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Kunal Shah, LiloTree
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2020
* USD 909,999.00

The Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will scale-up
development of eco-friendly, cost-effective novel Electroless Nickel Immersion
Gold (ENIG) surface finish with high corrosion resistance and robust solder
joints for better reliability of electronic assemblies. Conventional ENIG
currently available in the market is prone to black-pad defects (hyper-corrosion
related failures) associated with de-wetting of solder. ENIG also suffers from
brittle solder joint failures. Due to these reasons, there are field failures
and reliability concerns of electronic assemblies - component disconnection
which lead to overall malfunction of electronic assemblies. Moreover, most ENIG
manufacturers/suppliers provide cyanide-based gold chemistry which has health
and ecological hazards. The novel ENIG eliminates black pads- corrosion related
issues, achieves robust solder joints and provides improved quality and
reliability of electronic assembly. Also, it uses cyanide-free chemistry for
immersion gold process making it eco-friendly. This allows manufacturers to
consume eco-friendly product while avoiding major field failures and resulting
consequences. This new technology would be potential replacement for existing
ENIG (with market value roughly about 2-3 billion USD/year).

The primary focus of the project is to eliminate black-pad related failures and
lead to robust, high quality and reliable solder joints for electronic
assemblies. The root cause of black-pad defects has been identified as hyper
corrosion activity at gold and nickel-phosphorous interface which involves
nickel depletion and an enrichment of phosphorous in localized areas. During
Phase I, interfacial engineering approach had been used to successfully
eliminate black pads by achieving marked improvement in corrosion resistance.
This has led to robust solder joints and elimination of brittle failures. In
Phase II, the focus will be to scale-up development, optimize the
product/chemistries and carry out further reliability testing. The main goal
would be the rapid commercialization of novel ENIG into the market. This will
involve development of the chemistries/process parameters for replenishing
solution to make it market ready, economical and efficient for customers,
further chemical testing for quality compliance (shelf life, quality standards,
etc.) as well as reliability testing. Reliability testing will involve real
world scenarios and various industry standard based testing including drop and
vibration tests and solder ball shear and pull tests at extended thermal
exposures.