* 1739788
* INFEWS/T1: Advancing FEW System Resilience in the Corn Belt by Integrated Technology-Environment-Economics  Modeling of Nutrient Cycling
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Madhu Khanna, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,431,217.00

Food production, water supply, water quality, energy supply, and economic growth
and financial stability in the Corn Belt depend on each other while competing
for resources. In particular, recent increases in corn-based ethanol production
in the region have increased interdependencies among food, energy and water
(FEW) in the region and made the integrated FEW system more vulnerable to risks
and threats. Among various concerns, phosphorus (a key component of fertilizers
used in agriculture and a major pollution contributor to the "Dead Zones" in the
Gulf of Mexico) plays a unique and under-recognized role within the FEW nexus.
It is estimated that if recovered efficiently, the phosphorus (P) contained in
ethanol coproducts, in-process stream, or wastewater in the US could recycle up
to one-third of the fertilizer P needs of corn in the US while reducing water
pollution. To help decision makers in Corn Belt watersheds address such
interrelated challenges and opportunities, the PI team will develop an
Integrated Technology-Environment-Economics Modeling (ITEEM) tool to be used to
understand how changes in one sector may cause changes in other sectors. To
identify and implement the most effective combinations of practices in different
areas, policy makers will need new knowledge about technological, environmental,
and economic aspects which will be incorporated into the ITEEM. The ITEEM will
be used to compare whether and how different approaches to addressing problems
and opportunities in the integrated FEW systems, including: i) recovering
nutrients from grain processing and wastewater treatment facilities, ii)
strategic integration of perennial grasses (e.g., Miscanthus, switchgrass) into
annual grain landscapes for biofuel feedstock production and nutrient and
sediment loss reduction, and iii) adjusting farm management practices that
influence nutrient and sediment loss to surface water. The ITEEM will also be
used by stakeholder communities of the food, energy and water sectors to
identify and exploit strategies for enhancing watershed system
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will conduct hypothesis-driven
research activities for the development, dissemination and application of an
integrated modeling tool (ITEEM) for Corn Belt watershed resilience analysis.
Specific objectives include: 1) filling critical knowledge gaps in the
interrelations between environment, technology and economics; 2) establishing
the ITEEM tool for system resilience analysis; 3) testing ITEEM via multiple
testbed studies that represent a range of FEW stressors across the Corn Belt; 4)
fostering FEW nexus understanding in the Corn Belt via extension and education
activities. The overall hypothesis is that the ITEEM approach will allow us to
quantify the impacts of various nutrient management strategies and technologies,
and to identify particular policies that are incentive compatible and enhance
FEW system resilience in the Corn Belt. Both analytical (for generic integrated
FEW systems) and numerical (for testbed watersheds in the Corn Belt) modeling
analyses will be conducted to understand how watersheds respond to various types
of threats subject to multi-source uncertainties, and address how FEW nexus
relations influence watershed resilience. Potential early signals of critical
transitions of watershed systems will also be evaluated from ITEEM simulations.
Among the various strategies to enhance FEW system resilience, the role of such
emerging technologies as phosphorus removal and recovery from process water and
adopting perennial grasses for biomass production will be systematically
assessed in terms of their environmental impacts and economic costs/benefits, as
well as the extent the technologies can mitigate tradeoffs and enhance positive
synergies in order to build more resilient FEW systems. Finally, a shared-vision
modeling approach (SVMA) will be undertaken to incorporate researchers,
extension experts, outreach working groups, and stakeholder representatives
throughout the entire project for problem specification, model development and
testing, and solution exploration.