* 1739000
* CICI: RSARC: Trustworthy Computing over Protected Datasets
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Azer Bestavros, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,002,988.00

Scientists are often stymied in their research due to the inaccessibility of
relevant data. Additionally, many data owners silo data away from powerful,
economical cloud computing resources due to privacy and confidentiality
concerns. This project enables data scientists to compute statistics over
protected datasets while simultaneously empowering the owners of the underlying
datasets to maintain control over how their data is used in computations and
viewed by other people. The work also brings a cryptographically secure
computing engine to one of the largest collections of small to medium sized
research data in the world, running on a federated datacenter operated by
multiple non-trusting vendors. In doing so, this project enhances the flow of
information sharing to promote transparency and accountability for data sharing
and processing decisions while simultaneously reducing tenants' need to trust
the cloud's behavior thanks to cryptographic protections that promote
confidentiality and integrity. The project enables scientific research computing
on workflows involving collaborative experiments or replication and extension of
existing results when the underlying data are encumbered by privacy
concerns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish this goal and enhance the economic
potential of the cloud, the researchers and engineers on this project integrate
and enhance three technologies they have previously developed. First, the
Dataverse data management infrastructure houses, curates, and indexes social,
physical, and life science data. Second, the Massachusetts Open Cloud (MOC) is a
computing environment designed from the ground up to promote user control and
&amp;#64258;exibility over trust decisions. Third, Conclave compiles legacy code
into a cryptographically secure multi-party computation program that can be
executed on top of existing data processing frameworks like Hadoop and Spark.
This project develops and open-sources the necessary cyberinfrastructure to
integrate these technologies and provide a combined "secure computing element"
into which data and analytics may be inserted and their resulting answers fed
back. This secure computing element incorporates several designs: (i) policy-
agnostic programming to ensure that legacy code may be accepted, (ii) the MOC's
isolation mechanism to ensure that data owners may choose exactly which
environment to entrust with their data, (iii) Conclave to hide the source data
from everyone other the intended recipient (even the cloud itself), a policy
engine to ensure that the data owner consents to the requested analytic, (iv)
Dataverse's data classification engine to manage access control over source and
derived data, and (v) a new auditing and billing mechanism to promote
transparency, punish those who exceed their privileges, and provide a
sustainable economic model for growth.