* 1739042
* I-Corps: Tissue reparative cardiovascular disease technology
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2017,11/30/2018
* Anand Ramamurthi, Cleveland Clinic Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 11/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a tissue engineering technology that will enable generation of
cardiovascular (CV) tissue replacements capable of stretch and recoil, on demand
and also on site regenerative repair of blood vessels which are structurally
disrupted due to disease. The technology addresses the inability of current
tissue engineering approaches to overcome poor ability of adult cells to
generate the protein elastin that form the primary component of elastic fibers
that provide tissues stretch properties. The proposed innovation is a reparative
nanoparticle platform technology comprising antibody-targeted, biodegradable
polymer nanoformulations with pro-elastin regenerative and anti-degradative
properties. In this project, the technology will be initially validated in the
context of treating abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAAs), which are localized
expansions of the abdominal aorta wall resulting from irreversible elastic
matrix breakdown. Through this I-Corps project, the team will assess the
commercial viability of this technology, understand key market/customer needs
and value propositions, explore partnership opportunities and gain regulatory
insight towards generating a realistic business canvas for a commercial
startup.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project provides intellectual merit
based on the transformative potential of a novel polymer nanoparticle delivery
approach for onsite regenerative repair of disease compromised elastic tissues,
which mimic the elastic matrix regenerative effects of stem cell secretions. The
technology will first be tested in context of repairing abdominal aortic
aneurysms (AAA), since there are no FDA-approved pharmacologic treatments for
AAAs, and elective surgery and stent grafting on small AAAs have high risk and
no treatment benefit. The team will identify a minimum viable product based on
regenerative nanoparticles comprising antibody-targeted biodegradable polymer
matrices. The pro-elastin regenerative and anti-matrix degradative properties of
these nanoparticles are independently provided by both the released active
agents (biologic factors identified from adult stem cell derived smooth muscle
cells) and chemically functionalized polymer matrix. If successful, the
technology will provide realistic prospects to arrest or reverse growth of small
AAAs soon after diagnosis, thus reducing need for surgery in these patients.