* 1739676
* INFEWS/T1: Reducing the Environmental Impacts of FEW Systems In and Around Cities
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Kara Nelson, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 2,431,217.00

As population, urbanization, and affluence increase globally, cities and the
areas around them have become concentrated intersections of food, energy, and
water systems (FEWS). With growing demand and increasingly limited supplies of
each of these resources, their future availability is becoming more uncertain.
Fortunately, there remain significant untapped opportunities to harvest the
wastes from each sector thereby recovering resources for use in other sectors
and allowing the system as a whole to operate more cost-efficiently and with
fewer environmental impacts. For example, food waste and urban wastewater can
produce nutrients for fertilizers and energy in the form of electricity, and
water from agricultural drainage can be used to replenish groundwater aquifers.
Further study and modeling of integrated resource recovery and reuse, utilizing
a systems approach, is urgently needed to identify the most promising pathways
towards a more sustainable and resilient future. This project will identify the
best ways to reduce the environmental impacts of FEWS in urban, suburban, and
periurban areas. New data and insights generated by this research will inform
the modeling of resilient and cost-effective options. Findings and products of
the research will promote innovation toward more effective and integrated
management of FEWS resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create an
integrated food-energy-water systems (FEWS) framework to identify spatially- and
process-specific reductions in life-cycle energy and water use, economic costs,
environmental impacts, and solutions for resource recovery in urban, suburban,
and periurban areas. We will consider current and projected future conditions,
tradeoffs, and associated uncertainties and sensitivities in these systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cognizant of the policy and regulatory environment, we
will develop models of FEWS processes and program decision-support tools to
characterize FEWS efficiencies and resilience, as well as identify weak points
and prioritize future areas for analysis and investment. The cutting-edge
geospatial analysis, logistics optimization, mathematical meta-modeling, and
uncertainty and sensitivity quantification methods used should help pave the way
for an entirely new interdisciplinary field of FEWS analysis that will provide
the fundamental tools and insights to understand and engineer the sustainable
and resilient interconnected FEWS of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project unites researchers from diverse disciplines at two collaborating
universities to research understudied issues associated with food production and
processing, recovery and reuse of FEWS resources, as well as to develop
integrated FEWS process and product models and to create user-friendly tools to
support reduction of energy and environmental impacts. The research will fill
significant data gaps and increase understanding of synergies, feedbacks,
tradeoffs, and barriers to innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FEWS stakeholders
will be engaged to facilitate technology transfer between urban water and food
sectors to increase water, energy, and nutrient recovery while removing barriers
in siloed approaches to FEWS management. New technologies and policy
recommendations will help USP areas and agricultural actors overcome barriers to
integrating their resource recovery activities and realize environmental and
economic benefits. Models and tools will allow users to determine cost- and
environmentally efficient alternatives that include an examination of associated
tradeoffs to support informed investments in FEWS sectors. The work has
significant potential to offset the environmental consequences of unsustainable
water use in dry regions, nutrient discharge to sensitive receiving waters, and
burning of fossil fuels. Case study analysis of resource recovery in FEWS to
support urban, suburban, and periurban agriculture under a variety of conditions
will identify environmentally beneficial scenarios. The project will also
contribute to more informed public policy by using data science and
visualization tools to convey technical information in a manner understandable
to decision makers. Interdisciplinary courses at Berkeley will teach students
about FEWS interactions at undergraduate and graduate level. K-12 outreach
efforts through a hands-on teaching module to primary grades, FEWS training, a
FEWSYouth Summit for high school students - especially underrepresented
minorities living at the urban-agricultural interface - and research experiences
for teachers will spread and embed FEWS knowledge more broadly.