* 1739643
* CPS: Medium: Modular Power Orchestration at the Meso-scale
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Christopher Gill, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2023
* USD 936,504.00

Energy storage and power distribution play an integral part in the engineered
systems that play critical roles in people's everyday lives, including
transportation, utility, health, and security. In today's cyber-physical
platforms, however, the generation, storage, allocation, and distribution of
energy among modules is often managed in a haphazard and rigid manner that is
fixed at the system design stage. The limitations of existing power management
methods are clearly evident in highly-integrated meso-scale systems, which range
from mobile devices to large installations such as the International Space
Station. The power semantics of these meso-scale systems fall in between those
of macro-scale power grids and micro-scale on-chip power management, resulting
in a significant solution void. This research project aims to fill that void by
establishing an agile, yet resilient, framework to design and manage power
distribution and energy storage in cyber-physical systems. The broader impacts
of this project will not only transform power delivery capabilities in emerging
technologies such as the next generation of electric and hybrid autonomous
vehicles, but also enrich inter-disciplinary education by bridging hardware-
oriented power electronics design with control, system software, and application
development, through curriculum integration and outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop a principled approach
towards two main goals: modularizing the management of power semantics in meso-
scale cyber-physical systems, and orchestrating the power-related system-wide
interactions among heterogeneous modules. We begin by introducing an innovative
equivalence between the management of power distribution and the optimization of
energy packet delivery. This new problem formulation allows us to re-imagine the
power architecture by incorporating malleable power modules as smart energy
routers, connecting and buffering bidirectional power flows between diverse
functional components such as motors, processors, and sensors. This research
will develop a novel approach to efficient delivery of energy packets, which
will allow reasoning about optimality and trade-offs among power and performance
semantics holistically. This project will also establish a new intelligent
coordination framework based on formal methods, for off-line generation of on-
line interfaces among power modules, aiming to orchestrate exchanges of power
among modules at a full-system level, even in the face of variability and model
uncertainty. This modular power flow orchestration framework is a step towards a
theory of modular smart ubiquitous cyber-physical devices, empowering a paradigm
shift in how next-generation systems with new semantic objectives such as long-
term sustainable autonomy can be built.