* 1739139
* Broadening Life STEM Participation Among Historically Black Colleges and Universities
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2024
* Shubha Ireland, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Standard Grant
* Toya frank
* 04/30/2024
* USD 220,171.00

In meeting the national need for a stronger and more diverse future workforce,
NSF supports contributions from all segments of the STEM community through
investments in programs targeting underrepresented populations and institutions.
Responding to the Life STEM initiative, this workshop will use information from
NSF's longstanding efforts for broadening participation to help minority serving
institutions create, implement, and evaluate innovative models of intervention
in STEM for the students they serve in life science and bioscience. These models
will focus on underrepresented students from elementary school through
undergraduate studies. This workshop will support efforts of participants and
minority serving institutions to prepare successful research proposals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Xavier University of Louisiana will host this workshop
that brings together more than 100 participants in teams of STEM faculty and
education researchers, deans and department chairs, and university
administrators. The two-day workshop will be held June 12-13, 2017. Since
minority serving institutions lead the nation in the number of minority
graduates advancing into post-secondary training in STEM, this workshop will
help bring visibility to the work being done at participating institutions.
Outcomes from this workshop will include highlighting best practices, new
approaches to research, and examples of model interventions effective in
retaining underrepresented students in STEM fields. Outcomes will also include
information about how to help students overcome stresses that interfere with
their trajectories in STEM fields.