* 1739990
* CPS: Small: A Convex Framework for Control of Interconnected Systems over Delayed Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Matthew Peet, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2021
* USD 304,707.00

Recent years have seen an explosion in the use of cellular and wifi networks to
deploy fleets of semi-autonomous physical systems, including unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs), self-driving vehicles, and weather stations to perform tasks
such as package delivery, crop harvesting, and weather prediction. The use of
cellular and wifi networks has dramatically decreased the cost, energy, and
maintenance associated with these forms of embedded technology, but has also
added new challenges in the form of delay, packet drops, and loss of signal.
Because of these new challenges, and because of our limited understanding of how
unreliable communication affects performance, the current protocols for
regulating physical systems over wireless networks are slow, inefficient, and
potentially unstable. In this project we develop a new computational framework
for designing provably fast, efficient and safe protocols for the control of
fleets of semi-autonomous physical systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The systems
considered in this project are dynamic, defined by coupled ordinary differential
equations, and connected by feedback to a controller, with a feedback
interconnection which has multiple static delays, multiple time-varying delays,
or is sampled at discrete times. For these systems, we would like to design
optimal and robust feedback controllers assuming a limited number of sensor
measurements are available. Specifically, we seek to design a class of
algorithms which are computationally efficient, which scale to large numbers of
subsystems, and which, given models of the dynamics, communication links, and
uncertainty, will return a controller which is provably stable, robust to model
uncertainty, and provably optimal in the relevant metric of performance. To
accomplish this task, we leverage a new duality result which allows the problem
of controller synthesis for infinite-dimensional systems to be convexified. This
result allows the problem of optimal and robust dynamic output-feedback
controller synthesis to be reformulated as feasibility of a set of convex linear
operator inequalities. We then use semidefinite programming to parametrize the
set of feasible operators and thereby test feasibility of the inequalities with
little to no conservatism. In a similar manner, estimator design and optimal
controller synthesis are recast as semidefinite programming problems and used to
solve the problems of sampled-data and systems with input delay. The algorithms
will be scalable to at least 20 states and the controllers will be field-tested
on a fleet of wheeled robotic vehicles.