* 1739485
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: An Actuarial Framework of Cyber Risk Management for Power Grids
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Wei Wei, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Donald Wunsch
* 08/31/2021
* USD 352,109.00

As evidenced by the recent cyberattacks against Ukrainian power grids, attack
strategies have advanced and new malware agents will continue to emerge. The
current measures to audit the critical cyber assets of the electric power
infrastructure do not provide a quantitative guidance that can be used to
address security protection improvement. Investing in cybersecurity protection
is often limited to compliance enforcement based on reliability standards.
Auditors and investors must understand the implications of hypothetical worst
case scenarios due to cyberattacks and how they could affect the power grids.
This project aims to establish an actuarial framework for strategizing
technological improvements of countermeasures against emerging cyberattacks on
wide-area power networks. By establishing an actuarial framework to evaluate and
manage cyber risks, this project will promote a self-sustaining ecosystem for
the energy infrastructure, which will eventually help to improve overall social
welfare. The advances in cyber insurance will stimulate actuarial research in
handling extreme cyber events. In addition, the research and practice related to
cybersecurity and cyber insurance for the critical energy infrastructure will be
promoted by educating the next generation of the workforce and disseminating the
research results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
develop an actuarial framework of risk management for power grid cybersecurity.
It involves transformative research on using insurance as a cyber risk
management instrument for contemporary power grids. The generation of
comprehensive vulnerabilities and reliability-based knowledge from extracted
security logs and cyber-induced reliability degradation analysis can enable the
establishment of risk portfolios for electric utilities to improve their
preparedness in protecting the power infrastructure against cyber threats. The
major thrusts of this project are: 1) developing an approach to quantifying
cyber risks in power grids and determining how mitigation schemes could affect
the cascading consequences to widespread instability; 2) studying
comprehensively how hypothesized cyberattack scenarios would impact the grid
reliability by performing a probabilistic cyber risk assessment; and 3) using
the findings from the first two thrusts to construct actuarial models. Potential
cyberattack-induced losses on electric utilities will be assessed, based on
which insurance policies will be designed and the associated capital market will
be explored.