* 1739160
* Planets around evolved binary stars
* MPS,AST
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Smadar Naoz, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 02/28/2022
* USD 400,483.00

Exoplanets are found around many different types and ages of stars. Many planets
circle closer to their host stars than the distance from our Sun to its closest
planet, Mercury. Older stars, however, can have many planets but very few
planets located close to the star itself. This research addresses the question
of how planets in systems having two stars that orbit each other, or binary
stars, survive. The Principal Investigator will organize a program for pre-
college students with an interest in astronomy who are diagnosed with dyslexia,
ADHD, and/or autism spectrum disorder. The goal of the program is to encourage
these high schoolers to pursue higher education and to help them overcome
obstacles that they could encounter on their way. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will utilize the hierarchical secular three body approximation and will
include relevant physical processes, such as general relativity, tides and
stellar evolution. The investigators will link their work to astronomical
observations by providing specific predictions that are testable when compared
to current and future observations. This research expands our knowledge of
interactions taking place beyond the limits of our solar system, the regime from
which astrodynamics theory originated. Since every star will undergo various
post main sequence evolutionary stages this study will provide a detailed
analysis of the fate of planetary systems in evolved stellar
binaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.