* 1739163
* INFEWS/T3: Strategic FEW and Workforce Investments to Enhance Viability of Controlled Environment Agriculture in Metropolitan Areas
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Marianne Nyman, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 12/31/2022
* USD 2,423,476.00

Controlled environment agriculture (CEA), such as greenhouses or plant
factories, may provide an alternative to conventional systems of field-based
production and long-distance transportation to supply metropolitan areas with
locally-grown vegetables. Potential benefits of metro CEA include decreased
transportation of the food, reduced water use compared with field-based
production, economic growth, and new jobs and workforce development. However,
comprehensive information is lacking on the profitability of alternative CEA
production technologies, the characteristics of the work force required for
those production systems, the energy and water requirements under different
external conditions, and the scale of CEA production compared with conventional
field production. A systems modeling approach is being used to compare the
economics and environmental effects of CEA versus field vegetable supply chains.
This research project also evaluates novel systems to optimize economic benefits
as well as water, energy, and other resource use efficiencies in CEA vegetable
production. It fosters industry-research networks and workforce development
programs to facilitate the acceptance, adoption, and continued improvement of
viable CEA systems in metropolitan areas. Collectively, the project 1) Lays the
groundwork for more sustainable FEW systems exemplified by CEA and vegetable
production; 2) Provides knowledge and insights to enable informed decision
making by policy makers, city planners, entrepreneurs, and current CEA
operations; and 3) Develops education resources to train an appropriate
workforce for a growing CEA industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Controlled
environment agriculture (CEA), which encompasses greenhouses, plant factories,
or vertical farms, may be a viable alternative to conventional field-based
production of vegetables to supply metropolitan areas. However, fundamental
knowledge is lacking on CEA economic and ecological viability and scalability to
substantially replace existing food systems. Whereas metropolitan CEA is land
and transportation efficient, major barriers include: substantial energy inputs,
fundamental knowledge to improve plant productivity in closed systems, and lack
of a skilled workforce. The project's transdisciplinary team of plant
scientists, chemists, engineers, economists, systems modelers, and computer
scientists are developing a multi-dimensional toolkit to assess and guide the
systematic and appropriate development of metropolitan CEA. A systems modeling
approach is being used to understand the energy, water, and carbon footprints
for greenhouses, plant factories, and vertical farms using both status quo CEA
technologies and future scenarios based on plant research results. Information
is being made available to policy planners and entrepreneurs to assess the
environmental impacts of CEA adoption; no comprehensive previous information
exists. Further, the factors necessary for financial feasibility of metro-based
CEA operations are being systematically assessed and consolidated into a
decision-support system for potential CEA operations. The potential to scale up
metro-based CEA systems to provide a substantial proportion of selected
vegetables to a specific metropolitan market is being assessed, including an
analysis of market competition and agglomeration economies. Because metro-area
residents are not necessarily prepared for careers in agriculture, the project
identifies workforce needs and creates several structured workforce development
opportunities (curricula, short courses, and internships). It is anticipated
that the research results from this project will be highly transferrable to many
regions in the USA and elsewhere. The project also develops scientific and
leadership skills for several groups. Through planning and organization related
to their specific projects, the graduate students working on this project gain
valuable leadership experience working with undergraduate students in an
interdisciplinary collaborative environment between the involved labs. The
project research provides research experience to at least six undergraduate
students, and several undergraduate students are participating in summer
internship experiences with CEA industry members. Workforce development
training, including online curricula and in-person short courses, will
contribute to the professional development of potential metro CEA employees.