* 1739705
* INFEW/T2:WaterSmart: A Cyberinfrastructure-Based Integrated Agro-Geoinformatic Decision-Support Web Service System to Facilitate Informed Irrigation Decision-Making
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Fei Chen, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,342,195.00

Irrigation significantly increases crop yields but consumes approximately 80% of
consumptive water and 23-48% of all energy used in crop production in U.S.
Therefore, developing low-cost efficient irrigation technologies, applicable at
the state or even national level, will have significant impact in enhancing
agricultural profitability and competitivity and environmental and economical
health. Data-driven irrigation scheduling approaches, based on timely and
reliable measures of crop, soil, and weather conditions, have demonstrated
significant water and energy savings and economic and environmental benefits,
but require farmers to have knowledge of the approaches and timely and reliable
measures, which they don't normally possess. The project will strengthen food
and energy security and environmental health of our nation, bring immense
economic benefits to farmers, and help the US Department of Agriculture reach
its 2030 sustainable agriculture goals. The goals are to save ~10% of overall
irrigation water and energy usage, maximize irrigation returns on food and
energy, and reduce farmer's required time and investment in irrigation
management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WaterSmart, if successfully demonstrated in
Nebraska, can be scaled to national level, resulting in a potential direct
saving of 8.85 million acre-feet of water and $270 million in irrigation energy
cost per year. WaterSmart will be built through maturing and systematically
integrating recent advances in data-driven irrigation management, remote
sensing, agro-geoinformatics, ontology-driven decision-making, modeling, Web
service, and CI technologies. This project will automate data-driven approaches
by developing a cyberinfrastructure (CI)-based integrated agro-geoinformatic
decision-support Web service system, WaterSmart, and demonstrating its real-time
operational capability for Nebraska at virtually no cost to farmers.