* 1739736
* CPS: Medium: Security Certification of Autonomous Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,01/31/2018
* Yier Jin, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 01/31/2018
* USD 830,649.00

Automation is being increasingly introduced into every man-made system. The
thrust to achieve trustworthy autonomous systems, which can attain goals
independently in the presence of significant uncertainties and for long periods
of time without any human intervention, has always been enticing. Significant
progress has been made in the avenues of both software and hardware for meeting
these objectives. However, technological challenges still exist and particularly
in terms of decision making under uncertainty. In an autonomous system,
uncertainties can arise from the operating environment, adversarial attacks, and
from within the system. While a lot of work has been done on ensuring safety of
systems under standard sensing errors, much less attention has been given on
securing it and its sensors from attacks. As such, autonomous cyber-physical
systems (CPS), which rely heavily on sensing units for decision making, remain
vulnerable to such attacks. Given the fact that the age of autonomous CPS is
upon us and their influence is gradually increasing, it becomes an urgent task
to develop effective solutions to ensure the security and trustworthiness of
autonomous CPS under adversarial attacks. The researchers of this project
provide a comprehensive real-time, resource-aware solution for detection and
recovery of autonomous CPS from physical and cyber-attacks. This project also
includes effort to educate and prepare the community for the potential cyber and
physical threats on autonomous CPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the observation
that a thorough security certification of autonomous CPS will provide formal
evaluation of autonomous CPS, the researchers in this project intend to develop
methods to facilitate manufacturers for certifying security solutions. Toward
this goal, the researchers will first develop new theories to understand the
impact of physical and cyber-attack on system level properties such as
controllability, stability, and safety. They will then develop algorithms for
detection and recovery of CPS from physical attacks on active sensors. The
proposed recovery method will ensure the integrity of sensor measurements when
the system is under attack. Furthermore, a new analysis framework will be
constructed that uses platform-based design methodology to represent the CPS and
verifies it against design metric constraints such as security, timing,
resource, and performance. The key contributions of this project towards
autonomous CPS security certification include 1) a comprehensive study of
relationship between attacks and system-level properties; 2) algorithms and
their optimization for detection and automatic recovery of autonomous CPS from
attacks; and 3) systematically quantifying impact of security on design metrics.