* 1739491
* SI2-SSE:GeoVisuals Software: Capturing, Managing, and Utilizing GeoSpatial Multimedia Data for Collaborative Field Research
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Andrew Curtis, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Videos, photos, and narratives (audio, text, graphics) enriched with geospatial
coordinates can be used to capture spatial data and associated contextual
information for a variety of challenging environments. These data can fill gaps
where no data exists, capture ephemeral or constantly changing information, and
provide contextual insights that elevate local knowledge beyond more traditional
methods. Example applications might include how a slum in Haiti changes after a
vaccination intervention following a cholera outbreak, or identifying patterns
of homeless camps (and their temporal stability) in Los Angeles. The GeoVisuals
software system and a Web-based GeoVisuals Data Repository bridge the gap
between the diversity of researcher needs and data infrastructure challenges
often encountered "in the field". The computing infrastructures help domain
researchers and decision-makers capture, manage, query and visualize such big,
dynamic data to conduct exploratory and analytical tasks. The utilization of the
tools spans across disciplines as diverse as anthropology, clinical health,
criminology, disaster management, epidemiology, geography, planning, and
sociology. GeoVisuals is being developed with collaboration from many domain
researchers in academia, various branches of government, and non-profit sectors,
and funded by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure and the Directorate
of Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences (SBE). It is shared to users as
public-licensed software with free access.

The GeoVisuals software consists of a mobile data collection module, a data
transmission module, a data storage and computing module, and a visual analytics
module. The software helps users to: (1) Capture and transfer geospatial
multimedia data in a variety of different field settings ranging from developed
countries with advanced IT infrastructures, to countries that still lack a
reliable access to the Internet; (2) Manage and explore the collected data, when
the data scale and dimensions impose technical challenges for non-IT
professionals. It allows for the easy merging and query of GPS, video, audio,
narratives, and so on - with flexibility for multiple input types; (3) Apply
qualitative, quantitative, and spatial data analysis with mining algorithms,
visual representations, and interactions. This robust and easy-to-use software
enables the users to conduct information foraging and sense making on geospatial
multimedia data. The GeoVisuals Data Repository allows field researchers to
share their own data and access the analytical and visualization functions
through a web-based platform, being inspired by the open access GenBank for
biomedical researchers. The software and the data repository advance the
research activities and grant applications of worldwide researchers and
educators related to field studies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.