* 1739034
* CICI: RSARC: DDoS Defense In Depth for DNS
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* John Heidemann, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2021
* USD 997,226.00

Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attacks continue to plague the Internet.
Attacks have significant effects on social media, content and many other
Internet services. Malicious actors are becoming increasingly sophisticated and
are employing methods to hide their attack origins, amplify the size of their
attacks, and use huge botnets that simply overwhelm their targets. This project
directly addresses these advanced attacks by developing and deploying a defense
in depth approach, called Deep Layers, to mitigate the types of DDoS attacks
seen most recently. Deep Layers will be deployed to protect B-Root, the critical
infrastructure that is one of thirteen providers of the Domain Name System (DNS)
service for the top level (root) of Internet names that begin with
www.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Deep Layers solution to DDoS attacks integrates
two approaches to filter spoofed traffic, two approaches to identify known-good
traffic (hop-count filtering and prioritization of known-good clients), with the
addition of a cloud-based scaling component to handle the largest attacks. The
combination of these steps address an array of increasingly sophisticated
attacks, ranging from those seen today to those that would be possible in the
future, significantly increasing DNS resilience to DDoS attacks. The project
integrates and extends several recent successful research approaches to DDoS
defense and demonstrates their effectiveness on the B-root critical
infrastructure. The project demonstrates Deep layers on the B-Root DNS server,
and makes it available to other DNS operations as open source software. The work
vastly improves the reliability of the DNS critical infrastructure, benefiting
all Internet users.