* 1739145
* SI2-SSE: Infrastructure Enabling Broad Adoption of New Methods That Yield Orders-of-Magnitude Speedup of Molecular Simulation Averaging
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* David Kofke, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2021
* USD 508,234.00

There is, today, a strong expectation that future materials will be studied in
huge numbers first on the computer, and the best candidates for synthesis in the
laboratory will be identified computationally. In this way engineers can
efficiently formulate new materials that are lighter, stronger, or otherwise
more functionally effective. Such advances are needed across all fields of
technology, from energy to medicine to transportation to manufacturing. Recent
advances from the molecular modeling community toward quantifying atomic
interactions are rapidly eliminating a key obstacle to realization of this
vision. Yet, an important obstacle remains: the thermal properties of materials
-- those that are important at all but the lowest temperatures -- are needed to
predict crystal structures and properties at conditions of practical interest.
These properties are too expensive to compute for many materials at once, as
needed for a computation-based screening effort. The project team has developed
an algorithm that significantly accelerates these calculations without any loss
of accuracy, and therefore goes a long way toward removing this obstacle. The
aim of this project is to make this breakthrough available to researchers who
are using molecular simulation to understand and develop new materials. To this
end, this project will refine and extend these methods, and then add computer
code to widely-used molecular simulation packages so that they can perform
calculations using these new techniques. The team is additionally making efforts
to promote awareness and ensure ease-of-use of the methods and their
implementation.

"Mapped averaging" is a recently published scheme for the reformulation of
ensemble averages. The framework uses approximate results from statistical
mechanical theory to derive new ensemble averages (mapped averages) that
represent exactly the error in the theory. Well-conceived mapped averages can be
computed by molecular simulation with remarkable precision and efficiency; in
favorable cases the computational savings are many orders of magnitude. For
crystalline systems, a harmonic approximation provides a suitable starting
point, allowing simulation to compute precisely the anharmonic contribution to
the properties. The result is a technique for computing crystalline properties
with unprecedented, transformative efficiency. The aim of this project is to
implement these methods on well-established and widely used software packages
for simulation of crystalline systems, and to develop mapped averages for new
applications of interest to the users of these systems. The theoretical basis
for this project appeared in the literature very recently (2015), so the
proposed work is completely novel. The techniques are not trivial to understand
and are tedious implement, hence adoption by the larger community will require
this targeted infrastructure development to make them more accessible to casual
users. The full development team includes the computational scientists and
software engineers who coded, maintain and distribute the packages where these
elements will be introduced. This group assists the project investigators to
interface with the simulation packages while ensuring that the new codes are
written to the highest standards. The full development team works together also
to ensure that the software elements are thoroughly validated for correctness
and usability. In addition to the implementation, the project also aims to
expand the scope of the mapped-averaging method to encompass properties and
substances to which it was not previously applied. This project enables mapped
averaging methods to be employed on several widely-used molecular simulation
packages: viz, LAMMPS, HOOMD, Cassandra, and VASP, which altogether have a base
encompassing thousands of users. Software elements implemented in this project
are in many cases completely transparent to the users of these packages, and can
be employed by them with no added complication, to speed up their calculations
by orders of magnitude. Thus the efforts made in this project will produce an
enabling technology, giving scientists and engineers new capabilities to
formulate materials for practical applications. Development tools and scripts
are constructed in this project, which will facilitate the extension of mapped-
averaging methods by other developers to even more molecular simulation
packages, material properties, and molecular model systems. Software developed
for this project is distributed open-source. Knowledge developed in this project
is consolidated to form course materials made available on the web, and used as
part of a large component of a graduate molecular simulation course taught by
the PI. Training of 1 PhD student and numerous MS and undergraduates occurs
across the project period. A strong dissemination effort involving papers,
documentation, presentations, and workshops ensure that these methods and tools
are understood and adopted by the community. Finally, instructional,
graphically-oriented molecular simulation modules are developed and made
available on the web to convey concepts related to harmonic and anharmonic
components of crystalline behavior, with unique capabilities made possible by
the mapped averaging framework.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.