* 1739505
* CPS: Small: Recovery Algorithms for Dynamic Infrastructure Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2022
* Hamsa Balakrishnan, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 10/31/2022
* USD 449,765.00

Most critical infrastructures have evolved into complex systems comprising large
numbers of interacting elements. These interactions result in the spread of
disruptions, such as delays, from one part of the system to another, and even
from one infrastructure to another. Effective tools for the analysis and control
of real-world infrastructures need to account for the underlying
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key insight in this research is that by
learning data-driven models of infrastructure networks, and using these models
to determine dynamics-aware recovery algorithms, we can greatly improve the
resilience of critical infrastructure networks. We propose to address these
challenges by:&lt;br/&gt;1. Learning and validating scalable representations of
real systems from data. By considering continuous states, and by modeling the
time-varying nature of connectivity as switching between network topologies, we
propose to obtain a class of switched linear system models. Multilayer network
models will be developed to account for airline networks, and multimodal
systems.&lt;br/&gt;2. Characterizing resilience, both for the system as a whole,
and in terms of individual nodes (e.g., susceptibility to network delays). The
metrics to evaluate resilience will encompass both steady-state and transient
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;3. Using the identified models to design optimal control
algorithms that can enable recovery from disruptions, taking into account
network dynamics, the uncertainty in operating environments, and the costs of
decisions to restore service at various levels, at various
times.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the research will be validated using
operational data, thereby yielding a set of tools for system diagnostics,
analysis, and recovery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improving and maintaining critical
infrastructures are among the grand challenges identified by the National
Academy of Engineering. The proposed research will develop techniques grounded
in network science, machine learning, and systems and control theory in order to
effectively design and operate infrastructures. The development of common
frameworks and abstractions for these infrastructures will enable the study of
their interdependencies. With the rapid growth of intelligent infrastructures,
the proposed research will benefit society, and also help attract and train the
next generation of engineering professionals.