* 1739003
* NSF-NERC: Melting at Thwaites Grounding Zone and its Control on Sea Level  (THWAITES-MELT)
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Eric Rignot, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 03/31/2024
* USD 2,588,328.00

This project contributes to the joint initiative launched by the U.S. National
Science Foundation (NSF) and the U.K. Natural Environment Research Council
(NERC) to substantially improve decadal and longer-term projections of ice loss
and sea-level rise originating from Thwaites Glacier in West Antarctica. The
fate of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) is one of the largest uncertainties
in projections of sea-level change. Thwaites Glacier (TG) is a primary
contributor to sea-level rise and its flow is accelerating. This faster flow is
a response to reduced buttressing from its thinning, floating ice shelf, and is
ultimately caused by ocean-driven melting. The degree to which costly and
geopolitically-challenging sea-level rise will occur therefore hangs to a large
extent on ice-ocean interactions beneath such Antarctic ice shelves. However,
the Thwaites system is not sufficiently well understood, exposing a significant
gap in our understanding of WAIS retreat, its ocean-driven forcing, and the
consequences for sea level. The chief regulators of TG's retreat are ice and
ocean processes in its grounding zone, the location where the ice flowing from
inland goes afloat. Ice and ocean processes at this precise locale are central
to our understanding of sea-level rise, yet key variables have not been
constrained by observation. Model projections of TG's future display extreme
sensitivity to melting in the grounding zone and how that melting is applied.
Equally-credible melt rates and grounding-zone glaciological treatments yield
divergent trajectories for the future of West Antarctica, ranging from little
change to large-scale ice sheet collapse with a half a meter or more of sea-
level rise. The enormous uncertainty in outcome stems from the lack of
observations in this critical grounding zone region. The enhanced understanding
of melting of TG's ice shelf that will come from this project's focused
observational program will be built into state-of-the-art coupled ice-sheet and
ocean models. These physics-rich, high-resolution models will allow the
potential sea-level contribution of TG to be bounded to an unprecedented
degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable global and regional
climate modelers to make a substantial improvement to projections of future
ocean conditions over the continental shelf by providing physics-based
projections of TG's sea-level contribution. The team proposes a suite of
integrated activities: (1) multi-year oceanographic time series from beneath
TG's ice shelf to quantify melting processes that need inclusion in ocean
models, with a strong focus on the grounding zone, (2) analogous measurements on
the glacier to validate processes governing grounding-line retreat, (3) coupling
of these in situ measurements with novel, high-resolution space-borne
observations, (4) building this new understanding into state-of-the-art ocean
(MIT General Circulation Model and Imperial College Ocean Model) and ice sheet
(WAVI) models to correctly simulate the TG system, (5) coupling the models and
running with realistic present-day ocean forcing to project the state of TG
basin over the next hundred years. The international team will use a range of
techniques, from the well-established, such as using a hot-water drill to
instrument the ice column and water column in the grounding zone, through to the
cutting-edge, such as deploying a borehole deployable remotely operated vehicle
to survey the grounding zone, and using phase-coherent radar to monitor ice
strain and basal melt rates. The outcome of the project will be a more complete
understanding of the TG system in the critical zone extending from a few
kilometers inland of the grounding line, through the grounding zone, and out
under the ice shelf.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.