* 1739525
* CPS: Small: Cyber-Physical Communication for Cooperative Human-Robot Mobility
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Hossein Rastgoftar, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Human-robot teams engaged in transportation and data collection will often share
a common physical workspace. This project will investigate fundamental
challenges in human-cyberphysical-systems (h-CPS) for cooperative aerial payload
transport. First, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) cooperatively lift and carry a
payload through a cluttered environment under uncertain winds. The multi-UAV
system (MUS) functions autonomously to allow human companions to focus attention
on their environment while interacting with the MUS. We propose a novel
interface where an operator pushes on the slung payload to guide the team and
coordinates the mission through a networked tablet. A novel cooperative control
strategy safely guides the MUS while physics-based algorithms distinguish human
inputs from environmental disturbances. Flight tests will demonstrate and
validate the h-CPS. The PI and mentored postdoctoral researcher will involve
students from under-represented groups and K-12 students in safe MUS flight
demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project offers three research
advances: MUS scalability and collision avoidance guarantees through continuum
deformation cooperative control, safe MUS compensation for vehicle anomalies,
and cognitively-tractable user interfaces. Particularly novel to this work is
the h-CPS interface in which an operator pushes on the payload to guide the MUS
team. We will apply linear momentum analysis to sense haptic cues and will
validate our models in simulation and flight testing. Mission-level decision-
making will be performed through system modeling as a Markov game in which game
states are de&amp;#64257;ned from human, environment, and aggregate MUS state.
Our method abstracts MUS behaviors to reduce cognitive complexity and real-time
network and computational overhead.