* 1739816
* CPS: Medium: Quantitative Contract-Based Synthesis and Verification for CPS Security
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Alberto Sangiovanni-Vincentelli, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2021
* USD 800,000.00

Cyber-physical systems (CPS) are deployed in safety-critical and mission-
critical applications for which security is a primary design concern. At the
same time, these systems must be designed to be more flexible to changing
requirements and environment conditions. This project pursues foundational work
on a new methodology for CPS design to enable a "plug-and-play" approach that
also ensures the security and safety of the system from the design phase. Such a
principled design approach can have an enormous positive impact on the emerging
national "smart" infrastructure. Through collaborations with industry partners,
the project aims to improve the design process in the CPS industry with a
particular focus on automotive systems. Additionally, this project plans to
integrate research into undergraduate and graduate coursework, especially
capstone projects, and will have an impact on the textbooks and online course
content developed by the researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops
a fundamentally new theory for quantitative contract-based design of CPS that
balances security requirements with critical safety and performance concerns.
This theory meets a pressing need faced by industrial cyber-physical systems,
which are being transformed by a push towards "plug-and-play" design
architectures. This push tends to upend the design process for CPS, bringing
with it renewed concerns about security and privacy. The proposed approach has
the following key components: (i) a precise interface specification for each
"plug-in" component in a novel quantitative temporal logic; (ii) rapid, run-time
verification methods for checking component conformance to specifications, and
(iii) A new approach for mapping components onto existing architectures while
satisfying performance and security specifications, and minimizing costs. The
approach will be developed and evaluated in an industrial automotive context.
The proposed rigorous logic-based formalism, backed by algorithmic advances in
verification and synthesis, has the potential to create new fundamental science
and help put the industrial trend towards plug-and-play architectures on a firm
footing.