* 1739969
* CPS: Medium: Cyber Attack-Defense Modeling, Risk and Contingency Analysis for the Power Grid using Game Theory
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Manimaran Govindarasu, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2022
* USD 777,271.00

Modern electric power grid is a complex, interconnected cyber physical system
(CPS) that forms the lifeline of our society. Reliable, secure, and efficient
operation of the grid are of paramount importance to national security and
economic well-being. Recent trends in security indicate the increasing threat of
cyber-based attacks, both in numbers and sophistication, on energy and other
critical infrastructure systems of our nation and the world in general. To
address this growing threat, there is a compelling research need to develop a
holistic cyber security framework that encompasses attack deterrence, attack
prevention, attack detection, attack mitigation and resilience, and attack
attribution and forensics. Risk assessment is one of the fundamental building
blocks that cut across attack prevention, mitigation, and resilience. The
existing tools for risk assessment and mitigation are mostly qualitative and
often subjective, and hence they are grossly inadequate to capture the dynamic
and uncertain nature of the adversaries and the complex cyber-physical couplings
that exist in the grid. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a
scientific methodology, algorithms, and tools for cyber risk assessment, attack-
defense modeling, and cyber contingency analysis by leveraging game theoretic
tools and solution strategies. The developed security algorithms and tools will
be evaluated in a realistic CPS security testbed environment at Iowa State
University and the results will be broadly shared with research community and
also with industry for potential adoption. The innovative applications of game
theoretic formulations and tools will help to develop secure and resilient
algorithms that will prevent and mitigate attacks and will make the future grid
resilient to both faults and cyber-attacks. The research also will have broader
impacts in improving the security and resiliency of other CPS-based critical
infrastructure systems, such as oil and natural gas networks and transportation
networks. Through the associated educational and outreach activities, via
graduate courses, undergraduate capstone projects, and K-12 outreach program,
the project will contribute to a highly skilled workforce in this area of
national need. The project will help diversity in cybersecurity workforce by
engaging women and underrepresented minorities in research and educational
activities. In addition, the project will significantly contribute to imparting
hands-on cybersecurity training to industry professionals using the testbed
platform. Both educational and training modules will be made available to a
broader academic and industry communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
vision of this project is to transform the fault-resilient grid of today into an
attack-resilient grid of the future. Towards achieving this vision, the goal of
the project is to develop and evaluate algorithms and tools that will
significantly advance the state-of-the-art cyber risk assessment, attack-defense
modeling, and cyber contingency analysis. This goal will be accomplished by
undertaking the following research tasks: (1) Develop fundamental game-theoretic
formulations (single stage, multi-stage, Bayesian) for attack-defense modeling
for the power grid using behavioral and learning models; (2) Develop a
quantitative cyber risk assessment and mitigation methodology that capture all
three components of risk -- namely, threats, vulnerabilities, and consequences
-- using pragmatic game-theoretic formulations, and optimize the security
investments to defend the grid against high-risk attacks; (3) Develop scalable
techniques and tools for real-time operational planning using game-theoretic
formulations to account for multiple contingencies arising due to coordinated
cyber-attacks, and integrate them into a dynamic contingency analysis
methodology as part of the Energy Management System (EMS); (4) Evaluate the
effectiveness and scalability of the developed solutions and tools on Iowa State
CPS security testbed environment using realistic attack-defense scenarios
leveraging well documented power and cyber system topologies and synthetic
attack traces and also leveraging Iowa State industry partnerships in Electric
Power Research Center (EPRC) and Power System Research Center (PSERC).