* 1739025
* CICI: CE: Improving the Security of a Science DMZ
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Dipak Ghosal, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2021
* USD 754,094.00

The term "big science" refers to science that involves massive amounts of data.
Moving this data through ordinary networks is very slow, in part because the
amount of data is more than ordinary networks are designed to handle, and in
part because of the checking that network security mechanisms perform. The
"science DMZ" (DeMilitarized Zone) is a special network designed to move massive
amounts of data very quickly. The need to do so results in compromises affecting
security; checking is done on entry, and only for the first part of the
connection. If the connection is suspicious, it is blocked; otherwise, it is
allowed through. This project extends the checking by sampling the data in the
connection throughout the lifetime of the connection. Then, if something
suspicious is detected in the samples, appropriate action can be taken. A second
goal of this project is to determine what procedural or technical actions are
most effective when malicious flows are detected. The final goal is to determine
how to speed up the security analysis so the impact on the throughput is both
minimal and acceptable. The overall goal is to secure the science DMZ network
without sacrificing speed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, on a science
DMZ, large amounts of data are moved, making it very difficult to secure, so
data is sampled only when a connection starts and is analyzed without blocking
the connection. If the analysis shows it is malicious, a filter rule is added to
the router to drop packets in that connection. This project samples not just at
the beginning, but at various times while the connection is active. If something
malicious starts during the connection, it can be detected. What to do when
suspicious flows are identified is less clear; the project will examine both
technical and procedural methods, for example slowing down the flow to where it
can be analyzed thoroughly, and then if indeed malicious, provide information to
the Chief Information Security Officer?s (CISO) office to enable them to take
action. If the flow is not malicious (i.e., a false positive, confirmed by the
more detailed analysis), the rate reduction will cease. A key question is how to
reduce the time needed for the sampling analysis. Part of this project is to
examine how to speed up intrusion detection systems by using GPUs in order to do
a quicker analysis.