* 1739517
* CPS:Small:Collaborative Research: Incentivizing Desirable User Behavior in a Class of CPS
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Mingyan Liu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2020
* USD 250,000.00

In Cyberphysical Systems (CPS) such as large scale infrastructure systems,
individual users are shifting from being passive consumers of services to active
participants. This shift promises societal, economic, and environmental
benefits. For example, turning consumers into "prosumers" through distributed
renewable energy integration can improve sustainability, and turning users into
sources of data about traffic and road conditions can help alleviate congestion.
However, an explosion of decision makers also leads to heterogeneity in
concerns, aims, and quality of decision making. Participants will optimize their
decisions on data collection, data sharing, and actuation based on their own
self-interest. In an interconnected system, these decisions will affect the
system state, and hence, the utilities other participants derive from the
system. In extreme cases, undesirable and unintended consequences such as
instability can also ensue from actions of a few decision makers. Thus, there is
an urgent need to understand and modulate decision making by various
participants so that they internalize the impact on system performance and
utilities of the other participants that their decisions produce; the proposed
research solves basic problems in this domain. The proposed research has
potentially substantial social and economic impact. The general trend in CPS
systems, such as infrastructure systems, is to allow users to become active
participants. However, this will challenge the traditional algorithms and
organization for such systems. Since most CPS systems provide basic services to
the population, designs that guarantee reliable operation in spite of strategic
behavior of self-interested participants are needed. The research is coupled
with an education plan that includes integration of research and education,
curriculum design, student advising and training, as well as
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing approaches such as cooperative control
or competitive game theory in which participants are price takers are
insufficient to consider strategic behavior by participants. Motivated by this
observation, this proposal will advance the science of CPS by (i) abstracting
this problem into one of designing contracts by which the decisions of strategic
users, who may anticipate the effect of their actions and misreport any
information, can be aligned to obtain desired system performance, (ii)
presenting new mechanisms for this model under several assumptions inspired by
large scale CPS such as smart infrastructure systems, and (iii) demonstrating
the efficacy of this framework by applying it to several CPS case studies. The
proposed approach couples optimization and systems theory with economics and
mechanism design as well as models and constraints from specific infrastructure
systems.