* 1740310
* Collaborative Proposal:  SI2-SSE:  An open source multi-physics platform to advance fundamental understanding of plasma physics and enable impactful application of plasma systems
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Davide Curreli, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2019
* USD 160,001.00

As the world moves toward a more sustainable life cycle for vital resources, new
techniques for the synthesis, modification, or remediation of materials will be
needed.  Techniques that utilize plasma discharges will make significant
contributions to a more sustainable nexus spanning food, water, and energy.  To
advance the fundamental understanding of these plasma-based systems and how they
interact with the materials that will drive this higher level of sustainability,
the ability to simulate both the complex interactions within the plasma itself
and the complex interaction of the plasma with surrounding materials is needed. 
This project will provide a powerful simulation platform to the scientific
community that will enable the study of plasma chemistry formation and plasma
material interaction with a level of fidelity that is not currently available to
researchers around the world.  The open-source framework for this platform will
enable researchers from institutions around the world to contribute to the
capabilities of this framework and advance the underlying science of these
systems to move toward a more sustainable food, energy, and water nexus.

To advance plasma-based technology that will enable greater sustainability in
the future food, energy, and water nexus, there exists an overarching need for
advances in simulation capability that address four unifying research
challenges, 1.) Plasma Produced Selectivity in Reaction Mechanisms in the Volume
and on Surfaces, 2.) Interfacial Plasma Phenomena, 3.) Multiscale, Non-
Equilibrium Chemical Physics, and 4.) Synergy and Complexity in Plasmas.  This
research effort will expand, deploy, and support a powerful open-source multi-
physics platform that will enable advanced simulation in these unifying research
areas.  A plasma science simulation application will be expanded to include
complex multi-phase chemistries, multiple-domain simulation of the interface
between plasmas and other material phases, and fully coupled electro-magnetic
treatment of plasma systems that will link plasma formation mechanisms with
underlying chemical and electrical multi-phase interactions.  Zapdos will be
supported on the existing multi-physics Object Oriented Simulation Environment
(MOOSE) and will leverage the existing support, verification, revision tracking,
and training infrastructure and best known methods employed by both MOOSE and
the 22 developed applications (including Zapdos) that currently reside on the
MOOSE framework. This proposal will leverage collaboration not only between the
two partnering universities, but with framework developers (Idaho National
Laboratory), existing users (Oak Ridge National Laboratory), and the broader
plasma community (APS Topical Meeting on Gaseous Electronics) to develop
efficient development, deployment, support, and training of this impactful
simulation tool.

This project is supported by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the
Directorate for Computer & Information Science & Engineering, the Physics
Division and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate of
Mathematical and Physical Sciences, and the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems in the Directorate of
Engineering.