* 1740544
* I-Corps: Accurate GPS-free Navigation and Localization
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2018
* Suman Chakravorty, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 03/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to develop
autonomous navigation technology that will enable systems to robustly operate in
uncertain environments without a Global Positioning System (GPS). The project is
a result of a confluence of astronomy, aerospace, computational science and
artificial intelligence. Commercialization of this technology has the potential
to revolutionize space exploration, self-driving cars, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
(UAVs) and other such systems which need accurate position estimation. A key
advantage of this project's technology is enhanced cybersecurity as it does not
rely on external signals for navigation. Further, this project will contribute
open-source software to the scientific community. It is envisioned that
development of a software toolbox that integrates with the popular ROS (Robot
Operating System) library will allow researchers to simulate autonomous
navigation without GPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is a result of
research into the problem of Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM). In
SLAM, a robot is not given prior knowledge of its environment, it must use its
sensory data and actions to simultaneously build a map of its environment and
position itself within its uncertain map. Competing methods in this area exhibit
positioning errors which may be unsuitable for long-term navigation. The work
developed here shows that by fusing orientation sensing with short-range
sensing, the system attain a simplification of the underlying optimization
problem. This allows fast and globally optimal solutions. In this approach, a
vehicle uses a camera to track celestial bodies in the sky which allows the
vehicle to estimate its orientation in space, this information is fused with
short-range sensors such as lasers and cameras which track features in vicinity
of the vehicle. Using the proposed approach, a system can achieve 100x
improvement in position error over existing methods.