* 1740203
* PK-4: Self-Ordering of Interacting Complex Plasma Particles in Microgravity
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Marlene Rosenberg, Baylor University
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 05/31/2022
* USD 540,000.00

This project will utilize a facility called Plasma Krystal-4 (PK-4) on the
International Space Station to conduct experiments in microgravity investigating
the underlying physics behind self-ordering of interacting complex plasma dust
particles. Complex plasma, also known as dusty plasma, consist of ions,
electrons and charged nanometer to micron sized solid particles known as dust.
Dusty plasmas have long been of interest in the astrophysics community. For
example, the material from which stars and planets form, interstellar clouds,
and even planetary rings all consist of dusty plasma. Dusty plasmas are also
present on the Earth, particularly in industrial plasma applications, while the
controlled formation of dust crystals in a laboratory setting provides a useful
analog for both atomic and molecular systems, allowing fundamental progress in
our understanding of the physics involved. As such, dusty plasma research
enables the progress of science while allowing insight into practical issues of
yield efficiency in semiconductor manufacturing. This award will also impact the
STEM workforce through engagement of students who will develop computation and
modeling skills, obtain practical experience with instrumentation, and improve
their technical writing and presentation skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A proper
understanding of the physics underlying the field of dusty plasma research is
complicated by the fact that the majority of research conducted occurs in a
gravitational environment (i.e., on the Earth). This project directly addresses
this issue, utilizing a multinational collaboration to compare studies on self-
ordering of interacting complex plasma dust particles collected on the Earth to
experimental results employing the PK-4 facility under microgravity. Data
obtained will be compared with data from two different ground-based experiments
as well as to results provided by numerical modeling of the plasma / dust
environment using a comprehensive set of analysis techniques. This combination
will be used to define the parameter space where particular wave modes can
exist, and to develop comprehensive theories on interparticle potential and
grain-plasma interactions, determining the microscopic and macroscopic
properties of the complex plasma. The results obtained will directly impact
research in astrophysics and planetary science (e.g., dust in protoplanetary
disks, charged dust on the surface of airless bodies, such as the moon and
asteroids, planetary ring systems), atmospheric physics (e.g., noctilucent
clouds), fusion research (e.g., dust contamination), materials physics (e.g.,
soft matter, metastable states, complex fluids, granular matter), and advanced
manufacturing (e.g., semiconductor, etching, and deposition systems). This award
is made under a "NASA/NSF Partnership on Science of Dusty Plasmas: Utilizing the
PK-4 Facility on board the International Space Station"; a complementary NASA
award to support an undergraduate student is being made under the joint program.