* 1740961
* EAGER: Bio-Inspired Electrochemical Sensing of Small Molecules using Antibodies
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2017,01/31/2018
* Edgar Goluch, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 01/31/2018
* USD 75,000.00

PI: Goluch, Edgar D. &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1740961 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
new approach for measuring small biological molecules such as toxins found in
surface water is proposed. The approach, if successful, can provide a basis for
compact devices that are portable for measuring harmful molecules.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a scarcity of sensors for detection of small
biological molecules. The current approach - enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) - generally cannot be used for sensing small biomolecules due to limited
binding sites on the antigen. An alternative approach is needed. Antibodies that
have antigens bound to them are recognized in mammalian systems by C1q protein.
It is generally accepted that all antibodies undergo a conformational change
when they bind to an antigen. The change is recognized by the protein, C1q,
which attaches to the conserved, Fc, region of the antibody. In the proposed
work, C1q recognition event will be used to examine feasibility of detecting
small bioanalytes in aqueous samples. The binding measurements and
characterization will be performed using commercially available instrument
systems. In the second aim, C1q protein will be modified with a redox-active
molecule for measuring using voltammetry-based electrochemical sensor, as it is
a simple, robust, and mature technology. If the project is successful, it is
expected to be broadly applicable to many sensing application with the potential
to develop a low-cost, portable electrochemical sensing platform. The project
will provide undergraduate and graduate students with multidisciplinary research
experiences that will foster collaboration between engineers and biologists,
preparing them for future workplace environments.