* 1740776
* TRIPODS: Transdisciplinary Research Institute for Advancing Data Science (TRIAD)
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Dana Randall, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,604,238.00

This project creates the Transdisciplinary Research Institute for Advancing Data
Science (TRIAD) at the Georgia Institute of Technology. TRIAD aims to integrate
research and education in mathematical, statistical, and algorithmic foundations
for data science. Analysis of massive, dynamic, noisy, and complex data arising
in virtually every sphere of human activity is a pressing challenge of our time,
and an area of great importance for its economic and societal impact. TRIAD will
address the growing challenges in establishing the foundations of data science,
much of which lies at the intersection of computer science, statistics, and
mathematics. TRIAD's intellectual focus is to design and build transdisciplinary
research programs that provide an enabling and cross-fertilizing platform of
ideas and stakeholders (including theoreticians/scientists from domain sciences
and users of technology). TRIAD hosts focused working groups, national and
international workshops, and organized innovation labs. Participants include
senior, mid-career, and junior faculty members, postdoctoral fellows, graduate
and senior undergraduate students, and data science practitioners at large. All
TRIAD activities involve interdisciplinary personnel from the three foundational
disciplines. TRIAD deploys information technology and communication
infrastructure to quickly and efficiently disseminate its research and
activities, while the research community at large can easily access and
comment/critique TRIAD's choice of research programs and topics. The institute
aims to create an intellectual atmosphere that connects theoreticians and
practitioners, scientists, and engineers from across the nation and worldwide on
a regular basis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TRIAD enriches careers of participants
ranging from undergraduate students to senior researchers from around the
nation. Postdoctoral fellows and graduate students are introduced to
collaborative research in the institute activities and through workshops. TRIAD
makes prudent efforts to reach out to diverse communities, including
participants from smaller colleges and institutions serving under-represented
minorities. TRIAD actively engages in outreach through public lectures, press
releases, and dissemination via other internet channels. TRIAD works with
associated professional societies to provide stimulus to data-science-related
initiatives. Additional activities (such as customized workshops) will combine
interactive projects and field trips to acquaint undergraduate and/or high
school students from all over the U.S. with data-science-related techniques and
the themes of TRIAD's year-long programs. Every effort will be made to make
products and lectures available online and to enable remote participation. Funds
for the project come from CISE Computing and Communications Foundations and MPS
Division of Mathematical Sciences.