* 1740551
* TRIPODS: Algorithms for Data Science: Complexity, Scalability, and Robustness.
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Sham Kakade, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,500,000.00

Award: CCF 1740551, Principal Investigator: Sham
Kakade&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algorithmic tools underpin the ways in which modern
data science methods glean insights from data, manipulate their environments,
and estimate underlying statistical properties in the world. With increasing
computational resources and an unprecedented growth of large datasets, there is
an increased need for scalable and robust algorithmic tools which can provide
insights into data in an automated manner, and thus, help to accelerate the pace
of science and engineering. The modern challenges that a range of fields now
face are no longer easily handled by ideas from a single discipline. A central
goal of this project is to provide a common language and unifying methods for
addressing contemporary data science challenges. At their core, each of the
three disciplines of computer science, mathematics, and statistics has rich
theories of complexity and robustness. These theories have influenced the design
of the available tools that are used to address real world computational
problems. Going forward, this project seeks new algorithms and design principles
that unify ideas and provide a common language for addressing contemporary data
science challenges. The PIs will draw from their expertise in computer science,
mathematics, and statistics to aid in providing these unifying approaches. In
parallel, aiming for a strong educational impact of the work, the aim is to
train students an postdoctoral scholars to be well-versed in different areas
underpinning data science and will incorporate appropriate theoretical ideas
into a data science curriculum. The PIs will also organize events that help
train students (including a hackathon and a bootcamp) and a research workshop
that bring together researchers from the three disciplines for discussion and
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the research objectives of
this project are in unifying basic abstractions and techniques in order to yield
not only further breakthroughs in all three fields, but also to impact societal
and technological growth. The complexity and algorithmic questions this work
seeks to address include: (i) how to unify various notions of complexity (which
range from information theoretic to computational to black box oracle models),
(ii) how to unify notions of robustness and adaptivity (e.g., how solutions and
methods change as oracle models are corrupted by random or adversarial noise),
(iii) how to address optimization challenges due to nonconvexity, and (iv) how
to use these unified approaches to design more effective scalable tools, in
theory and practice. These foundations will directly draw from the PIs close
collaborations with various technological and scientific practitioners. Funds
for the project come from CISE Computing and Communications Foundations, CISE
Information Technology Research, MPS Division of Mathematical Sciences, and MPS
Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.