* 1740855
* TRIPODS: Berkeley Institute on the Foundations of Data Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Michael Mahoney, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,499,999.00

In response to NSF's TRIPODS Phase I initiative, the PIs, with expertise in
theoretical and applied statistics, computer science, and mathematics at the
University of California, Berkeley, will create a Foundations of Data Analysis
(FODA) Institute to address cutting-edge foundational issues in
interdisciplinary data science. The Institute will advance foundational research
and the application of foundational methods through an intensive program of
cross-disciplinary outreach to application domains in and beyond the campus
research community. In parallel with the massive technological and
methodological advances in the underlying disciplines over the past decade, a
thriving array of data-related research and training programs has emerged across
campus. Yet none of these programs within the campus data science ecosystem are
devoted to addressing the interdisciplinary foundations of data analysis in a
focused, mission-driven manner. The FODA Institute will address this crucial
unmet need. This interdisciplinary project will lay the groundwork for more
productive and fruitful interactions between theoretically-inclined data science
researchers and researchers in diverse domains that rely upon, but do not always
explicitly appreciate, foundational concepts. Advances in this area will lead to
more principled extraction of insights from data across a wide range of domains.
The three-year Phase I pilot will pave the way for institutionalization of the
project as a larger center that will be the subject of a potential Phase II
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical research component of the
project addresses four fundamental challenges in data science: the
characterization of what is, and what is not, possible in terms of upper and
lower bounds for inferential optimization problems; probing more deeply the
notion of stability as a computational-inferential principle; exploring the
complementary role of randomness as a statistical resource, as an algorithmic
resource, and as a tool for data-driven computational mathematics; and
developing methods to combine science-based with data-driven models in a
principled manner. Each of these challenges addresses old questions in light of
new needs, each has important synergies with the other challenges, and each is
situated squarely at the interface of theoretical computer science, theoretical
statistics, and applied mathematics. The project will bridge the underlying
interdisciplinary gaps to address some of the most important questions at the
heart of data science today. Funds for the project come from CISE Computing and
Communications Foundations and MPS Division of Mathematical Sciences.