* 1740795
* Fundamental Study of Ordered MXenes and Their Defects
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Yury Gogotsi, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2022
* USD 671,765.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: In 2004, a single atomic layer of graphite, called
graphene, was isolated and its remarkable properties were characterized.
Consequently, interest in two-dimensional, 2D, solids, where the lateral
dimensions are much greater than the thickness has exploded. The awarding of the
Nobel prize for graphene in 2010 fueled further interest. In general, 2D solids
are characterized by very large surface areas. Furthermore, by confining the
electrons, viz. the electric charge carriers, to 2D can also result in new
physics. The most recent family of 2D solid discovered is called MXenes where M
is a transition metal and X is carbon and/or nitrogen. In this project, single
layers of select MXenes are being isolated on a substrate and characterized in
order to better understand the effects of chemistry, temperature, surface
terminations, order, and magnetic fields on electrical transport. These results
are being used to better understand how charge flows in MXenes which, in turn,
is of vital importance to designing better lithium batteries, supercapacitors,
catalysts, and transparent conductive electrodes to name only a few potential
applications of this new and exciting family of 2D solids. Graduate students
involved in this project obtain international experience through participation
in research activities in collaborating laboratories in Europe and Asia.
Undergraduate students are involved in research every summer through Drexel
University's STAR program (which supports students who completed their first
year of studies, have high GPAs and are interested in research). Many of these
students subsequently complete graduate degrees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION: Quite recently, two new classes of quaternary ordered MAX phases
(M',M")n+1AXn, have been discovered: o- and i-MAX for out-of-plane and in-plane
order, respectively. The o-MAX phases are ones where one transition metal
sandwiches the other. The i-MAX phases are 211 (n = 1) phases in which the
M-planes are themselves ordered. With the judicious choice of etchants, neither,
or only one, of the two M elements can be etched - together with the A-layers -
to yield MXenes with ordered divacancies in the latter case. The overarching
scientific goal of the proposed work is to understand, at a fundamental level,
the effects of ordering, both of the M layers and point defects, on the magneto-
transport and optical properties of single 2D flakes and spincast films made of
the same flakes. Some of the questions posed involve the main electron
scattering mechanisms in the ordered/disordered MXenes; what factors influence
carrier densities; the effect of terminations and their order/disorder on these
values; and whether a band gap can be induced in these materials. In terms of
impact, MXenes will likely play a critical/enabling role in the "lego" approach
to heterojunctions 'simply' as ohmic contacts. Furthermore, and despite their
relatively young age, MXenes have already shown great promise as materials in
energy storage - both in supercapacitors and ion batteries/capacitors of lithium
and beyond - electro-magnetic shielding, water purification and desalination,
catalysis, transparent conductive electrodes, reinforcements in polymer
composites among many others. This work facilitates choosing the best MXene
chemistry for any given application.