* 1740630
* CCI Phase I: NSF Center for Chemo-Mechanical Assembly
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Anna Balazs, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,800,000.00

Much as a river current carries a pebble, fluid flows can carry particulates
such as nanoparticles and microcapsules. While mechanical pumps are
conventionally used to drive fluid flow, chemical "pumps" can also propel fluid
by using chemical reaction networks to create gradients in chemical
concentrations and fluid densities. Researchers in the NSF Center for Chemo-
Mechanical Assembly (CCMA) are creating new transformative tools to enable
unprecedented control over fluid flow and particle organization in confined
environments. These precisely controlled fluid flows enable the design of self-
powered, self-sustaining systems that organize particles and are capable of
performing complex functions such as an autonomous nanoparticle system that
detects a chemical source and collectively delivers a response chemical to it
resulting in a vital analysis or creation of a novel structure. The CCMA team
includes expertise in catalysis, synthetic chemistry, physical chemistry, fluid
flow, and modeling. In addition to providing the chemistry community with new
chemical reaction network tools, CCMA is also contributing to science and
technology workforce development by training students in multidisciplinary
experimental and modeling techniques. Through its industry affiliates program,
CCMA is engaging industry in student training and technology transfer.
Concurrent with the research, the team is launching a vigorous program of
education and outreach to the public. This includes expanding undergraduate and
graduate research opportunities for underrepresented groups in research-based
careers. The team is also participating in several large-scale public outreach
programs including public lectures, designing hands-on traveling exhibits, and
teaming with museums and science centers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
collaborative research that combines innovative modeling and experimental
studies, the NSF CCI Phase I: Center for Chemo-Mechanical Assembly (CCMA) is
harnessing catalytic chemical reactions to introduce spatiotemporal chemical
gradients that drive the flow of a surrounding fluid. This flow, in turn,
enables the manipulation of the collective behavior of suspended particles to
drive new modes of dynamic self-organization. The Center is developing novel
approaches to cause directed transport of nano- and micron-scale materials,
control particle organization in confined chambers, and establish new chemical
routes for regulating non-equilibrium structure formation from particles in
solution. These studies are providing the chemistry community with fundamentally
new tools and knowledge, including new chemistries for the creation of catalytic
cascades; determination of design rules for chemical feedback loops;
demonstration of new modes of out-of-equilibrium assembly; and progress toward
new understanding of the nonlinear behavior and auto-amplification emerging from
these systems. Potential applications include the creation of standalone
microfluidic devices that autonomously perform multi-stage chemical reactions
and assays for portable biomedical applications; automated materials assembly in
harsh environments; and small-scale factories that can operate autonomously to
build microscale components for use in fine instrumentation and robotic systems,
and, in parallel, to screen for optimal reaction parameters yielding micro-
machines with specified properties. To generate excitement and public
appreciation about this emerging area of chemistry, the CCMA team is
participating in several large-scale public outreach programs at the
participating institutions, including public lectures, hands-on traveling
exhibits, and museum and science center projects.