* 1740478
* ISS: Flame Spread in Confined Spaces - Study of the Interactions between Flame and Surrounding Walls
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2022
* Paul Ferkul, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 10/31/2022
* USD 365,315.00

This project is focused on the study of fire behavior and flame spread in
confined spaces. Structure fires account for approximately 82% of civilian
deaths and 72% of property damage among all fire types, according to the 2015
U.S. data. By providing a fundamental understanding of the interactions between
spreading flames and their confining walls, this project will help enable safer
designs and improved fire safety codes. These will ultimately reduce property
losses, injuries, and fatalities. The primary activity is the combustion
experiment that will be conducted aboard the International Space Station (ISS).
The microgravity conditions on the ISS enable a systematic examination of how
fires respond to different air flow environments in confined spaces. The
investigators will also use their state-of-the-art computational tools to model
the combustion process in great detail. In addition to the educational
opportunity to graduate students, this project will also provide rare
opportunities for college and high school students to be "on console" at the
NASA Glenn Research Center to have the first-hand experience of space experiment
operations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis of this research is that under
certain conditions, flame spread in confined spaces is a continuously
accelerating process and may pose an even more serious fire hazard than flame
spread in open spaces. The mechanisms that allow this to occur are radiative
heat feedback from the surrounding walls and the tunnel flow acceleration
effect. The goal is to examine this hypothesis by characterizing flame-wall
aerodynamics and thermal interactions. Tests of concurrent-flow flame spread
over flat samples will be conducted in a small flow duct in the microgravity
environment, where buoyancy is essentially eliminated, and the forced flow is
imposed on the sample independent of other parameters. A wide range of
parameters will be tested, including the duct height, sample material, duct wall
surface properties, and flow speed. This will be accompanied by an in-house
transient computational model. The computational results will help interpret the
experimental data and allow extrapolations to other situations and geometries
with realistic fire scales. The outcome of this project will provide missing
knowledge and lead to a more complete understanding of the flame spread process
in confined spaces. The experimental data will yield valuable information to
enhance the computational fire model. The resulting model will allow re-
interpretation of current and past research results in light of the new
findings, which will lead to new discoveries in fire science.