* 1740883
* EAGER: USBRCCR: Researching Internet Routing Security in the Wild
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Ethan Katz-Bassett, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

The Internet provides a control plane to establish routes to destinations and a
data plane to send traffic, and the protocols for both lack authentication. The
lack of authentication allows networks to claim ownership of routes to other
networks' addresses in order to siphon traffic (prefix hijacking), and allows
devices to claim that their traffic came from a different source (source
spoofing). These vulnerabilities form the basis for denial-of-service attacks,
traffic interception and snooping, Bitcoin theft, and compromises of Tor's
anonymity. Because of these vulnerabilities, routing research is a critical
aspect of cybersecurity research. However, researchers lack experimental
approaches that let them perform Internet routing experiments that are both
realistic and controlled. This project aims to extend the public PEERING
research testbed to enable classes of security-focused routing research that are
beyond the reach of academic researchers today, and to subsequently develop
techniques to identify which networks allow or are vulnerable to prefix hijacks
and source spoofing. Results from this project will empower novel routing
security research, help identify vulnerable networks, map bot populations, and
serve as a step towards improved routing security in the
Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will extend the PEERING research
testbed with security-related functionality, including the ability to execute
containers on routers, integrating PEERING prefixes with the RPKI (an
infrastructure for securing aspects of Internet routing), and making the testbed
more reliable. It will also develop algorithms to (1) locate the sources of
spoofed attack traffic and to (2) track the adoption of RPKI-based protection
against prefix hijacking and identify possible problems in its application. The
algorithms will use PEERING's ability to manipulate routing and its extensions
developed in this project to force route changes and observe the impact on the
volume of spoofed traffic received from each peer and which vantage points do/do
not use routes that violate the RPKI. The algorithms will need to address
challenges related to limited visibility of Internet routes, lack of ground
truth about routing policies, and lack of control of routing decisions of other
networks. The researchers will investigate how the algorithms can systematically
change routes in order to narrow the set of feasible explanations to those
consistent with all observations, yielding more precise inferences. The
project's extensions to the testbed will allow others to conduct novel routing
security research, and the algorithms from the project will identify vulnerable
networks, a key step forwards in addressing the Internet's lack of
authentication for traffic and routing.