* 1740996
* BIGDATA: F: Collaborative Research: Foundations of Responsible Data Management
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Bill Howe, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 364,975.00

Big Data technology promises to improve people's lives, accelerate scientific
discovery and innovation, and bring about positive societal change. Yet, if not
used responsibly, this same technology can reinforce inequity, limit
accountability and infringe on the privacy of individuals: irreproducible
results can influence global economic policy; algorithmic changes in search
engines can sway elections and incite violence; models based on biased data can
legitimize and amplify discrimination in the criminal justice system;
algorithmic hiring practices can silently reinforce diversity issues and
potentially violate the law; privacy and security violations can erode the trust
of users and expose companies to legal and financial consequences. The focus of
this project is on using Big Data technology responsibly -- in accordance with
ethical and moral norms, and legal and policy considerations. This project
establishes a foundational new role for data management technology, in which
managing the responsible use of data across the lifecycle becomes a core system
requirement. The broader goal of this project is to help usher in a new phase of
data science, in which the technology considers not only the accuracy of the
model but also ensures that the data on which it depends respect the relevant
laws, societal norms, and impacts on humans.

This project defines properties of responsible data management, which include
fairness (and the related concepts of representativeness and diversity),
transparency (and accountability), and data protection. It complements what is
done in the data mining and machine learning communities, where the focus is on
analyzing fairness, accountability and transparency of the final step in the
data analysis lifecycle, and considers the problems that can be introduced
upstream from data analysis: during dataset selection, cleaning, pre-processing,
integration, and sharing. This project develops conceptual frameworks and
algorithmic techniques that support fairness, transparency and data protection
properties through all stages of the data usage lifecycle: beginning with data
discovery and acquisition, through cleaning, integration, querying, and
ultimately analysis. The contributions are structured along three aims. Aim 1
considers responsible dataset discovery, profiling, and integration. Aim 2
considers responsible query processing and develops a general framework for
declarative specification, checking and enforcement of fairness,
representativeness and diversity. Aim 3 incorporates data protection into the
lifecycle, develops techniques to facilitate sharing of sensitive data, and
considers the tradeoffs between privacy and transparency. This project is poised
to establish a multidisciplinary research agenda around responsible data
management as a critical factor in enabling fairness, accountability and
transparency in decision-making and prediction systems. Additional information
about the project is available at DataResponsibly.com.