* 1740490
* ISS: Collaborative Research: Spherical Cool Diffusion Flames Burning Gaseous Fuels
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Peter Sunderland, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 02/28/2023
* USD 286,023.00

Spherical cool diffusion flames are remarkable flames with unusually low
temperatures. They offer valuable insight into combustion processes in practical
combustion devices, such as engines. These flames were discovered in 2012 aboard
the International Space Station (ISS), and since then this has been the only
platform for observing them. To date all the ISS cool flames have involved
liquid droplet fuels. This has limited the number of fuels to be observed and
the ability to observe truly steady flames. For this project, experiments aboard
the ISS will be performed using gaseous hydrocarbon fuels burning as nearly
steady spherical flames. These flames will be supported by spherical porous
burners. Their observation, with the most advanced combustion diagnostics
available aboard the ISS, will allow the development of new chemical kinetics
mechanisms and computational tools for combustion research. The improved
understanding of cool diffusion flames gained by these experiments will lead to
improved designs of practical combustion devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
discovery of cool diffusion flames has spawned a rapidly growing research field,
but only a few measurements at limited conditions are available. Consequently,
cool flame chemical kinetics mechanisms cannot be adequately tested or advanced,
but such knowledge is needed to design cleaner and more efficient internal
combustion engines. The objectives of this project are to observe diverse cool
diffusion flames aboard the ISS, to simulate the tests with advanced
computational models, and to advance chemical kinetics mechanisms that can
accurately model these flames. The ISS is the only platform for observing
spherical cool diffusion flames because they require about 20 s of microgravity
to establish and even longer to reach steady state. The flames will be supported
by a 6-mm spherical burner fed with propane, n-butane, or n-pentane. Normal and
inverse flames will be considered, including a broad range of dilution
conditions and pressures. The burners, gas delivery system, and diagnostics will
be those used by the previous ISS flight experiments. The diagnostics will
support color video, imaging of excited CH* and CH2O*, and measurements of gas
temperatures, radiative emissions, optical emissions from H2O and OH, and
ambient gas compositions. The research will be disseminated widely to the
combustion research community and to industry. There will be outreach activities
to attract secondary school students to engineering. This project will advance
the state-of-the-art in cool flame kinetics mechanisms, which in turn should
lead to cleaner, more efficient internal combustion engines.