* 1740075
* INFEWS/T3: Coupling infrastructure improvements to food-energy-water system dynamics in small cold region communities: MicroFEWs
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2017,03/31/2023
* Daisy Huang, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 03/31/2023
* USD 2,419,338.00

This research project seeks to develop a process by which researchers and
community members together characterize how renewable energy infrastructure
might impact the Food-Energy-Water (FEW) nexus in isolated Arctic and Subarctic
communities. The research is critical because Arctic and Subarctic communities
in the US and beyond represent some of the world's least secure communities with
respect to provision of food, energy, and water. A systems approach
acknowledging the linkages between food, energy, and water security holds great
promise for developing integrated solutions. Such communities are ideally suited
as model systems for the FEW nexus as they are geographically isolated, often
inaccessible by roads, highly dependent on imported FEW resources, and often
dependent upon isolated microgrids for distribution of local power. Due to this
isolation, links between FEW infrastructure components are more readily observed
compared to those in larger, interconnected communities elsewhere, and
perturbations to the system can be more readily predicted. While introducing
renewable energy infrastructure to the local microgrid in such communities could
potentially enhance energy security by reducing their dependence upon imported
fossil fuels, this introduction could also adversely impact the stability of the
microgrids themselves or variably impact the linked infrastructure and processes
contributing to food and water security. In pursuing a comprehensive approach
that directly engages community stakeholders as well as researchers, the work
seeks to ensure that any impacts to food, energy, and water security imposed by
introducing renewable energy generation infrastructure to Arctic and Subarctic
communities are universally positive. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project represents a series of tasks addressing two key research questions: 1)
What are the direct and indirect linkages between renewable energy generation
and local drivers of FEW security in Arctic and Subarctic communities? 2) To
what extent can combinations of renewable energy generation and FEW-related
infrastructure energy loads be optimized to enhance FEW security in Arctic and
Subarctic communities? The project derives expertise from two US universities,
one Canadian university, three rural Alaska communities, and a host of
associated stakeholders across Alaska. Key tasks include 1) engaging communities
and developing place-based FEW metrics; 2) measuring existing FEW flows and
feedbacks within the communities; 3) evaluating new technologies capable of
impacting the local FEW nexus; 4) developing energy distribution models to
optimize on-grid infrastructure components; 5) evaluating those optimization
scenarios in the broader framework of the local FEW nexus using the previously-
defined metrics; and 6) communicating results in diverse formats tailored for
local residents and the broader scientific community. While analytical tools for
optimizing grid configurations in the presence of renewable sources are
available, they are designed for time-averaged performance and do not account
for short-term fluctuations in sources or demands. This project capitalizes on
those short-term fluctuations so that excess energy, when available, will be
diverted to dispatchable loads serving FEW-enhancing objectives. Novel energy
distribution models and controls are being developed to operate on timescales
necessary to optimize the performance of intermittent renewable sources powering
FEW-enhancing dispatchable loads. In addition to the advances offered in
renewable energy management and control, the broader process represents an
innovative approach to evaluating the FEW nexus. By framing the local FEW nexus
around the infrastructure linked by the grid system, this work captures a thin
cross section of the nexus that can be readily measured and manipulated. In
linking off-grid FEW processes to the more concrete on-grid processes, MicroFEWS
offers a novel and potentially scalable approach to understanding FEW dynamics
in the Arctic, Subarctic, and beyond.