* 1740921
* Chemical Transport in the Atmosphere of Venus
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Xi Zhang, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Luke Sollitt
* 08/31/2021
* USD 279,486.00

Venus has been studied by spacecraft since the early 1970s. Most recently, Venus
has been observed by the space mission Venus Express from 2006 to 2014 and is
now continuously observed by the space mission Akatsuki. Using the data
collected across these decades and using new, state-of-the-art models of the
circulation of the atmospheres of planets, the Principal Investigator will model
the gases and particles such as SO2, OH, and haze at Venus. He will look at how
chemical composition and atmospheric flow combine in Venus' atmosphere. He will
compare model results to observations by looking at the chemistry and
atmospheric motion tied to location on Venus' surface, height above Venus'
surface, and time. This project serves the national interest by advancing
progress in our understanding of the planet Venus, close in size and location to
Earth, and especially its atmosphere. Students will work on all parts of this
research including making an animation of the atmosphere of Venus for the
Science on a Sphere display.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate
large-scale chemical tracer transport in the atmosphere of Venus from the ground
to above 120 km using 1-, 2-, and 3-dimensional photochemical transport models
(CTM) that include representations of microphysics and the photochemistry and
thermochemistry on Venus. The CTMs will be driven by circulation pattern and
eddy dynamics produced in a state-of-the-art 3-D Venus general circulation
model. Using observational data, the PI will simulate the chemical tracers
including many gaseous species and condensed particles such as SO2, OH radicals,
and haze particles and will study the interaction between the Venus chemistry
and general circulation patterns such as the zonal superrotation at around 60
km, dayside-to-nightside circulation above 90 km, and the transition region in
between. The PI will compare models and measurements for the chemical species
distributions from observations in a 4-D fashion (longitude, latitude, altitude
and time) to understand further the chemical transport process on Venus.