* 1740741
* Foundations of Model Driven Discovery from Massive Data
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Stuart Geman, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,482,177.00

This project creates an institute at Brown University that brings together the
disciplines of mathematics, statistics, and theoretical computer science to
define and refine the foundational landscape of the emerging area of data
science. The institute sponsors focused activities organized by small groups of
researchers that cut across disciplinary boundaries. It connects with and
informs a broad range of students at the undergraduate and graduate levels,
working in a wide area of domain areas, from neuroscience, to genomics, to
climate modeling, to public policy. Theoretical developments can improve
diagnostic imaging and tumor classification, can develop improved models for
neural structure, and can even inform findings regarding food stamps and
recidivism in Rhode Island. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The mission of the institute
is to foster development and principled application of theory and methods of big
data to discover, refine, and validate underlying theoretical models that govern
a system or data-generating process, which in turn improve predictions of new
outcomes. Scientific projects in "causal and model-based inference," "data
analysis on massive networks," and "geometric and topological methods to analyze
and visualize complex data" drive home the role of the model, and its continuous
refinement, in data analysis. Rather than seeking better "black-boxes" for
analysis, the institute will emphasize the role of the "investigator-in-the-
loop" interrogating the entirety of the data pipeline, seeking theoretical
improvements and implications. It connects to the Brown Data Science Initiative
and the Institute for Computational and Experimental Research in Mathematics
(ICERM). Funds for the project come from CISE Computing and Communications
Foundations, MPS Division of Mathematical Sciences, Growing Convergent Research,
and EPSCoR. (Convergence can be characterized as the deep integration of
knowledge, techniques, and expertise from multiple fields to form new and
expanded frameworks for addressing scientific and societal challenges and
opportunities. This project promotes Convergence by bringing together
communities representing many disciplines including mathematics, statistics, and
theoretical computer science as well as engaging communities that apply data
science to practical research problems.)