* 1740707
* TRIPODS: Institute for Foundations of Data Science
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Stephen Wright, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* huixia wang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,499,523.00

As data continues to accumulate at an ever-increasing rate, so does the need for
powerful and novel methods to extract information from data, in a form that is
useful to individuals, society, researchers,and commerce. This project
establishes a new entity at the University of Wisconsin-Madison: the Institute
for Foundations of Data Science (IFDS). Building on the foundational work of
earlier generations of researchers, IFDS will serve as a hub for people across
campus with expertise in mathematics, statistics, and computer science to
explore new approaches to the formulation and solution of problems in data
analysis, as well as to epitomize the possibilities of a collaborative approach
to investigating fundamental issues in data science. IFDS will integrate with
the broader UW-Madison agenda for data science research, creating a new home for
research of a fundamental, theoretical nature. It will play a vital role in
establishing graduate degree programs in data science and in outreach to
industrial partners with interests in fundamental data science
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new Institute for Foundations of Data Science
will bring together researchers across the UW-Madison campus in mathematics,
statistics, and theoretical computer science for a transdisciplinary effort
organized around three themes: Algebra and Optimization in Data Science, Graphs
and Networks in Data Science, and Data Acquisition Theory and Methods. All
topics represent areas of significant current interest in data science due to
their intrinsic fundamental import and their wide applicability. The
collaborations within these themes will involve fourteen senior researchers,
together with postdoctoral and graduate student researchers. The IFDS will lay
the foundations for a larger future effort in transdisciplinary data science
research, possibly involving other universities and institutes. Funds for the
project come from CISE Computing and Communications Foundations, MPS Division of
Mathematical Sciences, MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, and Growing
Convergent Research. (Convergence can be characterized as the deep integration
of knowledge, techniques, and expertise from multiple fields to form new and
expanded frameworks for addressing scientific and societal challenges and
opportunities. This project promotes convergence by developing transdisciplinary
data science solutions to problems in important application domains such as
functional brain networks in cognitive neuroscience, understanding causal
effects in gene regulatory networks, phylogenetic reconstruction in
computational evolutionary biology, and the spread of information or disease
across a network.)