* 1740555
* Conference: Petrochronology 2017
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Matthew Kohn, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 04/30/2018
* USD 15,934.00

This award will support participants in a conference that will be convened in
Seattle (WA) on October 2017 with the purpose of disseminating new knowledge and
skills for the integration of petrology and geochronology. The primary audience
for the conference is composed of graduate students, early-stage researchers as
well as established professionals that would like to learn this new methodology.
Through this type of training, early-career investigators will be able to
develop future research directions that, in turn, will promote the advancement
of the fields of petrology and tectonics. The conference will be held in the
Washington State Convention Center, and will emphasize lecture-style
presentations from experts in the discipline, and include a demonstration of
data reduction software and possibly additional discussion time to identify
areas of improvement of these methods. The first day will cover theory and
analytical methods, and begin the systematic survey of relevant mineral systems.
The second half-day will complete discussion of petrogenetically useful minerals
and the presentation of useful software followed by discussion. Participants
will be recruited from the broader communities interested in developing these
new skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Petrochronology has emerged in the last 5-10
years as a preferred approach to geochronology, basically using chemistry and/or
textures to integrate ages of individual crystals or crystal domains into a
petrogenetic context. Examples in metamorphic systems include the use of crystal
domain-specific trace element patterns or thermometers in minerals like zircon,
monazite, titanite and garnet to link an age to an overall P-T-t evolution.
Examples in igneous systems include resolution of crystal residence times,
timing and rates of magma recharge, and rates of magma transport from zoning in
quartz, olivine, feldspar, and melt (glass). Petrochronology directly benefits
studies of tectonics, and metamorphic and igneous petrogenesis. It is expected
that a corresponding book, published through "Reviews in Mineralogy and
Geochemistry", will provide an important foundation accessible to high-level
undergraduate students, graduate students, and junior professional researchers
who are interested in theory and applications within this burgeoning field.