* 1740286
* E2CDA: TYPE 1: Durable, Energy-Efficient, Pausable Processing in Polymorphic Memories (DEEP3M)
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Darrell Schlom, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Carmina Londono
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,906,600.00

In modern computer systems, memories located close to the processing unit must
be fast with nearly infinite endurance to support operation rates exceeding a
billion per second. However, these memories cannot be scaled to very small
sizes, i.e. they are low-capacity, and/or they lose their contents when the
power is off, i.e. they are volatile. Existing high-capacity non-volatile
memories, such as solid-state hard drives, must typically be situated away from
the processing unit. As a result, it takes extra time for a processing unit to
fetch data, process them and store them back. Furthermore, most non-volatile
memories can only be erased and written a finite number of times. An ultimate
memory should be suitable to be embedded in all systems. The desired features of
this memory include non-volatility, low-power operation, infinite endurance,
large on-off ratios, excellent write-error rates, nanosecond writing time, sub-
nanosecond reading time, and good scalability.

This project uses an interdisciplinary approach spanning materials, devices,
circuits and architectures to realize such a memory and paradigm-shifting in-
memory-processing architectures. The outcome will be durable, energy-efficient,
pausable processing in polymorphic memories (DEEP3M), where computational
capabilities are pushed directly into the high-capacity memories enabling
massively parallel computation with fast and energy-efficient memory access.
This approach builds on recent breakthroughs in physics of magnetic switching
and advanced materials, and enables a transformative, holistic exploration of
processing and memory by re-imaging the memory device as a computing element
itself. This view will provide new insights and an entirely new paradigm for the
semiconductor industry in the emerging era of Big Data. The team will also
provide interdisciplinary educational opportunities to students and public
alike.