* 1740213
* E2CDA:  Type II:  Collaborative Research:  Metal-insulator transitions for low power switching devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Susanne Stemmer, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The project focuses on new oxide materials that may enable a new generation of
electronic devices for computing. The project will offer interdisciplinary
training of graduate and undergraduate students in new electronic devices,
materials, and circuits. Their training will be fostered by close collaboration
and student exchanges between the investigators' groups at the University of
California, Santa Barbara (UCSB) and Ohio State University (OSU). UCSB has a
diverse undergraduate population and is a minority/Hispanic-serving institution.
Regular phone conferences with industry stakeholders and related activities will
ensure knowledge transfer to industry and expose the participating students to
matters relevant to the transitioning of new materials and devices into emergent
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel electronic devices will be realized
that employ electric fields to control the unique electronic properties of oxide
materials, in particular, their ability to change the electrical resistance by a
large amount. These devices will be investigated for their potential as
alternatives to current transistor devices used for computing, which are based
on conventional semiconductor materials, such as silicon. The project is
motivated by unique opportunities, including the potential for abrupt switching
and a reduction in the energy that is required to switch. Close collaboration
between materials scientists at UCSB and electrical engineers at OSU will focus
on optimizing oxide materials, their scientific understanding, and their control
using electric fields, and establishing the device characteristics relevant for
applications. The results from this project will contribute to a solid-state
electronics technology that has been underexplored.