* 1740201
* Understanding the Role of Moisture Transport in Rainfall Variability and Agricultural Decision Making
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Jeremy Diem, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 02/28/2023
* USD 399,998.00

This project will investigate the link between atmospheric processes and
decisions made by farming households that depend on rainfall for food security.
By exploring linkages between rainfall variability and climate-related
agricultural decisions, the project will expand basic understanding of how
improved climate knowledge systems can lead to better agro-economic decisions by
local subsistence farming communities. Outcomes from this research will serve as
a key resource for the community to deepen its understanding of what information
sources of weather patterns assessments to rely upon. Furthermore, by
investigating the connectivity between atmospheric conditions and knowledge
systems, the project will provide a critical step toward promoting food security
and regional stability. The project will advance STEM education in the US
through K-12 educator development and online courses, as well as opportunities
for students to participate virtually in field experiences. The project also
includes outreach to underrepresented populations in STEM at the university and
K-12 levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing a better understanding of the
climatic drivers of complex rainfall regimes including the sources of moisture
will lead to more reliable scientific forecasting and improved decision-making
by the agricultural communities. Using Uganda as a case study, this project will
(1) determine relationships between atmospheric and oceanic variables, seasonal
rainfall totals, and wind direction over the past 30+ years; (2) evaluate the
role of different moisture sources in daily to seasonal rainfall through
isotopic and meteorological measurements; (3) identify and analyze the knowledge
system used by farmers in order to determine how weather-related decisions are
made; and (4) assess the agreement of farmers' observations and perceptions of
moisture sources and associated rainfall with measured physical data. Spatio-
temporal relationships between seasonal rainfall totals and various atmospheric
and sea-surface temperature (SST) analyses will be investigated along with
atmospheric and SST conditions of extreme seasons. A mixed-methods approach will
be used to analyze precipitation data and detail local knowledge systems through
community interviews, household surveys, and weather-event reporting. The
research has far-ranging global socio-economic implications for rural farming
communities that are highly susceptible to variable rainfall amounts and chronic
food insecurity.