* 1740399
* Structural-functional characterization of a hyperactive antifreeze protein
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Krisztina Varga, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 07/31/2018
* USD 145,191.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding the research of Dr. Krisztina Varga and Dr. Daniel Levy from
the University of Wyoming to structurally and functionally characterize a
hyperactive insect antifreeze protein. Antifreeze proteins are produced in
several organisms that live in cold climates and contribute to their resistance
to freezing. They bind irreversibly to the surface of ice crystals and inhibit
their growth, however, the exact mechanism at the molecular level is not fully
understood. The investigators will determine the structure of the antifreeze
protein, examine its water binding properties, and investigate its mechanism of
freeze inhibition in live cells. The results of this research will provide a
better fundamental understanding of molecular processes characteristic of
antifreeze proteins interacting with ice and expand their practical
applications, for example, in protecting foods from damage by freezing. The
project will have a broader impact by providing opportunities for
underrepresented groups of graduate and undergraduate students to participate in
scientific research, many of them being first generation university students
from rural areas. The project will be integrated into outreach programs for
community college, high school and grade school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will probe the structure and
mechanism of action of the hyperactive insect antifreeze protein ApAFP752. The
research will provide a better understanding of how antifreeze proteins interact
with ice and provide cryoprotection to organisms that live in cold environments.
The approaches are comprehensive and combine biochemistry, NMR spectroscopy, and
confocal microscopy for both in vitro and in vivo studies and will utilize the
synergy of the expertise of the investigators in these areas. This research
project will be undertaken to (1) structurally characterize the antifreeze
protein by NMR spectroscopy, (2) explore its water binding properties and
interactions (e.g. hydrogen bonding), and (3) investigate its cryoprotective
mechanism in Xenopus live cells. The comprehensive approach will provide unique
insights into the underlying molecular mechanism of
cryopreservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the
Experimental Program for the Stimulation of Competitive Research (EPSCoR).