* 1740248
* E2CDA: Type I: Collaborative Research: Energy-efficient analog computing with emerging memory devices
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Qiangfei Xia, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2021
* USD 377,037.00

The main goal of this project is to develop analog computing circuits that will
greatly exceed their digital counterparts in energy-efficiency, speed, and
density by employing emerging nonvolatile memory devices. Though analog circuits
have been around for a long time, their applications in computing have been
rather limited, largely due to the lack of efficient implementations of analog
weights. This impediment could be overcome now due to the rapid progress in the
emerging nonvolatile memory devices, such as metal-oxide memristors, which are
the focus in this project. The analog memory functionality of memristors,
combined with high retention and sub-10-nm scaling prospects, might for the
first time enable extremely fast and energy-efficient analog implementations of
many core operations, such as vector-by-matrix multiplication, which are central
to many existing and emerging future applications such as internet-of-the-things
and sensor networks, robotics, and energy efficient neuromorphic systems. The
results of the proposed research will be integrated into educational curriculum
and will help to train material science and electrical engineering students of
all levels in this exciting field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main caveat of the
considered analog circuits is their limited operation accuracy, primarily due to
the noise and variability in memory devices. The mitigation of this challenge by
several means will be one of the main focuses of the project, and will be
addressed with highly-interconnected research effort across device, circuit, and
architectural layers. At the device level, detailed electrical characterization
of analog operation and ways to improve it via material engineering,
optimization of electrical stress, and development of efficient tuning
algorithms to cope with device variations will be explored. Guided by
experimentally-verified device models, the design of several representative
analog computing circuits will be optimized. Circuit modeling tools will be
developed to capture rich design trade offs in area, speed, energy efficiency,
and precision, calibrated on experimental results from wafer-scale integrated
memristor circuits, and used for detailed comparison with state-of-the-art
digital counterparts. Finally, accurate circuit models will guide exploration of
circuit architectures that mitigate limitations of analog computing and assist
with detailed system level simulations.