* 1740463
* HBCU DCL: EAGER Collaborative Engineering of a Biodegradable Polymer for Treatment of Various Water Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2021
* Clayton Clark, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 01/31/2021
* USD 299,752.00

1740463 Clark

Presently, less than 1% of all the water on earth is freshwater readily
available for human use. With increased human activities resulting in water
contamination from industrial effluent, urban runoff, contaminated spills, and
wastewater treatment discharges, there is a need for the development of more
innovative and feasible solutions to provide sustainable methods to treat
various types of contaminated water sources. This proposal seeks to develop
controlled release biodegradable polymers for treatment of surface water,
groundwater, and wastewater systems. The polymers will treat contaminated waters
without the need for external power, equipment, or additional chemicals while
only producing minimal biodegradable by-products.

This project is focused on the fundamental understanding of controlled release
chemical-oxidant polymers to treat various source waters. Furthermore, new
oxidants will be investigated for their ability to improve and optimize this
treatment delivery mechanism. The ease of implementation would be transformative
for those who maintain water quality in the fields of engineering, water
resources, sustainability, environmental science, and public health. The
proposed research plan explores both disinfection of microorganisms and
oxidation of contaminants collected in the state of Florida. The development of
the controlled release biodegradable polymer will be based on a patent developed
by the Co-PI and modified for treatment of physical, chemical, and biological
contamination of water sources. The novelty of this method is not only in
sustainable remediation and treatment of various water contaminants; but also
adding to the knowledge base to provide a more comprehensive understanding of
oxidant release in water treatment. The research will be a collaboration between
two leading Historically Black College & Universities (HBCUs), Florida AM
University and North Carolina A&T, and run by students and faculty from groups
traditionally underrepresented in the engineering research field. The proposed
work will not only support graduate students who are traditionally
underrepresented in the STEM fields, especially engineering, but it would also
provide opportunity to help inspire undergraduates to purse both graduate
studies and careers in these fields.