* 1740434
* Phase I IUCRC University of South Alabama: Center for Advanced Research in Forensic Science (CARFS)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2023
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2023
* USD 824,840.00

In recent decades, a rapid transition from fundamental discoveries to forensic
method development has improved the quality of evidence in many types of
forensic investigations. However, there has also been a call, at the national
level, for forensic disciplines to address their scientific limitations and
expand fundamental research that can underpin and improve existing and
developing forensic applications. Investigators at the University of South
Alabama (USA) and Florida International University (FIU), along with affiliated
collaborators at Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU), the University of North Texas
Health Science Center (UNTHSC), Northeastern University (NE), and George
Washington University (GWU), will address aspects of this broad challenge
through the formation of the Center for Advanced Research in Forensic Science
(CARFS). This Industry University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) will serve
as a platform for innovative and, in many cases, interdisciplinary forensic
science research activities at the interface of academia, government, and
industry. CARFS will initially include digital forensics/data analytics (USA),
forensic chemistry (FIU/NE/GWU), forensic molecular biology (FIU/GWU), and
forensic microbiology (TAMU/UNT), with the possibility of future expansion to
include other forensic disciplines. The Center is anticipated to provide new
findings and tools to a range of stakeholders, including forensic science
practitioners, research laboratories, industrial partners, and government and
private forensic science end users, and will ultimately support safety and
justice for the nation. The Center's research sites will also provide training
opportunities to a diverse group of students, thus supporting the pipeline of
future forensic researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of CARFS, the USA
site, including affiliates at TAMU and UNTHSC, will focus on digital and
microbial forensics. At USA, research will focus on Digital Forensic Information
Intelligence, including the development, testing, and implementation of novel
approaches to understand not only how devices, information systems, and software
can be compromised, but also how one can reliably determine how those
compromises occurred. The research will support the development of new
technologies with potentially cross cutting industry impact: (1) mobile devices,
(2) additive manufacturing, (3) medical devices, (4) transportation systems, as
well as (5) generation and storage of large scale data sets (forensic
microbiology). At TAMU and UNTHSC, research will focus on forensically important
phenomena of decomposition and ecological recycling of vertebrate carrion, to
support human identification and source attribution; taphonomy;
counterterrorism/drug interdiction; and validation services. The research will
address scientific challenges in forensics as well as applications in broader
areas of human importance (e.g., food safety, engineering, structural integrity,
agriculture). Across the six institutions involved in CARFS there is also
potential for innovative projects that span and integrate digital and laboratory
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is jointly supported by NSF (Division
of Chemistry, Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate; and Division Of
Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences, Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences
Directorate) and the National Institute of Justice (Office of Investigative and
Forensic Sciences).