* 1740934
* 2017 Chemical Oceanography Gordon Research Conference: Synthesizing Multifaceted Data in Chemical Oceanography
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2017,10/31/2017
* Karen Casciotti, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Simone Metz
* 10/31/2017
* USD 36,880.00

Every two years, the Chemical Oceanography Gordon Research Conference brings
together leading members of the scientific community, graduate students,
postdocs, and early career scientists to discuss new, cutting-edge research
projects in marine chemistry within an informal setting. The National Science
Foundation, along with the Gordon Research Conference, will co-sponsor the
participation of at least 15 graduate students/postdocs/early career scientists
and 30 invited speakers/discussion leaders/chairs to the 2017 Chemical
Oceanography Gordon Research Conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2017, the
Chemical Oceanography Gordon Research Conference will be held July 23-28, 2017
at Colby Sawyer College in New London, New Hampshire. The theme for the
conference will be "Synthesizing Multifaceted Data in Chemical Oceanography"
with the aim of highlighting new approaches available in the field of chemical
oceanography to address cutting edge questions. The primary goal of the
conference is to provide a forum that brings together scientists that are
leading contributors in the field of marine chemistry along with graduate
students and postdocs to exchange ideas on new, innovative research.
Presentations and discussions at the 2017 Gordon Conference will center around
the following session topics: (1) Time Series- Synthesizing Observations over
Space and Time; (2) Autonomous Measurements-Filling Gaps in the Space/Time
Continuum; (3) New Perspectives on the Biological Pump; (4) Multi-Element
Approaches to Chemical Oceanography; (5) Data Assimilation and Synthesis Through
Ocean Models; (6) Coupled Biogeochemical Cycles; (7) Organic Geochemistry-
Identifying Sources and Cycling of DOM; (8) Sediment Processes-Scaling up from
Local to Global Scales; and (9) Paleoceanography-Integrating Measurements Across
Space and Time. The Chemical Oceanography Gordon Research Conference has become
recognized as an important venue to exchange ideas in the interdisciplinary
field of marine chemistry and to forge new scientific alliances.