* 1740466
* NSFDEB-NERC: Ecological Genomics of Adaptive Polymorphism
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2024
* Kimberly Hughes, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 04/30/2024
* USD 440,069.00

Individuals are enormously genetically diverse, even when those individuals live
close together in the same environments. This high diversity has important
implications for sustainable agriculture and for the conservation of
biodiversity because genetic diversity allows crops and wild plants and animals
to persist in the face of disease and other environmental challenges.
Understanding genetic diversity is also important in medicine because
individuals have different susceptibility to disease and they can respond
differently to the same treatment; this is the foundation of the recent emphasis
on "personalized medicine". However, high genetic diversity is surprising
because we expect that local populations that share a common gene pool and
experience similar environments should be relatively genetically homogenous.
This project addresses the debate about why individuals within populations
(including humans) are so genetically diverse. Specifically, the research team
will test a prominent hypothesis: that high diversity is maintained because rare
gene variants confer an advantage to individuals who bear them (i.e., they are
favored by natural selection). The project will also identify the genes that are
the direct targets of this kind of selection. Because experiments required to
answer these questions would be impossible in humans or agricultural species,
the project will use a vertebrate animal that has well-known natural history,
ecology, and behavior, and for which the genome sequence has recently become
available (the Trinidad guppy). These small fish have high genetic diversity for
body color, and this research will examine competing ideas about why: (1) fish
with rare patterns survive better, or (2) fish with rare patterns reproduce more
successfully. This project will also produce educational material and activities
for school children. This material will enhance students' understanding of
genetics, ecology, and evolutionary biology by using an animal with which many
students are already familiar since guppies are popular in home
aquariums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accounting for the persistence of high genetic
diversity in ecologically-important traits is a fundamental problem in
population genetics, and one that has fundamental implications for agriculture,
medicine, and conservation biology. Debate about what processes maintain
variation has led to the development of important population-genetic principles
and hypotheses, but the larger question remains unanswered. This project will
test the hypothesis that selection that varies in space or time ("balancing
selection") maintains genetic diversity in natural populations and will link
these selective processes directly to the genetic variants they target.
Researchers will combine genomic and ecological approaches in a species
exhibiting one of the best-known cases of adaptive polymorphism, the colour
patterns in the Trinidadian guppy (Poecilia reticulata). Field and laboratory
studies of predator density, reproductive behavior, and color-pattern variation
will determine which ecological processes promote genetic variation. Whole-
genome sequencing of guppies from 13 natural populations will identify regions
of the genome enriched for intermediate-frequency alleles; using data from many
populations will allow us to differentiate between loci under balancing
selection and those that are polymorphic because of non-selective processes such
as random genetic drift and migration. This multipronged approach will enable
linking evolutionary processes that maintain variation directly to the genetic
variants (polymorphisms) they target.