* 1740929
* Collaborative Proposal: EarthCube Integration: THROUGHPUT: Standards and Services for Community Curated Repositories
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Douglas Fils, Consortium for Ocean Leadership, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2019
* USD 58,366.00

Data heterogeneity and accessibility are major barriers to scientific progress.
Many community curated data repositories (CCDRs) have emerged in the
paleogeosciences in response to the needs of their scientific communities, but
these CCDRs are not well integrated. This project seeks to transform
geoscientific research by breaking down the barriers among the CCDRs that serve
geoscientists. All participating resources are closely engaged with their
respective disciplinary communities and each is mobilizing data from its
communities; the key need is to facilitate data interchange among CCDRs. The
work will align several major CCDRs using a system that develops new shared
services that rely on common standards, and demonstrates the kinds of new
scientific insights that become possible with an integrated geoscientific
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project will accomplish
the following: 1) A survey of existing data structures and standards, their
suitability for paleogeoscience CCDRs and alignment with requirements identified
by the paleogeosciences research coordination network, and their degree of
adoption. This will lead to recommendations for adoption by participating
resources (EarthChem, Flyover Country, IODP, LacCore/CSDCO, LinkedEarth,
Neotoma) and documentation written for geoscientific audiences. 2) Alignment of
participating CCDRs to recommended standards and development of a common API
that will allow data exchange among CCDRs and to third-party users. 3)
Development of an Annotation Engine, which will provide a credentialed, crowd-
sourced system for scientists to flag changes to datasets, to connect datasets
post hoc, to add context to legacy data, and to provide link-back notification
among CCDRs when linked dataset attributes change. Annotation Engine will be
embedded into existing scientific CCDR-based workflows, minimizing disruption to
users. 4) Development of GeoNoteBase to enable scientists to generate citeable,
reproducible workflows that draw information from across data resources, with
workflows made available through keyword searches, with full attribution. This
is a pilot effort to begin some of the work Through two pilot scientific
projects, THROUGHPUT will test and evaluate these new capabilities and
demonstrate kinds of new scientific insights that can be gained through
integration.