* 1740433
* Applied and Environmental Microbiology Gordon Conference and Research Seminar
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2017
* Max Haggblom, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 11/30/2017
* USD 15,010.00

This award will support the participation of graduate students, postdoctoral
researchers and early career investigators to attend the 2017 Gordon Research
Conference and Seminar in Applied and Environmental Microbiology (GRC-AEM), a
biennial gathering that represents a very vibrant research field with major
impacts on the environment and human society. The goals of the GRC-AEM are to
provide an open forum for presentation and discussion of the latest research in
related microbial sciences. Microorganisms exert a profound influence on life on
Earth, sustaining our environment, influencing our health, and driving
industrial biotechnology. Previous AEM-GRCs have helped to advance research in
industrial laboratories, colleges and universities, research foundations, and
government laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gordon Research Conferences
explore the frontiers of science in the chemical, biological and physical
sciences. Established in 1950, the (AEM) GRC is one of the longest running GRCs.
The 2017 GRC-AEM, subtitled Human and Microbial Perspectives of Microbial
Economics, will highlight diverse strategies adopted by microbes for coping with
energy and resource excesses and limitations within a broad spectrum of natural,
industrial, and clinical environments. Research areas central to this GRC
include terrestrial, marine, and freshwater biogeochemical cycles and the
influence of microbes on climate change through consumption and production of
greenhouse gases, bioremediation of contaminated land and water, production of
biofuels, use as biocatalysts, microbes in human health, and interactions of
microbes with animals and plants. Some sessions will embrace "Microbial
Economics" as it pertains to the cost/benefit of microbes to humans, while
others will consider "Economics" from the microbe's perspective and explore the
diversity of lifestyles and metabolic strategies for coping with resource
availability and limitation. The intimate size of the conference encourages
dialog and exchange of ideas - especially between students and senior
scientists. To help facilitate this, for most sessions a graduate student,
postdoctoral researcher or early-career investigator will be selected be
selected from the abstract submissions to give a presentation. Poster sessions
will also help stimulate discussions that carry through the week. The conference
will be preceded by a two-day Gordon Research Seminar subtitled the "Sharing
Economy of Microbes and Microbial Communities: Adaptations and Applications".