* 1740960
* CIF: Student Travel Support for the 2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Alon Orlitsky, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2018
* USD 20,000.00

The IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT) is the premier
international conference on information theory, the scientific discipline that
studies the mathematical foundations of efficient, reliable, and secure
communications, including telephony, television, wireless, optical, and data
storage systems. By their nature, the fundamental limits of communication and
storage are not technology-dependent, and do not become obsolete with
improvements in hardware or software. In fact, the performance benchmark
provided by information theory has successfully guided engineers in the design
of ever more efficient coding systems that leverage the technological advances
to closely approach the fundamental limits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The symposium
typically attracts around 1000 paper submissions with about 600 papers accepted
and 850 participants, including about 350 students who benefit from the
excellent learning and networking opportunity that ISIT provides. This award
provides travel funds for students to attend the
symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students form an integral part of the
Information Theory community. Over the past few years the IEEE Information
Theory Society has undertaken several activities to promote student
participation. These include the establishment of Schools of Information Theory
on five continents, the ISIT Jack Keil Wolf Best Student Paper Award, the
Information Theory Society Student Committee, and the ISIT tutorial series. The
ISIT Jack Keil Wolf Student Paper Award is given to up to 3 outstanding papers
for which a student is the principal author and presenter. This author must be a
registered student of an educational institution at the time of paper submission
to be eligible. The criteria for the award includes both content and
presentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, an outstanding benefit of the
ISIT is the close personal interaction between senior and junior researchers in
information theory, which encourages the liberal exchange of ideas and critical
comments. The opportunities for cross-fertilization are immense and it is vital
that those who are new to the field and bring fresh ideas be present to discuss
their work with those who are more experienced.