* 1740656
* CCI Phase I: NSF Synthetic Organic Electrosynthesis Center
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Scott Anderson, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 04/30/2021
* USD 1,800,000.00

In an equation that represents a step in a chemical reaction, adding or removing
a single electron from a molecule might look simple. However, that single
electron transfer can be followed by many complicated chemical reactions that
occur very quickly. The NSF Synthetic Organic Electrosynthesis Center is
developing new ways of making molecules by understanding both the electron
transfer process and the subsequent chemical reaction steps. The Center avoids
the use of added chemical reagents that are expensive and generate waste by
using electrons to promote chemical changes, leading to "greener" and more
sustainable methods for organic synthesis. Center researchers also design the
tools and instruments that make this approach more useful to other chemists in
the greater scientific community. Broader impacts in the development of human
resources result from the advanced scientific training offered to graduate
students and postdoctoral research associates. The Center also creates outreach
materials that introduce electrochemistry through experimentation with
batteries, solar cells and electrolysis. Center researchers trained in effective
science communication collaborate to share these materials with diverse
audiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Synthetic Organic Electrosynthesis
Center is focused on developing novel electrochemical methodologies for chemical
synthesis of organic molecules. This center has three thrusts: 1) design of
electrocatalysts and mediators for carbon-hydrogen (C-H) functionalization; 2)
translation of cross-coupling reactions to electrosynthesis; and 3) arene
functionalization with electrochemical mediators. Research activities have
broader impacts in scientific and industrial communities. Oxidation and
reductions are still commonly done using large amounts of oxidizing and reducing
agents, rather than greener and more efficient electrochemical methodologies. As
synthetic organic chemists work toward more sustainable reactions, preparative
electrochemical methods may become a natural choice to effect these syntheses
due to their high product efficiency, mild conditions, and ease of scalability.
The Center provides new electrocatalysts and protocols while developing
instrumentation and electrochemical cells for use by the synthetic organic
chemists. Broader impacts in the development of human resources result from the
advanced scientific training offered to graduate students and postdoctoral
research associates. The Center also creates outreach materials that introduce
electrochemical techniques through experimentation with batteries, solar cells
and electrolysis. Center researchers trained in effective science communication
collaborate to share these materials with diverse audiences.