* 1740112
* SI2-SSE: Collaborative Research: Software Framework for Strongly Correlated Materials: from DFT to DMFT
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Hyowon Park, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 05/31/2021
* USD 250,001.00

The main objective of this project is to develop advanced computational (ab-
initio) tools that bridge the gap between the existing complex theories that
describe the behavior of strongly-correlated electron materials, and the
scientists working in other diverse fields who want to investigate the physical
properties of the strongly correlated materials using modern state-of-the-art
computational methodologies. These strongly-correlated materials show a large
set of interesting properties that can impact different fields as in opto-
catalysis, magneto-optics, magneto-transport, high temperature superconductivity
and magneto-electricity. The intriguing properties of such strongly-correlated
materials includes unconventional superconductivity, complex charge spin and
orbital ordering, metal-to-insulator transitions, and excellent
thermoelectricity that have promising applications in modern technology. The
existence of strong electron-electron interactions limits the use of existing
Density Functional Theory (DFT) to understand the electronic structure of the
strongly-correlated materials. However, recent developments of a new theory,
named Dynamical Mean Field Theory (DMFT), has enabled researchers to correctly
describe the electronic structure of the strongly correlated materials. In this
project, the PIs will develop advanced Python-based computational research tools
that will enable the researchers from diverse fields to investigate the
properties of the strongly-correlated materials using DMFT. The specific
applications include -- correct prediction of the electronic structure,
vibrational properties and elastic properties of the strongly-correlated
materials. The developed software tools will be freely available and open source
and a user-manual will be made available for training
purposes.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to
provide end users of various electronic structure codes with a flexible Python-
based interface that does not rely on the extensive user experience or specific
parameters to perform calculations for strongly-correlated materials and to
develop new software to calculate electronic, vibrational, and elastic
properties of strongly-correlated materials by using Dynamical Mean Field Theory
(DMFT) methods starting from a Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculation. The
developed software tools will be powerful enough to allow scientists in
different fields to calculate the diverse electronic properties of a wide range
of strongly-correlated materials with the state-of-the-art computational
methodologies. Furthermore, these software packages will allow the correct
electronic structure calculations in a minimal set of parameters, by offering to
the end user the possibility of using three different methodologies to describe
basic physics of strongly-correlated materials. All the developed computer
software will be designed to enable the non-expert materials scientists and
engineers to investigate the novel properties of the strongly-correlated
materials. The scientific aim of this project also concerns the evolution of
electronic correlations for several complex oxinitrides and Heusler alloys, in
particular the dependence of several physical observables with respect to
external fields such as pressure and strain. Targeted physical properties
include electronic, vibrational, and elastic. The technical goal consists of the
development of an open-source software that will address the scientific issues
raised by the research on calculating properties of the strongly-correlated
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Office of
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer &amp; Information
Science and Engineering and the Division of Materials Research in the
Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences.