* 1740271
* E2CDA: Type I: Collaborative Research: Interconnects Beyond Cu
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Daniel Gall, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2020
* USD 79,999.00

When electrons move through wires, they are scattered by vibrating atoms and
wire imperfections. This scattering is the source of the electrical resistance
and results in power consumption. For the wires used in modern electronics
(interconnects) this is already a bottleneck to computing performance and is
worsening as the wires (along with the transistors) are made smaller. The aim of
this program is to make the wires so small (<< 10-nm in width and height) and so
structurally perfect that quantum size effects arise and the electrons can
travel in a ballistic fashion without scattering. This can result in orders of
magnitude improvements in resistance and computing energy efficiency and enable
a revolution in electronics. In addition to the societal benefit of improved
computing, the program will support education and research at the undergraduate,
graduate and post-doctoral levels at four institutions, Columbia University,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and the
University of Central Florida. The outreach effort will include: (1) The Harlem
Schools Partnership (HSP) for STEM education at CU, (2) MIT's Materials Day for
industry outreach, (3) the Discovery Engineering program for high-school girls
at RPI, and (4) the techCAMP "Future of Information" at UCF.

To achieve its goal of ballistic conduction in metallic nanowires, the project
will include the preparation and atomic scale characterization of single crystal
metallic films and lines as well as experimental measurement of electron
transport behavior, with ruthenium as the metal of choice for the initial
studies. The stability of the metallic lines will also be investigated, since
this is critical to the reliability of interconnects in computing systems. A
theoretical and computational physics modeling effort will aim to provide a
quantitative understanding of ballistic transport in the size and defect limits,
and serve to identify preferred metals for ballistic conductance of
interconnects for future efforts. The computational models and codes developed
will be made available on the Nanohub (https://nanohub.org/). The project will
additionally provide a proof-of-principle demonstration of how the proposed
metallic conductors can be fabricated for technology implementation by the
semiconductor industry.