* 1740333
* SI2-SSE: Gunrock: High-Performance GPU Graph Analytics
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* John Owens, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2022
* USD 400,000.00

Many sets of data can be represented as "graphs". Graphs express relationships
between entities, and those entities and relationships can be used to solve
problems of interest in many fields. For instance, a social graph (like
Facebook's) links people (entities) by friendships (relationships), and with
that graph, Facebook can suggest people to you who might be your friends. Amazon
might use a graph made of people and items for sale (entities) connected by who
bought those items (relationships) to suggest items you might want to buy. A
credit card company might look at your pattern of purchases and detect possible
fraud even before you know your credit card was stolen. Graphs are also useful
in many fields of science, such as genomics, epidemiology, and economics. This
project uses an emerging programmable processor, the graphics processor (GPU),
to solve graph problems. GPUs are rapidly moving into our nation's largest data
centers and supercomputers. The project team is building a system for
computation on graphs that will significantly improve performance on these
problems. In this project, the team will work with the computing community and
the scientific community, both of whom have numerous interesting, challenging
graph computation problems that this system will target. The system is open-
source software and can be used freely by researchers and industry all over the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, supported by the Office of
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure seeks to develop the "Gunrock" programmable, high-
performance, open-source graph analytics library for graphics processors (GPUs)
from a working prototype to a robust, sustainable, open-source component of the
GPU computing ecosystem. Gunrock's strengths are its programming model and
highly optimized implementation. With this work the project team hopes to
address Gunrock's usability in the computing and scientific communities by
improving Gunrock's scalability, capabilities, core operators, and supported
graph computations. In this work the team will collaborate with the GPU Open
Analytics Initiative and the NSF-sponsored CINET project for network science to
ensure that our work has the broadest possible impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.