* 1740858
* TRIPODS: UA-TRIPODS - Building Theoretical Foundations for Data Sciences
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Joseph Watkins, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,416,498.00

UA-TRIPODS aims to build a transformative and highly interactive data science
hub in the Southwestern United States for the integration of research,
education, and outreach in the theoretical foundations of data science. Through
research, education, and outreach targeted to high school students through
postdoctoral fellows, UA-TRIPODS will help establish and encourage a diverse
population to pursue careers in quantitative and computational data science. The
intellectual merits of the project include identifying fundamental areas where
progress in the theoretical foundations is imperative, developing mathematical
and algorithmic principles of data science, and basic research on topics ranging
from the theory of large scale networks and optimization to statistical modeling
for natural language processing and Bayesian methods. This is accomplished by
extending long-standing collaborations with experts in the foundational
disciplines - theoretical computer science, mathematics, and statistics - and
motivated by problems in the domain sciences and industry. New mathematical,
statistical, and algorithmic principles will strengthen the foundations of
theoretical data science, while driving discovery and innovation for emerging
applications. UA-TRIPODS will also cultivate new partnerships with local
industries engaged in data-centric enterprises in astronomy, environmental
science, genomics, lunar and planetary sciences, medicine, transportation, and
optical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research Working Groups will pursue
fundamental questions in a number of different areas in the theoretical
foundations of data science. By ensuring each group includes researchers from
each area of the foundational disciplines, while also pairing these groups with
science and industry partners, UA-TRIPODS will ensure that these projects will
benefit from a truly transdisciplinary collaboration. Progress in collaboration
will be measured by specialized program evaluation metrics. Yearly workshops,
seminars, and brainstorming/visioning activities will enable UA-TRIPODS to lay
the foundation for the future of training and research in data science. In
addition, this project will support the development of a new undergraduate
degree in Statistics and Data Science at the University of Arizona, expanded
online offerings, and facilitation of cooperation in graduate education (both
among the foundational disciplines and with the domain sciences). Students will
be provided with opportunities to experience first-hand data analysis and
interdisciplinary research and education. UA-TRIPODS will also engage partnering
colleges and universities across the Southwest in the institute activities and
then utilize these connections to support novel and effective inter-university
and intra-university research and educational programs. Partnerships with
Hispanic Serving Institutions and Tribal Colleges in southern California,
Arizona, New Mexico, and western Texas will be strengthened.