* 1740335
* Soil Erosion, Floodplain Sedimentation, and Agricultural Sustainability Over Centennial Time Scales.
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2022
* J Michael Daniels, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 12/31/2022
* USD 348,876.00

This project will examine patterns of soil erosion and floodplain sedimentation
in agricultural landscapes. Soil erosion is a significant environmental
challenge facing 21st century society. While many of the physical mechanisms
involved in the erosion process are well-understood, there are gaps in the
understanding of erosion rates and downstream sediment transport rates measured
over centennial time scales. This project takes advantage of an agricultural
setting in which landscape patterns have persisted over ~700 years, providing an
opportunity to test prevailing models of erosion and improve the scientific
understanding of erosion and downstream sediment transfer. This project will
promote the teaching and training of U.S. students, foster international
scientific collaboration, support international knowledge and technology
transfer, and contribute to related fields of study. Results will benefit
undergraduate students through practical, experiential-learning in field courses
and undergraduate research opportunities. The interdisciplinary project will
promote direct scientific collaboration with leading scientists in a variety of
related disciplines (landscape ecology, geochemistry, paleoecology, hydrologic
engineering). The research will have broad appeal and application in fields such
as landscape conservation and agricultural land management. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project will construct high-resolution records of human induced
sedimentation at a range of spatial scales representing watersheds from 1 to
1000 square kilometers. These fluvial archives will include sedimentological,
geochemical, and paleoecological data, and will be supplemented by shallow
geophysical surveys. The project will also employ spatially-distributed erosion
modeling to predict expected patterns of erosion and deposition. This model/data
comparison will permit the quantification of the degree to which agricultural
slopes are hydrologically and sedimentologically connected to downstream
sediment sinks. The project will enable quantification of time-lags involved in
agricultural sedimentation over multiple centuries. The principal theoretical
contributions of the research will improve the understanding of hydrologic and
sedimentologic connectivity, fluvial responses to anthropogenic disturbance, and
spatio-temporal distributions of agricultural legacy sediments. Although this
research project will focus on erosion and sedimentation in Czech Republic, the
results will provide new insights and approaches for understanding and
mitigating agriculturally-induced soil erosion in many other countries,
including the United States.