* 1740597
* CCI Phase I: NSF Center for Autonomous Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Sankaran Thayumanavan, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,800,000.00

There are numerous autonomous or self-governing processes that exist in nature.
One example is the human body's immune response where white blood cells search,
sense, and react to disease-causing bacteria or viruses. Artificial molecular or
nanoscale systems with such autonomous capabilities are rare. Inspired by
Nature, the NSF Center for Autonomous Chemistry (CAC) identifies the structural
and functional signals that are needed to generate autonomously-operating
chemical systems. The center develops design guidelines for these new autonomous
systems, creating new opportunities in sensing, diagnostics, controlled release,
drug delivery, encrypted catalysts, food safety, and self-healing materials. In
addition to advanced scientific training of graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers, the NSF CAC also trains center students in entrepreneurship and
innovation, as well as in the communication of science to non-experts and the
engagement of diverse audiences.

Autonomous regulation of molecular recognition with recognition-induced chemical
events in complex environments is a challenge for chemists. Biological systems
use molecular and supramolecular networks to autonomously regulate recognition-
induced chemical transformations. The NSF Center for Autonomous Chemistry (CAC)
addresses this challenge by identifying the bio-inspired structural factors and
molecular design guidelines that allow for artificial molecular networks that
are capable of autonomous operation. The NSF CAC brings together expertise in
the design and synthesis of responsive supramolecular assemblies,
characterization of assemblies in solution and in surfaces, and transduction of
supramolecular events into readable signals. The team also examines logic-gated
responsive systems, specific stimulus-induced morphological and phase changes,
functionalization of two-dimensional surfaces, and characterization of surfaces
and their interaction with three-dimensional molecular assemblies. The resulting
design tools enable the next generation systems to be incorporated into diverse
applications. Students at the NSF CAC are trained in the theoretical and
experimental aspects of the research, and also in meta-skills essential for the
21st century workforce. Students take entrepreneurship training focused on
translating basic research for industrial applications. NSF CAC students also
receive training in science communication and serve as Science Ambassadors to
diverse audiences.