* 1740470
* Acquisition of a pXRF and refurbishment of used germanium detectors for research and undergraduate research training
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* F. Zeb Page, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2023
* USD 68,582.00

This grant supports the expansion of gamma counting facilities at Oberlin
College to improve the throughput of samples used to determine the activity of
short-lived fallout radionuclides in river sediment. The grant will be used to
acquire a used and fully functional germanium detector, refurbish and upgrade
two older used detectors, and acquire supplies to support these new-to-Oberlin
instruments. The detectors will be used for projects fingerprinting depth of
erosion in response to major storms and changes in human land use. Ongoing
projects supported by these detectors include documenting the effects of
Hurricane Maria on erosion in Dominica, the effects of wide spread transition to
organic agriculture in Cuba, and the effects of deforestation and reforestation
projects in China. Oberlin is a liberal arts college with a strong history of
undergraduate involvement in research. An average of 7 students per semester and
summer will use the detectors. Many of the students who will work with the
equipment are likely to be members of groups typically underrepresented in the
earth sciences. Thus, the grant includes funding for a faculty member and
student each year to attend a conference focused on minority participation in
earth science. In addition, the detectors will be used for outreach with K-12
and college students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern quantitative geology
increasingly relies on chemical measurements to make observations about Earth
processes. Schmidt's geomorphology group uses fallout radionuclides (210Pb,
137Cs, 7Be) to fingerprint relative changes in timing and depth of erosion in
upstream watersheds in order to understand the effects of land use change and
major storms on erosion. This research relies on a germanium detector for gamma
counting. Each sample is counted for 24-96 hours on Schmidt's only detector;
machine time is a major constriction point for lab throughput. Funds from this
project will be used to refurbish two germanium detectors given to Oberlin and
acquire a used, but functioning, detector. It will additionally be used to
acquire sample preparation and analysis equipment necessary to optimize student
training and use of the germanium detectors. The additional germanium detectors
will increase throughput of samples in the lab by quadrupling the number of
machines counting samples and thus quadruples sample throughput in the
lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.