* 1740393
* CONFERENCE: 2017 The Intersociety Conference on Thermal and  Thermomechanical Phenomena in Electronic Systems Orlando, FL
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Yoonjin Won, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 11/30/2018
* USD 9,000.00

ITherm is a leading international conference for scientific and engineering
thermal, thermo-mechanical and emerging technologies related with electronic
devices, packages, and systems. Recent progress on electronics thermal
management has been motivated in part by increase in microprocessor power
densities, power semiconductor lasers, and radar amplifiers. As the performance
density of high-power electronic systems is severely limited by their cooling
systems, their need for sophisticated cooling mechanisms increases
concomitantly. The conference targets the electronics thermal management
community by organizing five specific technical talks on critical topics
including Aerospace Thermal Management, ICE-Cool: Intrachip/Interchip Enhanced
Cooling, Advanced Cooling Solutions for Photonics, Embedded Inter/Intra-chip,
Cooling, and Microfluidics. Also, there will be six technical panels about
Light-emitting diode (LED) Packaging, Thermal Issues for Mobile Devices, Micro-
Two-Phase Liquid Cooling Systems, Design Challenges in Internet of Things (IoT),
X-ray Characterization of Highly Conductive Materials, and Data Centers and
Emerging Technologies. The focused characteristic of the conference is an
additional attractive point, especially to young researchers interested in
cooling of electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will
launch the formation of the Women and Diversity Chapter for ITherm providing an
excellent opportunity for an annual gathering that serves to establish
invaluable networking opportunities within this niche community. While improving
female participation at the ITherm conference is the direct target of the
proposal, this effort should lead also to increasing attendance from the
Hispanic, African-American, and disabled engineer groups. The requested support
will allow undergraduate, graduate students, post-doctoral fellows, and young
faculty to participate in the conference, with special consideration given to
minorities and women. &lt;br/&gt;