* 1740380
* I-Corps: Modular Microcontroller Prototyping Tools to Facilitate Learning and Collaboration
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2017,08/31/2018
* Betsy DiSalvo, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 08/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to make it
easier for novices to learn electronics and computing concepts making these
disciplines more available, accessible, and inclusive. The prevalence and
advances in embedded technology are spurring increasing need for trained STEM
employees to create Internet of Things (IoT) devices. However, electronics and
computing are difficult to learn and the interventions that exist often result
in an underrepresentation of women and minorities. The educational technology in
this project addresses these needs through learning materials designed to engage
a diversity of students through experiential educational experiences that can
integrate into a variety of contexts to educate students through design of
computational objects. The project focuses on broadening participation and
improving student learning outcomes through curriculum, technology, and a
support system that provides tools that account for the needs of students with
varying skill levels, while offering students non-traditional pathways into
computing and engineering.

This I-Corps project builds on work in physical computing education, focusing on
the design and development of tools to facilitate learning about electronics and
computing concepts as students build engaging projects. The literature in
physical computing is dominated by informal educational interventions and has
yet to understand how to improve the tools and learning activities to address
the needs of teachers and students. This project will begin to investigate the
needs of the various stakeholders within formal education to understand how to
reach the broad range of students in public high schools. Furthermore, our
modular educational technology brings clarity to the programmable electronics by
focusing on visibility of the signals within the circuits, while promoting
interactions that focus the learner to encounter important concepts. By shedding
light on the interactions between the hardware and software, the tools
facilitate students in understanding how the embedded Internet of Things (IoT)
technology works.