* 1740135
* Labor Migration and Effects of Remittances and Commodity Enclosures on Industrial Agriculture and Forest Landscapes
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Nancy Peluso, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 09/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

This project examines the interactive effects of circular labor migration and
large-scale commodity enclosures on land use, land cover, and resource control.
Circular labor migration and the mobility of capital are tremendously important
for rural livelihoods and landscape formation around the world as millions of
people and substantial funds regularly move long distances between home and
work. Migration remittances are infusing cash into rural areas, causing shifts
in local labor regimes and household accumulation strategies and generating
shifts in land use and land cover. Concurrently, governments and corporate
investors acquiring land for large-scale production of agricultural and forest
commodities alter landscape composition and rural employment opportunities. Yet,
little is known about interactions between labor migration and commodity
concessions, including the effects of migration and remittances on land use and
land cover in and around plantations. This research merges approaches from
political and land change science to tackle understudied questions about the
biophysical and social effects of labor migration and land use change. Findings
from the research will be informative for government policy, NGO assistance
strategies, and institutional practices concerned with economic development,
transnational migration, and resource management.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
research examines how labor migration and large-scale commodity plantations
interact and reshape processes of land cover and land use change (LCLUC) in
regions where industrial agriculture and forestry concessions are expanding
rapidly. By combining remote sensing with ethnographic and other social science
approaches, it assesses (i) how large-scale concessions affect patterns and
rates of labor migration from rural areas, (ii) how labor migration influences
household labor allocation and new resource investments, and (iii) how resource
investments enabled by remittances from migration produce measurable changes in
land use and cover. These objectives are investigated at multiple scales
(districts, villages, and households) in four provinces where large-scale land
acquisitions are present and labor migration is an important household
livelihood strategy. The investigators collaborate with local researchers in
each site and coordinate efforts through annual data sharing, planning, and
training workshops.