* 1740384
* I-Corps:  Integrating Electric Vehicles in the Smart Grid Through Smart Charging Software
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2018
* Rhonda Shrader, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 03/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to enable
safe integration of Plug-in Electric Vehicles (PEVs) into the broader power
network, as well as to reduce PEV charging costs for drivers. If unmanaged, PEVs
would represent major extra loads for utilities, which would increase energy
peak consumption and require considerable investment to upgrade grid
infrastructure. The technology developed here involves a smart charging
software, which will enable real time communication between PEV fleets and
utilities, and will remotely control PEV charging to provide grid regulation
services. This project will bridge the gap between the automotive industry and
the energy industry, and will develop strategies to create a smart and connected
ecosystem around PEV charging. Successful commercialization of the smart
charging software could result in lower PEV cost of ownership, and increased
penetration of clean transportation in the US.

This I-Corps project is based on an advanced, adaptive, optimization framework
for Plug-in Electric Vehicle (PEV) charging control in power networks. The
technique can control PEV charging under conditions of general uncertainty, and
consider both driver mobility constraints and power network constraints. The
optimization framework is particularly adapted to large fleets of PEVs and shows
fast convergence rate and privacy preserving properties. The method uses past
PEV data to predict travel behaviors and energy demand. It also models
distribution grid constraints and electricity market structure to set relevant
optimization objectives. The method utilizes a range of optimization methods and
selects the best algorithm based on tradeoff between optimality, constraint
satisfaction and computation time. The methods include partial differential
equation aggregation techniques for car sharing fleets, plug-and-play model
predictive control for power networks with high congestion, and dual-splitting
methods for large scale residential fleets with lower computation capabilities.