* 1740784
* Complex Plasma under Microgravity:   Utilizing the International Space Station Plasma Krystal-4 Facility and Beyond
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Edward Thomas, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 05/31/2022
* USD 19,996.00

This award will support the analysis of data and a series of dedicated
experiments on the International Space Station (ISS) aimed at understanding
fundamental properties of the complex plasma systems. Plasmas have long been
studied in the astrophysical setting since most of the universe is in a plasma
state and are important in explaining the live cycles of stars. The heavy use of
plasma production methods in the semiconductor industry also demonstrates the
economic importance of plasma based production methods in our society. In nearly
all situations were plasmas exist, small particles may be embedded in the plasma
environment either as a natural component, as a result of unintended growth from
chemical reactions, or introduced intentionally. The presence of the dust
particle component can significantly change the overall behavior and the
properties of the plasma. In some cases, the presence of the dust can have
negative effects such as significant yield reductions in processing plasma
manufacturing or undesired complications in the design of fusion devices. On the
other hand, the presence of the dust can also result in new plasma production
methods and provides an accessible, excellent model system to investigate the
universal behavior and properties of general complex particle systems. The full
potential of the complex plasma research requires that some experiments be
performed under reduced gravitational influence, as provided by the ISS. This
award will support the training of the next generation of highly qualified
scientists and engineers by providing the opportunity to work with a team of
international collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will make
use of the recently developed microgravity complex (dusty-) plasma facility
Plasma Krystal-4 (PK-4), which is a European-Russian apparatus now on the
International Space Station. Working in a close collaboration with the European
core team of PK-4 scientists, the US team will study fundamental aspects of
complex plasma including the charging and interaction of individual particles,
particle transport and the thermal properties of the overall system. These
fundamental interactions between the particles in a complex plasma is the basis
for understanding its overall behavior. For example, increasing the strength of
the interaction relative to the random motion can cause the system to undergo a
transition from an irregular, uncorrelated (liquid) state to an ordered,
crystalline structure (solid). Using experimental data obtained from the PK-4
experiment, the charging and particle pair interaction will be studied by
examining the dynamics of individual particles during pair collisions. Particle
transport and heating of particles will be examined using additional
experimental data obtained from the PK-4 experiment and results from dedicated
ground based experiments. Required software tools to follow the motion of
individual particles (particle tracking velocimetry) and the overall particle
flow (particle image velocimetry) will be developed. A series of experiments to
support the development of potential future microgravity complex plasma
experiments will also be performed. This award to support an undergraduate
student is made under a "NASA/NSF Partnership on Science of Dusty Plasmas:
Utilizing the PK-4 Facility on board the International Space Station" and is
complementary to a NASA award made under the joint program.