* 1740554
* A Bottom-up Approach to Design of Chemical Soil Stabilization Using Thermodynamic Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Maria Chrysochoou, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 07/31/2022
* USD 282,894.00

Clay soils are present in large parts of the United States, such as Texas,
Oklahoma, Kansas and others. Since clay soils are unsuitable as foundations for
construction of highways and other structures, various stabilization techniques
are employed to improve their properties. Chemical soil stabilization using lime
and Portland cement is among the most widely applied approaches. Typically,
design of soil stabilization requires the performance of lab scale treatability
studies in order to determine the optimal chemical dosage, and there is still
limited ability to predict the long-term behavior of stabilized soils over
months and years. Models that describe the chemical reactions within stabilized
clays over time are currently lacking and are necessary to improve our
predictive ability. Accordingly, the overarching goal of this project is to
generate the fundamental kinetic and thermodynamic models that will
quantitatively describe the evolution of the chemical reactions between clay
minerals and common stabilizers (lime, Portland cement). The long-term vision of
the project is to utilize the models to predict long term behavior of stabilized
clays and inform the mix design, minimizing the need to conduct treatability
studies. In addition, the models will be tools for assessing the behavior of
chemically stabilized soils under different scenarios (e.g. increased
carbonation or impact of acidification).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Model development
will be done for eight different combinations (pure kaolinite with different
particle sizes, pure Na-bentonite and one soil stabilized with quicklime and
Portland cement) that will be provide a) fundamental data for pure minerals; and
b) insight into the applicability on a real soil. Three different techniques
(quantitative X-ray Diffraction, thermogravimetric and differential thermal
analysis and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance) will be employed to monitor the solid
phase composition in pure and reactive systems over time, utilizing advanced
spectra deconvolution techniques. The generated data will be used to fit kinetic
models for the pozzolanic reactions of each clay mineral. In addition,
monitoring of pore solution composition will allow to conduct both forward and
inverse thermodynamic modeling to predict the system stability and potential
evolution. Due to the multi-disciplinary nature of the project, a parallel goal
is to provide training opportunities integrating geotechnical engineering,
geochemistry and materials science. Specifically designed modules with project-
related multi-disciplinary concepts will be designed and integrated in regularly
offered teaching and outreach activities at UCONN, providing a sustainable
platform for continuous exposure of wide student audiences and expanding
existing initiatives, from K-4 soil modules, to an ASCE webinar for
professionals, new undergraduate courses and a distance learning Masters of
Engineering. Engagement across three professional societies (chemistry,
environmental and civil engineering) will result in cross-fertilization and wide
dissemination of project results.