* 1740538
* Collaborative Research:  New Approaches to New Production
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Alyson Santoro, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 07/31/2018
* USD 101,545.00

Coastal marine ecosystems are seasonally dynamic and highly productive.
Phytoplankton populations shift from nutrient replete conditions in the spring
to nutrient poor conditions in other seasons. The San Pedro Ocean Time-series
(SPOT), located 17 km offshore between Los Angeles Harbor and Catalina Island,
is a representative and accessible model coastal system with regular sampling
and a substantial archive of relevant observations. The SPOT program has
cataloged the dynamics, diversity, and productivity of microbial populations
since 2000. With rising carbon dioxide (CO2) concentrations and resulting
decreases in surface pH, it is critically important to understand the nutrient
controls on primary production in coastal waters and the capacity of coastal
ecosystems to sequester CO2. This project will examine rates of primary
production, nitrogen uptake associated with primary production, and the
oxidation of ammonium to nitrate (nitrification), at SPOT over two seasonal
cycles. It will also contribute to the development of human resources in the
marine sciences through the training of undergraduate and graduate students at
the University of Southern California and the University of Maryland. The
researchers participate in education outreach activities (e.g. through the
Centers for Ocean Sciences Education Excellence programs), and will incorporate
findings from this study in those presentations.

This project will investigate primary production and nitrogen (N) dynamics at
SPOT and specifically implement an analysis of new production. The new
production conceptual model has been a powerful organizing principle in
biological oceanography and provides a means to constrain the amount of primary
production that may be exported or "sequestered" from the system. Despite
qualifications to the definitions of new and regenerated forms of N as
originally articulated, the concept has, for the most part, been narrowly
applied, specifying nitrate as the primary form of new N, and ammonium as the
predominant recycled form. Evidence continues to accumulate that these
definitions may warrant expansion. N fixation can be at times a substantial
source of new N; similarly, forms of dissolved organic N (e.g., urea) may
contribute significantly to recycled production, but the specific organisms
taking part in these transformations are still uncertain. Nitrification in the
upper water column may also compromise the strict definitions of new and
recycled N. Scientists can now probe more deeply into new and regenerated
production, and directly identify major agents of these processes using new
molecular techniques. This project will quantify new and regenerated production
in a coastal ecosystem, illuminating the predominant compounds involved. Rates
of primary production, nitrate, ammonium and urea assimilation, N2 fixation, and
nitrification will be determined in the upper water column in concert with
monthly SPOT cruises. In tandem, two stable isotope probing (SIP) approaches
(conventional SIP for nitrate, ammonium and urea uptake coupled to high
throughput sequencing and microarray based Chip-SIP for N2 fixation) will be
used to directly identify the major agents involved in these processes, along
with the uptake of 13C-urea into nitrifier biomass. The following two hypotheses
will be tested: 1. N2 fixation is a substantial source of new N in coastal
waters of Southern California supporting export production. 2. Forms of
dissolved organic N, and specifically urea, can be substrates for nitrification
and contribute substantially to regenerated production.