* 1740251
* SI2-SSE: Software for Semiconductor and Electrochemical Interfaces (SSEI)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Richard Hennig, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2022
* USD 322,051.00

The importance of materials interfaces is apparent when considering key
industrial segments such as the microelectronics, chemical, energy, and
biomedical industries. Interfaces and surfaces often control the properties of
materials and the interface structure and chemistry are one of the most
important, yet least understood, aspects of materials synthesis and
functionalization. Materials interfaces come in a broad variety, ranging from
solid/solid interfaces in semiconductor hetero-structures to solid/liquid
interfaces in electrochemistry and biomaterials, and solid/vapor interfaces in
chemical vapor deposition and free-standing 2D materials. Despite their
diversity, all interfaces present a common set of challenges for computational
studies. This project will develop a sustainable software package that enables
ab initio simulations of materials interfaces in various environments that
extends the current state of the art by adding functionality and increasing
performance. The software tools will impact the development and the design of
novel materials that broadly benefit society in the fields of catalysis,
electrochemistry, battery technologies, and electronic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop
a comprehensive and sustainable Software for Semiconductor and Electrochemical
Interfaces (SSEI) that provides various continuum models and couples them to ab
initio simulations. The SSEI package will enable an efficient and accurate
description of a wide variety of materials interfaces that are important for
application in energy technologies, corrosion research, electronic devices, and
2D materials. The SSEI is based on the VASPsol module developed by the PI and
will be developed primarily for direct use as a module in VASP. For future
extension of the software to other DFT codes, the project will provide a
portable software interface and detailed documentation. The software design
goals are to develop SSEI into (i) a sustainable scientific tool, (ii)
significantly extend its functionality to nonlinear models and arbitrary
electrostatic boundary conditions, and (iii) increase its performance. These
complementary goals will be achieved through an expansion of the developer and
user base, a transition to portable software interfaces and data structures, and
the addition of modular algorithms for functionality and performance
enhancements. All developments will make extensive use of object-oriented
programming principles and software design patterns to speed up the development
process and aid maintainability. The SSEI package provides the predictive tools
for materials interfaces that have the potential to transform the use of ab
initio methods to advance our fundamental knowledge and enable the design and
optimization of materials interfaces for better catalysts, battery electrodes,
electronic junctions, and corrosion resistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the
Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering and the
Division of Materials Research in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.