* 1740309
* NSCI SI2-SSE: Multiscale Software for Quantum Simulations of Nanostructured Materials and Devices
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Carl Kelley, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Computational science is firmly established as a pillar of scientific discovery
and technology, promising unprecedented new capabilities. The National Strategic
Computing Initiative (NSCI) establishes an ambitious roadmap to advance Science
and Technology (S&amp;T) through support for sustained innovations in high
performance computing and its use. Harnessing the power of millions of computer
cores and/or compute accelerators (also called graphical processing units, GPUs)
foreseen in future high performance computers requires a new generation of
application software and algorithms, able to effectively utilize such resources
and create the revolutionary S&amp;T advances that underpin the nation's
economic competitiveness. The proposed work will develop high-performance,
scalable quantum simulation software for complex materials and devices, which
will be portable and tunable across alternative exascale architectures. It will
be able to address grand challenges in the design of quantum materials and
devices, responding to one of the five strategic objectives of NSCI. Quantum
materials and processes also underpin one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas for Future NSF
Investments, The Quantum Leap: Leading the Next Quantum Revolution. Another
important program in which materials simulation plays a key role is the
Materials Genome Initiative. It seeks to "deploy advanced materials at least
twice as fast at a fraction of the cost" and relies on computational materials
design as the critical aspect, with computation guiding experiments. The goals
of this project are to refactor and extend the open-source RMG software suite to
future computer architectures at exascale, to enable transformational research
on the design of quantum materials and devices from fundamental quantum-
mechanical level. The RMG software will extend from desktops to the largest
supercomputer systems, and will also perform well on a multitude of other
systems, such as parallel computing clusters of various sizes, including those
with GPUs. At the highest level of performance, it will enable predictive
simulations at unprecedented scale, impact several areas of science and
engineering and become a source of new discoveries and economic growth. RMG,
already highly parallel and capable of multi-petaflops speeds, can provide a
pathway towards reaching key NSCI goals. RMG has already been included in a
benchmark suite which will be used to help select future supercomputers. At the
same time, it's scalability means that it will be useful in classroom education
running on students' laptops, to help individual researchers perform significant
scientific or technological research on their accelerator- or GPU-equipped
workstations, and, to run larger problems on a multitude of computer clusters
with varying capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to
refactor and extend the open-source RMG software suite to exascale
architectures, to enable transformational research on the design of quantum
materials and devices from fundamental quantum-mechanical level. The RMG
software will extend from desktops to the largest supercomputer systems, and
will also perform well on a multitude of other systems, such as parallel
clusters of various sizes, including those with GPUs. At the highest level of
performance, it will enable predictive simulations at unprecedented scale,
impact several areas of science and engineering and become a source of new
discoveries and economic growth. RMG, already highly parallel and capable of
multi-petaflops speeds, can provide a pathway towards reaching some of key NSCI
goals. It has been included just as a part of NSF's Sustained Petascale
Performance Benchmarks, which will be used to select NSF's future Leadership
Class supercomputers. However, it will also be useful in classroom education,
running on individual students' laptops, help individual researchers perform
significant scientific or technological research on their accelerator- or GPU-
equipped workstations, and also run on a multitude of clusters with varying
capabilities. The extensible and portable exascale-capable software tools for
simulations of complex quantum materials and devices will enable many scientific
and technological endeavors that are currently too difficult to pursue,
including dramatically accelerated discovery and design of complex quantum
materials structures, such as nanostructured energy storage materials; nanoscale
biosensors for electrical sequencing of DNA and nanoscale "laboratories on a
chip" for monitoring health; as well as addressing fundamental questions about
quantum behavior and the manipulation of quantum systems. Analogous accelerated
progress is expected in other areas of science and technology that depend on
nano and meso scales that are intermediate between those of molecules and bulk
solids. Medium-size simulations will be enabled on local computing platforms,
with an easy migration pathway to national facilities with the same input GUI.
The exascale quantum simulation software will thus become a major resource to
the national community. The easy availability of desktop binaries, supported
source code, and optimized binaries at national facilities will lead to a major
increase in high-end usage, dramatically enlarging the number and quality of
simulations. The increase in users at all levels will stimulate their
contributions both by new development and though incorporation of existing code
elements into various materials frameworks. The national Cyberinfrastructure
Community will be engaged through SI2 Software Institutes, Blue Waters and XSEDE
projects, including live tutorials at workshops, as well tutorial sessions at
conferences. STEM education and interests will be addressed by recruitment of
undergraduate students, visually attractive presentations at libraries and
science museums, and web-based presentation modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the
Directorate for Computer &amp; Information Science and Engineering and the
Division of Materials Research in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.