* 1740250
* SI2:SSE: MAtrix, TEnsor, and Deep-Learning Optimized Routines (MATEDOR)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Stanimire Tomov, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2022
* USD 400,000.00

A number of scientific software applications from important fields, including
applications in deep learning, data mining, astrophysics, image and signal
processing, hydrodynamics, and more, do many computations on small matrices
(also known as "tensors") and using widely available standard linear-algebra
software libraries. Scientists are trying to make these applications run faster
by running them on advanced high performance computing (HPC) systems, that are
heterogeneous systems that use processors of many different types, such as
"accelerators" - that use of specialized computer hardware to perform some
functions more efficiently than standard, general-purpose processors - and "co-
processors" - that can run certain specialized functions in parallel with the
central processor. However, standard linear algebra software libraries cannot
make use of these specialized hardware components, and so the scientific
applications mentioned above do not become much faster. Many existing linear
algebra libraries, including libraries supplied by commercial vendors of
computing technology have been tried to no avail. This issue is now critical
because advancements in science from important fields are being held back due to
the lack of progress in speeding up software. This project will address this
through research and development that will create efficient software that can
repetitively execute tensor operations grouped together in "batches" and which
can be written to run very efficiently and quickly on the types of hardware
components that exist in HPC systems. In addition to the research and
development, several students will be engaged in the project, thus helping
develop a critically needed component of the U.S.
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The trend in high performance computing (HPC)
toward large-scale, heterogeneous systems with GPU accelerators and coprocessors
has made the near total absence of linear algebra software for small matrix or
tensor operations especially noticeable. Given the fundamental importance of
numerical libraries to science and engineering applications of all types, the
need for libraries that can perform batched operations on small matrices or
tensors has become acute. This MAtrix, TEnsor, and Deep-learning Optimized
Routines (MATEDOR) project seeks to provide a solution to this problem by
developing a sustainable and portable library for such small computations.
Future releases of MATEDOR are expected to have a significant impact on
application areas that use small matrices and tensors and need to exploit the
power of advanced computing architectures. Such application areas include deep-
learning, data mining, metabolic networks, computational fluid dynamics, direct
and multi-frontal solvers, image and signal processing, and many more. This team
has a proven record of providing software infrastructure that is widely adopted
and used, that supports ongoing community contributions, and that becomes
incorporated in vendor libraries (e.g., Intel's MKL and NVIDIA's CUBLAS) and
other software tools and frameworks (e.g., MATLAB and R). Students will be
regularly integrated into the project activities, and this group of PIs has an
exceptionally strong record of community outreach, having given numerous
performance optimization and software tutorials at conferences and Users Group
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.