* 1740103
* Training Successful Trajectories: Interventions to Increase Minority Student and Future Engineering and Other STEM Faculty Application Success Rates
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Amanda Grannas, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 07/31/2021
* USD 274,325.00

Many communities of color remain significantly underrepresented at the doctoral
level in all STEM fields; the engineering fields are particularly difficult to
increase racial and ethnic representation among domestic groups. Many doctoral
applicants of color, who are otherwise well-qualified in education and
experience, are underserved in the area of graduate school application support,
specifically in the development of self-presentation skills necessary to win a
major fellowship, gain admission to graduate school, and land a quality position
in their field. While underrepresented students at well-resourced universities
and colleges are offered recruitment for fellowships, preparation workshops, and
professional advising to develop such self-presentation skills, these services
are often lacking at institutions of higher learning that do not have the human
and financial resources to offer such professionalization training. Without this
support, many underrepresented doctoral students are less likely to be
successful in securing a fellowship and are gaining admission to complete
graduate school. This grant project focuses on remedying this issue by offering
underrepresented undergraduate and graduate students, and postdoctoral scholars,
who will all be future faculty, the kind of self-presentation training offered
during that Boot Camp (and at well-resourced universities and colleges), and
using measurable outcomes to test the efficacy of four different types of
intervention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has immense potential broadening
participation in engineering and other STEM field by studying and comparing four
different interventions for underrepresented students, and the findings from the
research study will provide practical insights into the most effective training
of vital professional development skills. Over two years, ninety
underrepresented students, along with future faculty (e.g., postdocs) and
current faculty, will receive first-rate training. By assessing participant
knowledge, their application numbers, and the results of their applications, the
investigators will evaluate content delivery, consultation efficacy, and the
effectiveness of training methods and materials. After participating in this
program, the 90 trainees (e.g., LSAMP students, postdocs, and faculty) will take
their training with them; this training will positively influence their
professional trajectories throughout their careers. Beyond training these future
leaders, the most important result of the project will be the compilation,
analysis, and dissemination of the research findings to a broad audience, so
that future programs across the country will have the benefit of research into
which types of training content and delivery methods most successfully support
URM STEM students (and current and future faculty) with applications to graduate
school, fellowships, and grants.