* 1740695
* Building Capacity for Interdisciplinary Analysis of Longitudinal Data for Education Policy Research: Understanding Science and Math Teacher Labor Market Pipelines
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Thomas Fullerton, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 09/30/2019
* USD 499,875.00

Growth in the demand for workers with math and science skills places competing
challenges for K-12 education. Schools are expected to prepare a new and more
diverse group of leaders for science, technology, engineering and math (STEM)
industries, yet teachers with math and science training are increasingly
valuable in the private sector. Teacher shortages, primarily in the fields of
math and science, often require school leaders to fill positions with under-
qualified teachers. Research is limited on this problem because there is limited
longitudinal data linking teachers to individual students or linking teacher
labor markets to non-teacher labor markets. As a result, state and district
policymakers often lack necessary evidence on how to reform teacher labor market
policies in ways that both reduce regional and subject-specific shortages and
improve students' access to highly-qualified educators. The University of Texas
at El Paso (UTEP) will develop interdisciplinary research expertise in this area
by drawing on large scale longitudinal student-level datasets. The project's
overarching goals are to develop and link databases for next-generation data-
intensive research in education and to build an interdisciplinary community of
scholars at UTEP that will continue to analyze these datasets in future
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will explore three stages of
the math and science teacher pipeline: (a) entrance of teacher candidates
through preparation programs or alternative certification; (b) assignment of
currently employed teachers to classrooms, and their later transfers to other
schools and districts; and (c) exit out of the teaching labor market and into
non-teaching educational positions or private sector employment. These analyses
are facilitated by data on private sector employees in Texas that can be linked
to multiple longitudinal student- and teacher-level datasets covering 250,000
teachers and over five million students each year for more than a 20-year
period. The research topics that form the basis of this study are: (a) teacher
supply, shortages, and the teacher preparation pipeline; (b) access to effective
teachers for historically underserved students; and (c) factors leading to
teacher attrition. Findings from the study will be of substantial interest to
policymakers as well as the academic community.