* 1740011
* Collaborative Research: Quantitative Analysis of Liposome Deformation at Nanoscale Using Resistive Pulse Sensing in Solid State Nanopores
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Petia Vlahovska, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

Tiny lipid sacs, called liposomes, play a crucial role in living cells as means
to store and transport material in and out of the cell. The key task of
liposomes (storage and delivery to targets) requires them to be flexible enough
to merge with target membranes in order to deliver their cargos, and yet to have
sufficient structural stability to maintain integrity without rupturing and
losing the stored material in the naturally dynamic biological environments.
Therefore, understanding the mechanics of liposomes is of great interest to both
fundamental and applied scientists who are developing artificial, biomimetic
liposomes as targeted drug/gene delivery systems for better therapeutics. A
major challenge however, is the lack of efficient engineering tools to probe the
mechanical flexibility of the sub-cellular, nanoscale liposomes. The research
addresses this need by developing a novel method based on nanopore technology
that uses electric fields to deform liposomes and electrical measurements to
characterize their shape. The overall goal is to characterize the mechanical
flexibility of nano-liposomes with the ultimate goal to establish a method to
study mechanical properties of nanoscale objects such as viruses and other
biological samples at cellular/molecular level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will advance the engineering tools for mechanical characterization of
soft biological materials at the micro/nanoscale. The technology uses nanopore
resistive pulse sensing to detect membrane deformation. As liposomes translocate
through a nanopore, they experience strong electric stresses and physical
confinement, which cause deformation. In this project, liposome shapes will be
inferred from ionic current blockade, i.e., the sharp change (pulse) in ohmic
resistance when a liposome is present in the pore. A theoretical model for
liposome deformation in the nanopore will be developed to yield membrane
mechanical properties. The method will enable both high-throughput and single-
particle resolution because (1) thousands of liposomes pass through the nanopore
and a resistive pulse will be recorded for each individual one, and (2)
thousands of measurements on a single liposome can be made by alternating the
applied electric field direction to drive back-and-forth translocation. In
broader terms, this method will enable studying mechanobiology at novel
unprecedented scales, which is single-virus and single-particle level.