* 1740833
* TRIPODS: From Foundations to Practice of Data Science and Back
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Qiang Du, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,500,000.00

In recent decades, scientific and technological fields have experienced "data
moments" as researchers recognized the potential of drawing new types of
inferences by applying techniques from computational statistics and machine
learning to ever-growing datasets. At the same time, everyday life is
increasingly saturated with products of data analysis: search engines,
recommendation systems, autonomous vehicles, etc. These developments raise
fundamental methodological questions, including how to collect and pre- pare
data for analysis, and how to transform statistical inferences into effective
action and new statistical inquiries. To address these questions, it is
necessary to develop theoretical foundations for the practice of data science,
and to provide practitioners with sound and practically relevant methodological
training. The Columbia TRIPODS Institute pursues these goals through an
integrated program of research in data science foundations, curriculum
development, and center-building activities. The research program seeks to
provide theoretical understanding of practical heuristics, develop modular and
well-structured toolkits of computational primitives for data science, and to
support the entirety of the data science cycle, from data collection and
annotation, to the assessment of the analysis product. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Institute pursues programs of research, education and center-building aimed at
articulating theoretical foundations for data science. Its activities aim to
have a major impact in shaping this emerging field. The research directions
include understanding tractable classes of optimization problems, developing
primitives that support efficient computation on data, and developing
methodological foundations for interactive protocols in data science. These
directions address challenging problems at the interface between theory and
practice, the solutions of which require ideas spanning mathematics, statistics,
and computing. The educational activities articulate model curricula in data
science at the MS/professional and PhD levels, including interdisciplinary
courses aimed at building a common language for a new generation of scientists
and engineers. Center building activities are organized around cross-
disciplinary themes and structured to encourage interaction across disciplines
and to develop a common methodological community in Foundations of Data Science.
These research and educational activities-including workshops, summer schools,
distinguished lecture series, long-term visits, and outreach- help to further
define and disseminate a common language for foundational research and
education, and to increase diverse participation in data science. Located within
the Center for Foundations of Data Science in the Data Science Institute at
Columbia University, the Institute is at the center of the Northeast Big Data
Hub. This position supports expansion of activities within Columbia, and also
with other Big Data Hub members, TRIPODS Institutes, and research/industry
organizations. Funds for the project come from CISE Computing and Communications
Foundations, CISE Information Technology Research, MPS Division of Mathematical
Sciences, and MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.