* 1740525
* AF: Small: Graphs and structures for distance estimation
* CSE,CCF
* 01/20/2017,08/31/2019
* Virginia Williams, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2019
* USD 219,028.00

Distance computation and estimation in networks is one of the most basic and
fundamental tasks in network analysis. However, storing the distance between
every pair of nodes of a graph is infeasible, especially for today's "big data."
Small sketches of a graph have been developed so that a good estimate of any
pairwise distance can be retrieved from the sketch. This project aims to advance
the state-of-the art of such sketches. The main objects of study are spanners,
distance oracles and their fault-tolerant variants. A spanner is a sparse
subgraph that does not stretch any distance of the original graph by much.  A
distance oracle is a data structure that has small space usage and is capable of
answering (approximate) distance queries efficiently. Both spanners and distance
oracles compress the distance information. The main difference between them is
that one can still run graph algorithms on a spanner, but not on a distance
oracle, whereas one can obtain any distance from a distance oracle instantly,
but in a spanner one would have to actually compute it.

In practice, networks are dynamic in nature. To address this, graph sketches
would have to tolerate faults, i.e. edge and vertex deletions. There are fault-
tolerant versions of spanners and distance oracles-- these structures estimate
distances for any given (typically fixed size) subset of failed edges or nodes.
This project will provide algorithms for constructing new low-space spanners and
oracles with improved guarantees and will strive to develop new techniques for
fault-tolerance and distance estimation in general. Spanners and distance
oracles have many applications, e.g. in parallel and distributed algorithms for
distance computation, network routing, and simulating synchronized protocols in
unsynchronized networks. A better understanding of network routing along short
paths could guide the design of next-generation Internet protocols. The research
is also closely tied to the field of metric embedding, and thus extends beyond
the strict boundaries of computer science. Material from this research will be
integrated into core undergraduate and graduate courses, and will lead to the
development of new courses on the topic. The lecture notes and project materials
will be available on the course website for the general public.