* 1740095
* SI2-SSE: TLDS: Transactional Lock-Free Data Structures
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Yan Solihin, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2022
* USD 427,472.00

Exploiting the parallelism in multiprocessor systems is a major challenge in
computer science. Multicore programming demands a change in the way we design
and use fundamental data structures. Non-blocking data structures allow un-
constrained access to shared data; however, care must be taken so that data is
not overwritten incorrectly. A main obstacle to the design and use of non-
blocking data structures is the lack of a generic methodology for allowing
efficient transactional and composable operations. This project, supported by
the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure, and the Division of Computing and
Communication Foundations, will explore and define the fundamental techniques
for the design and use of transactional multiprocessor algorithms. The software
elements produced in this work will significantly improve the functionality and
reuse of the existing concurrent containers and will accelerate the performance
of multiprocessor applications beyond what is possible with current programming
libraries. The programming elements created in this project will be disseminated
through the open-source release of a software library. The project will also
help contribute to a workforce trained in systems
programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the project's goals, the PI will
explore solutions to overcome two key challenges for supporting high-performance
data structure transactions: 1) how to efficiently buffer write operations so
that their modifications are invisible to operations outside the transaction's
scope, and 2) how to minimize the penalty of rollbacks when aborting partially
executed transactions. A representative collection of six transactional lock-
free containers will be created including: a linked-list, a set, a skiplist, a
multi-dimensional list, a priority queue, and a dictionary. This work will
substantially advance the knowledge and practice in multiprocessor software
design. To the best of the PI's knowledge, lock-free transactional
transformation is the first methodology that provides both lock-free progress
and semantic conflict detection for data structure transactions. To achieve
this, the PI will create new techniques for conflict detection and recovery in
the execution of transactions. A node-based conflict detection scheme that does
not rely on Software Transactional Memory nor require the use of an additional
data structure will be introduced. A new and efficient conflict recovery
strategy will be designed, based on the interpretation of the logical status of
nodes instead of explicitly revoking executed operations in an aborted
transaction. This research will introduce the first approach for the efficient
execution of composable non- blocking transactions across multiple data
structures. The software components and data structures engineered as part of
this work will be significant research artifacts themselves.