* 1740361
* Workshop: Collaborative Research: Pan American Nanotechnology Conference: Shaping the Future from November 27th to 30th, 2017 at Guaruja, Sao Paulo, Brazil
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Vinka Craver, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 01/31/2019
* USD 47,025.00

This award is cofunded by the Office of International Science and Engineering.
This project aims to support the participation of U.S. researchers,
postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate students in one of the first Pan
American Nanotechnology Conference to be held from November 27th to 30th at
Guaruja, Brazil. Preference for allocation of travel support will be given to
underrepresented groups in USA, i.e. minorities, females and
researchers/students with disabilities as well as early career scientists. This
conference will provide a venue for understanding nanotechnology and
nanoparticles behavior in biological, chemical and environmental systems with
the purpose to develop useful and sustainable applications throughout the Pan-
American region. In this conference, educational, regulatory, social and
economic aspects of sustainable nanotechnology applications will be also
discussed. This conference will be the largest assemblage of participants from
the Americas sharing knowledge and fostering collaboration to move forward the
development and application of sustainable nanotechnologies and
nanomanufacturing with the final aim to solve societal challenges as well as
protect and improve the environment and human health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conference will have plenary and concurrent smaller breakout sessions to
introduce different areas of the nanotechnology field, including: biological-
nano interactions, chemical-nano interactions, ecological-nano interactions,
sustainable nanomanufacturing, nanoinformatics and modeling, as well as
educational, social, economic and legal aspects of nanomaterials and
nanotechnologies. This conference will be one of the first assemblage of
participants from the Americas sharing knowledge and fostering collaboration
with the purpose of moving forward the development and application of
sustainable nanotechnologies to improve quality of life worldwide while
promoting protection of the environment and human health.