* 1740540
* Graduate Student Workshop on Service Life Prediction of Concrete; Oregon State University; July 9-14, 2017
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Jason Ideker, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 04/30/2018
* USD 17,126.00

This award will support a workshop for graduate students and faculty to
participate a one-week course on experimental work and computational modeling on
material evaluation, degradation mechanisms and prediction models. The workshop
will be held at the Oregon State University in Corvallis, Oregon, July 9-14,
2017. As our existing infrastructure continues to age, it is of utmost
importance to reliably assess and predict the performance of the remaining
service life of existing assets. Computational modeling based on fundamental
physics theories can be a powerful tool in achieving these goals while it can
also be applicable to new constructions to optimize the materials selection and
formulation for a desirable design life. Currently, courses related to material
deterioration analysis and service life prediction modeling in the graduate
civil engineering curriculum are scarce or limited to few institutions. This
workshop offers a teaching model that can overcome this challenge. The course
will be taught by a group of faculty members (national and international) with
relevant research expertise. The outcomes of this course will enable civil
engineering graduate students to gain fundamental knowledge related to service-
life prediction and to integrate course materials into their current research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this workshop is to enhance graduate
student learning and research efforts by infusing the basic science and theory
to model and predict concrete performance. Students will be introduced to
reactive-transport modeling of multi-species and multi-mechanistic transport in
concrete; coupled modeling of corrosion propagation of embedded reinforcement
and recent developments in coupling reactive processes, which are quantified
using thermodynamic modeling, with numerical solutions of extended Nernst-Plank
equation for multi-species transport. Basic thermodynamic modeling principles,
Gibbs Free Energy Minimization processes and introduce open-source algorithms
(e.g. GEMS framework) and thermodynamic databases (e.g. CEMDATA) that use this
approach will also be explored. In addition, students will have hands on
experience with different analytical equipment to evaluate laboratory and field
aged cement and concrete samples. The instructors will incorporate the
verification of prediction models using analytical results from those test data.
Effective technical communication including proposal writing skills will also be
introduced to the graduate students.