* 1740042
* INFEWS/T1: Linking Current and Future Hydrologic Change to Hydropower, Human Nutrition, and Livelihoods in the Lower Mekong Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2017,12/31/2022
* Jon Miller, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 12/31/2022
* USD 2,410,684.00

This INFEWS project will identify and communicate science-based resource
management constraints to sustain food-energy-water systems in the lower Mekong
River Basin (MRB). The Mekong is one of the last major rivers to remain undammed
for much of its length. The river's strong natural flood pulse is driven by the
South Asian Summer Monsoon and controls multiple ecosystem processes critical to
livelihoods in the region. Yet, despite the dominant role floodplain ecosystems
play in the region, there is little known in the MRB regarding climate,
hydrology, ecological processes, resource users and governance. Annual flooding
controls the fluxes of the key nutrients and contaminants that enhance or shrink
the growth and productivity of fish and rice. In this way, the flood pulse is
directly linked to human well-being. However, the river's enormous discharge
could also generate over 40 GW of power. This power is viewed as essential to
stimulate the economic development of the region. It seems certain that future
hydropower development and climate variability will impact the flood-pulse and
the goods and services it provides in the MRB. To fill these knowledge gaps,
this project(a partnership between Arizona State University and the University
of Washington) will build analytical frameworks, collect critical field data,
and construct new tools that advance the progress of science and that are also
applicable for scenario analysis and planning as an aid to sustainable
development and that will also promote the progress of science. Furthermore,
food, energy and water security are core components of stability throughout the
developing world, and this project will advance national security by providing
science-based guidelines for stabilizing food-energy-water security tradeoffs in
rapidly developing and growing regions of the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
South Mekong Livelihoods Project (SMLP) will provide a quantitative framework
for predicting the effects of hydropower development and climate variability on
the Mekong River Basin (MRB) and its flood-pulse, freshwater biodiversity, and
both yields and nutritional quality of fish and rice, two key aspects of food
security. The Variable Infiltration Capacity (VIC) macro-hydrology model will
predict current and future streamflow and thereby serve as the foundation of the
quantitative framework. VIC will be parameterized with new remote-sensing
analyses predicting evapotranspiration as well as land-cover change from
riparian forest to irrigated rice paddy. Climate simulations and future dam
development and operations scenarios will be used as a forcing function for VIC,
which will then drive a water-resources development model, a hydropower
generation model, and a hydrodynamics model of the Tonle Sap Lake in the lower
MRB. The project will link aspects of hydrology with food production in the
Tonle Sap in two ways: 1) via multivariate autoregressive state-space analyses
of new catch per unit effort data to quantify how timing, magnitude, and the
decadal-scale sequence of the flood-pulse drives relative fish abundance and
ecosystem processes; and 2) via a crop model (CropSyst) linked to VIC that
generates rice yields from a physically based land-surface scheme. Dynamics of
the flood-pulse are also likely to control food quality, specifically fluxes of
key nutrients and harmful contaminants to people in fish and rice through its
effect on redox biogeochemistry. The project will establish this relationship
for the first time and incorporate both positive (nutritional) and negative
(contaminants) effects of fish and rice into a single metric, thereby
quantitatively linking the flood-pulse to human well-being. The research team
will use metrics of food-system yield and quality to identify best management
practices for dam development and operations using multi-objective optimization
approaches that analyze tradeoffs between hydropower generation and food yield.
Finally, the project will develop one of the first quantitative institutional
analyses using a cooperative game-theoretic approaches to unearth best practices
in creating international coalitions at multiple scales of governance. These
system components will be integrated by measuring robustness of tradeoffs under
climate extremes and given bargaining among institutions that might force local
solutions to diverge from the global (basin) optima. The project will: 1) train
three US-based postdoctoral researchers, six graduate students, multiple
undergraduates, and at least two Cambodian students; 2) share critical data and
models through broad stakeholder engagement within the Mekong; 3) develop a
novel online curriculum that enhances STEM capacity in sustainability by
engaging 20 fisheries managers in quantitative modeling and tradeoff analysis
led by ASU's EdPlus online learning program; and 4) improve scientific capacity
in the region as MRB scientists develop and apply the project's advanced
modeling systems. Local scientists and students will be trained in both field
and statistical methods so that the research can be sustained beyond the
project's duration.