* 1740536
* Collaborative Research: Convection and Rainfall Enhancement over Mountainous Tropical Islands
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Peter Molnar, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2023
* USD 59,373.00

More rain falls over tropical islands than nearby ocean areas. This enhancement
of island rainfall occurs for multiple reasons, including triggering of
thunderstorms by daytime heating of islands and associated sea breezes, as well
as by winds blowing over mountainous islands. Although island rainfall may seem
like a local subject of study, an improved understanding of it has several
benefits that cut across study of global weather and climate. For example,
rainfall over the large islands of the western Tropical Pacific (such as Borneo,
Papua New Guinea, and Sumatra) influences wind patterns along the equatorial
Pacific basin at both weather (a few weeks) and climate (seasonal) time scales.
Also, a deeper understanding of tall thunderstorms in the tropics remains a
major obstacle to better weather forecasts and reducing uncertainty in climate
change projections. Connected with this, studying island rainfall may help
address questions about whether it tends to rain more over wet or dry soils and
why; these questions are important for understanding the persistence of floods
and droughts. Finally, understanding how island rainfall depends on the
temperature of the nearby ocean remains a challenge. This temperature-dependence
is important not only for the societal impacts of rainfall extremes in a
changing climate, but also because dissolved minerals found in the runoff from
all land - but particularly tropical islands - can regulate atmospheric carbon
dioxide content and global temperature over periods of millions of years. The
goal of this project is to address these questions that cut across weather,
current climate, and past climate, by using high-resolution numerical model
simulations of the atmosphere to investigate how island rainfall enhancement
depends on multiple factors of the island environment. These factors include the
temperature of the nearby ocean, the wetness and height of the island, the
strength of the winds impinging on the island, and the size of the region
simulated in the numerical model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
will advance knowledge about the tropical convection processes that regulate the
climate, by studying how tropical convections are influenced by local aspects of
the island environment. The research project supports a graduate student who
will gain training in climate dynamics and preparation for a career in teaching
and research in academia or commercial weather prediction, thus sustaining the
pool of human resources required for excellence in climate research. Publicly
available instructional videos will be produced to illustrate central concepts
associated with island thunderstorms and rainfall, including sea-breezes and the
pattern of thunderstorm triggering over the day. A set of tools for analyzing
the output generated by the high-resolution numerical model of the atmosphere
will be made available to undergraduate students, graduate students, and
postdoctoral researchers.