* 1740579
* Support for the 2017 IEEE Visualization Conference (VIS) Doctoral Colloquium
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Henry Childs, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 04/30/2018
* USD 20,000.00

Visualization, or the use of interactive graphic representations to support data
analysis and understanding, has become an integral part in a wide array of
application areas. This grant provides support for about 18 U.S.-based graduate
students to participate in the Doctoral Colloquium to be held in conjunction
with the IEEE Visualization Conference (VIS 2017), October 1- 6, 2017, Phoenix,
AZ (http://ieeevis.org/). The Doctoral Colloquium (DC) was initiated in 2006,
and has been highly successful in providing mentorship opportunities from senior
researchers to new ones. DC provides an opportunity to the students to present
their doctoral dissertation research and receive feedback from a key group of
their peer professionals that will enable them to further shape and improve
their work. The VIS Doctoral Colloquium brings together the most promising of
the next generation of visualization researchers. This event allows the
participants to create a professional network both among themselves and with
senior researchers. This professional network plays a major role in their
professional and educational career development. Since the students and mentors
are a diverse group on several dimensions (nationality, gender, ethnicity,
scientific discipline, and research specialization), the students' horizons are
broadened at a critical stage in their professional development. Supporting
participation of U.S. students in DC VIS 2017 is important for the development
of researchers, practitioners and educators in the important area of visual
analytics.

IEEE VIS (formerly known as IEEE VisWeek) is the premier forum for visualization
advances in science and engineering for academia, government, and industry,
bringing together researchers and practitioners with a shared interest in
techniques, tools, and technology for data analysis. VIS 2017 will take place in
Phoenix, Arizona, during October 1-6. The event is composed of three main
conferences: the 28th Annual IEEE Scientific Visualization Conference (SciVis),
the 23rd Annual IEEE Information Visualization Conference (InfoVis), and the
12th Annual IEEE Visual Analytics Science and Technology Conference (VAST). It
will also include the 14th International Symposium on Visualization for Cyber
Security (VizSec), the 7th Symposium on Large Data Analysis and Visualization
(LDAV), and the 3rd Symposium on Visualization on Data Science (VDS). Papers in
the InfoVis conference are rigorously refereed and are published in a special
conference issue of IEEE Transactions of Visualization and Computer Graphics
(TVCG). Select papers from the proceedings of the SciVis and VAST conferences
arealso published in IEEE TVCG, while the remaining proceedings papers are
published by the IEEE. Student research will be disseminated via extended
abstracts published in the VIS 2017 Extended Abstracts.