* 1740645
* CCI Phase I: NSF Center for First Principles Design of Quantum Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Todd Martinez, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,800,000.00

Quantum mechanics describes all nature at the most fundamental, smallest-scale
level -- sub-atomic particles, atoms and light. Chemical reactions are, at their
core, quantum mechanical processes that involve the motion of electrons and
nuclei. Understanding the ways that chemical reactions occur is important to
being able to predict new reactions. The NSF Center for First Principles Design
of Quantum Processes brings together theorists and experimentalists to develop
new methods to understand, predict and design quantum mechanical phenomena as
they relate to chemical reactions. The research activities have substantial
broader impacts in the field since these processes are central to many chemical
applications, including the development of new light-harvesting materials (for
renewable energy) and improved bio-medical imaging techniques. Broader impacts
also result from the development of new theory tools, graduate student training
at the interface of theory and experiment, early research opportunities for
undergraduates from diverse backgrounds, and the use of visualization devices to
convey the complexities of quantum processes to broad audiences.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Center for First Principles Design of Quantum Processes is
focused on developing fully-predictive theoretical methods for atomistic quantum
mechanical molecular dynamics for the rational theory-aided-design of molecules
and materials. Strong ties to experimentalists ensure that the methods are well
validated. Specific collaborative projects include: (1) tailoring transport and
reactivity of proton defects in complicated environments such as metal organic
frameworks (MOFs) and interfaces, (2) understanding and manipulating excitation
energy transport in natural photosynthetic systems, and (3) elucidating and
controlling the factors governing fluorescence vs. photoisomerization in
fluorescent proteins. The central theoretical framework is ab initio molecular
dynamics (AIMD), including localized and periodic basis sets, ground and
excited-state simulations, and efficient dynamics techniques including non-
adiabatic and other quantum mechanical effects for large spatial and temporal
scales. Broader impacts from the research activities are significant since the
enhanced theoretical methods allow for unprecedented insight and control in
areas that are difficult to address experimentally. Broader impacts also result
from the development of new theory tools, graduate student training at the
interface of theory and experiment, early research opportunities for
undergraduates from diverse backgrounds, and the use of visualization and haptic
devices to convey the complexities of quantum processes to broad audiences. The
Center model integrates theory and experiment and provides innovative training
of graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. New software tools are also
being developed and disseminated to a diverse audience of professional chemists
and students.