* 1740282
* SI2-SSE: Collaborative Research: Integrated Tools for DNA Nanostructure Design and Simulation
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Shawn Douglas, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2020
* USD 250,000.00

Nanotechnology could one day revolutionize several activities of great
importance to our national interest, including how we manufacture consumer
products, how we diagnose and treat disease, and how we detect and neutralize
threats to our defense. One promising approach to atomically precise
construction is adapting molecular building blocks from living organisms such as
DNA, RNA, and proteins, and repurposing them to self-assemble into prescribed
shapes, devices, and materials. A key bottleneck to progress is the complexity
of designing, building, and testing nanostructures comprised of thousands or
millions of atoms. The goal of this project is to accelerate development of bio-
inspired nanostructures by integrating two widely adopted software tools used in
bio-nanostructure design and physics-based molecular simulation. The products of
this effort will enhance our fundamental capability to understand and precisely
engineer self-assembled biomolecular nanostructures, which, when coupled with
experimental validation in the laboratory, will enable future demand-meeting
applications of bionanotechnology.

Toward realizing the goal of programming matter with nanoscale precision, this
project will develop software interfaces between two classes of molecular design
programs that, until now, have been evolving independently from one another. A
widely adopted DNA structure design program, Cadnano, will be extended to
utilize the results of physics-based microscopic simulations, enabling an
iterative structure design process. A leading molecular graphics program, VMD
(Visual Molecular Dynamics), will be developed to seamlessly visualize Cadnano
designs, provide their structural interpretation, and enable further
modification of the structures using an arsenal of computational structural
biology and nanotechnology tools. Both developments will utilize recent advances
in cloud computing technologies, making the DNA structure design software
available anywhere and to anyone in a platform-independent manner.

This project is supported by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the
Directorate for Computer & Information Science & Engineering and the Division of
Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation in the Directorate of
Engineering.