* 1740874
* RESEARCH-PGR:  Transcriptional and Translational Regulation of Gene Expression by Gene Structure, Codon Usage and tRNAs in Grasses
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Ning Jiang, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 03/31/2024
* USD 2,561,080.00

Like all species, grasses such as maize, rice, wheat, oats and barley contain
genes encoding information that determines the amino acid sequence of all the
proteins that plant synthesizes to germinate, grow and reproduce. All genes in
an organism use a simple, four-letter alphabet (A, C, G, T) to make three-letter
words (codons) to specify each amino acid of a protein. There is redundancy in
this genetic code with multiple, similar codons often coding for the same amino
acid. In the DNA, the overall G+C content of genes within any given species is
often very similar. However, in grass species there are high-GC and low-GC
genes, and there is evidence that high-GC and low-GC genes may be transcribed
from DNA into RNA and translated from RNA into protein differently. This project
will test whether proteins from high-GC and low-GC genes are transcribed and
translated with equal efficiency and, specifically, whether that differential
regulation is used when responding to heat, cold and drought stress. This work
will also discover rules about codon usage and protein synthesis that can be
used to design transgenes for efficient protein production. Finally, current
gene prediction software does not account for the high-GC and low-GC genes found
in grasses. This project will create a new gene prediction program that will
more accurately predict genes in grasses. Better gene prediction will benefit
the larger community of plant researchers, including those who work with
economically important grasses such as maize, rice, wheat, oats and
barley.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Grass genes have a bimodal GC distribution and a
significant 5' to 3' GC gradient. Little is known about the consequence of such
variation on gene and protein expression. High gene GC content and strong
negative 5' to 3' gradients in grasses strongly affect codon usage bias. It is
possible that both GC biased gene conversion and codon usage bias are important
in shaping the unusual GC features that are found in grass genes. GC biased gene
conversion may help to move gene mutation towards a particular codon usage
program, and then selection on that codon bias may maintain a gene's GC content
and gradient. GC biased gene conversion in rice will be examined.
Transcriptional and translational characteristics of native and transgenes that
differ only in their GC content will also be studied in rice. Translational
efficiency may also be affected by regulation of tRNAs in a tissue or condition-
specific manner. Therefore, regulation of tRNAs will be examined to determine if
changes in tRNA abundances affect protein translational efficiency. Recent
published data indicate that due to the variation of GC content in grass genes,
a notable number of genes in grasses have been missed or mis-annotated by
existing gene finders. A new gene prediction tool that accounts for grass
bimodal GC distribution will be designed to improve gene annotation in grasses.
The results from this project will provide novel insights into gene evolution in
grasses as well as important guidance for crop improvement via genetic
modification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.