* 1740508
* RAPID: Deportation and Transborder Sociolegal Ties
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Ruth Gomberg-Munoz, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2019
* USD 44,795.00

The research supported by this award explores how sociolegal ties are created by
migration through deportation. In particular, it asks 1) what social and legal
relationships are produced by deportation, 2) how sociolegal relationships, such
as those between parents and children with different citizenships, are managed
and maintained in families separated (and in some cases reunited) by
deportation, and 3) what new challenges and legalities are generated in post-
deportation, cross-border ties. Attention to the sociolegal specificities, as
well as the generalities, of life after deportation will make a vital and timely
contribution to current efforts to understand the effects of the unprecedented
mass human displacement currently underway globally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will be conducted in the United States and Mexico. This is an
appropriate site because recent and anticipated shifts in policy afford an
opportunity to collect data during the process of establishing new sociolegal
ties and relationships. The researcher will collect data through semi-structured
interviews and focus groups with recent deportees, family members, community
organizers, and legal professionals who work with migrants and deportees on both
sides of the border. Results from the rapid assessment will be used to develop a
longitudinal bi-national study of sociolegal dimensions of deportation and to
prepare conferences presentations and publications. The researchers will
increase flows of information between United States.-based and Mexico-based
migrant communities through two community forums, and the project will provide
training in ethnographic research to two undergraduate students from
underrepresented communities.