* 1740386
* Collaborative Research:  Universal skills for Geoscience Graduate Student Success in the Workforce
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Jeffrey Ryan, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2023
* USD 25,645.00

Although geoscience professions have evolved with geoscience research and
technology, different skills and competencies are needed by graduate students to
be successful in the non-academic workforce. The investigators propose to
determine the skills and competencies that should be part of graduate geoscience
education, and the best means of developing these in graduate geoscience
programs nationally. They will build on accomplishments from their previous
initiative "The Future of Undergraduate Geoscience Education". This effort
worked with geoscience employers and academics to identify skills, competencies
and concepts needed by undergraduates to be successful in graduate school and
the future workforce. Department heads and Chairs from across the country
developed action plans for incorporating these results into their departments'
undergraduate programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For this activity, the
investigators will hold an Employers Workshop with participants that span the
breadth of geoscience professions to define the skills and competencies
geoscience graduate students need to be successful in the workforce more broadly
than academia. They will invite a range of employers from those actively
involved in recruiting new hires to senior executives. Subsequently the
investigators will organize a summit for departmental heads, chairs, and
graduate program directors to discuss ways to implement change in individual
departments and programs. Participants will be invited from a broad spectrum of
earth, ocean, and atmospheric science programs at Masters and PhD granting
institutions. An important outcome will be the transformation of graduate level
curriculum for geoscience programs to better align course offerings and
activities with future professional needs of earth, ocean and atmospheric
sciences students.