* 1740385
* I-Corps: Lymphedema Intervention Exercise for Breast Cancer Survivors
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2017,08/31/2018
* Yao Wang, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 08/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is its benefit
for millions of individuals who are at risk for or have developed chronic
lymphedema, including patients who have been treated for breast cancer and other
cancers (head and neck, prostate, melanoma, gynaecological cancer). Lymphedema
is a progressive and chronic swelling with many distressful symptoms after
cancer treatment. Each year, 1.38 million women worldwide and more than 230,000
women in the US are diagnosed with breast cancer. At least 20-40% of breast
cancer survivors have developed lymphedema and the rest of them are at lifelong
risk for lymphedema. This project further develops a lymphatic therapy effective
in reducing the risk of lymphedema and relieving lymphedema symptoms for breast
cancer survivors. The approach may potentially be applied more broadly to
individuals with chronic heart failure, end-stage renal disease and hypertension
with similar abnormal fluid accumulation symptoms.

This I-Corps project explores the commercial potential of a lymphatic therapy.
The core technology consists of a physical therapy system that can automatically
and accurately track a patient's movement and evaluate it against the desired
movement. The system provides instant feedback on whether a patient is
performing an exercise correctly and how should the patient make adjustments in
their movement. Furthermore, the system will be designed to motivate the patient
to perform the therapy correctly and regularly. The system will leverage the
novel computer vision and machine learning algorithms being developed in an on-
going research project in order to overcome the sensor constraints in detecting
joint positions and the significant variability of the normal range of the
desired movement, which are the major technical obstacles faced by current
sensor-based physical therapy systems.