* 1740648
* Collaborative Proposal: EarthCube Integration: Pangeo: An Open Source Big Data Climate Science Platform
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Naomi Henderson, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 08/31/2021
* USD 794,830.00

Climate, weather, and ocean simulations (Earth System Models; ESMs) are crucial
tools for the study of the Earth system, providing both scientific insight into
fundamental dynamics as well as valuable practical predictions about Earth's
future. Continuous increases in ESM spatial resolution have led to more
realistic, more detailed physical representations of Earth system processes,
while the proliferation of statistical ensembles of simulations has greatly
enhanced understanding of uncertainty and internal variability. Hand in hand
with this progress has come the generation of Petabytes of simulation data,
resulting in huge downstream challenges for geoscience researchers. The task of
mining ESM output for scientific insights has now itself become a serious Big
Data problem. Existing Big Data tools cannot easily be applied to the analysis
of ESM data, leading to a building crisis across a wide range of geoscience
fields. This is exactly the sort of problem EarthCube was conceived to address.
The project will integrate a suite of open-source software tools (the "Pangeo
Platform") which together can tackle petabyte-scale ESM datasets. Additionally,
training and educational materials for these tools will be developed,
distributed widely online, and integrated into existing educational curricula at
Columbia. A workshop at NCAR in the final year will help inform the broader
community about Pangeo. Collaborators at other US climate modeling centers will
encourage adoption and participation in the Pangeo project by their scientists.
Beyond climate and related fields, multidimensional numeric arrays are common in
many fields of science (e.g. astronomy, materials science, microscopy). However,
the dominant Big Data software stack (Hadoop) is oriented towards tabular text-
based data structures and cannot easily ingest petabyte scale multidimensional
numeric arrays. The proposed work thus has potential to transform Data Science
itself, enabling analysis of such datasets via a novel, highly scalable, highly
flexible tool with a syntax familiar to disciplinary
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core technologies are the python packages
Dask, a flexible parallel computing library which provides dynamic task
scheduling, and XArray, a wrapper layer over Dask data structures which provides
user-friendly metadata tracking, indexing, and visualization. These tools
interface with netCDF datasets and understand CF conventions. They will be
brought to bear on four high impact Geoscience Use Cases in atmospheric science,
land-surface hydrology, and physical oceanography. Disciplinary scientists will
define workflows for each use case and interact with computational scientists to
demonstrate, benchmark, and optimize the software. The resulting software
improvements will be contributed back to the upstream open source projects,
ensuring long-term sustainability of the platform. The end result will be a
robust new software toolkit for climate science and beyond. This toolkit will
enhance the Data Science aspect of EarthCube. Implementation of these tools on
the cloud will also be tested, taking advantage of agreement between commercial
cloud service providers and NSF for the BIGDATA solicitation.&lt;br/&gt;