* 1740771
* WORKSHOP: 2017 Gordon Research Conference on Crystal Growth and Assembly: From atomic to hierarchical assemblies in crystal growth
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Jeffrey Rimer, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 15,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Our society continuously benefits from
the development of a wide range of advanced materials to solve technological
challenges in applications ranging from super-alloy turbine blades, solar-cells,
microelectronics to new therapeutics for human diseases such as malaria. Such
materials are developed by scientists with diverse backgrounds including
chemistry, physics, materials science, and engineering. Novel materials are
often developed at the boundaries of these disciplines and the aim of the Gordon
Research Conference on Crystal Growth &amp; Assembly, is to bring together
leading scientists from these different backgrounds in order to stimulate cross-
fertilization. In an effort to promote broader impact, the format of the meeting
emphasizes interaction with and active participation of young scientists, i.e.,
students and post-docs, in order to educate a new generation of researchers that
will have to meet future materials challenges in a changing world where (some)
resources become increasingly scarce. NSF's Division of Materials Research (DMR)
acknowledges the importance of the conference by supporting stipends for
registration fee and/or travel support for some participants through its Cross-
Cutting Activities Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Crystal Growth &amp; Assembly Gordon Research Conference
and Seminar is dedicated to the knowledge and understanding of the fundamental
atomic and nanoscale physics and chemistry that are central to the nucleation
and growth of crystals for a wide array of technologies. Such knowledge and
understanding is needed to develop advanced materials for applications ranging
from super-alloy turbine blades, solar-cells, microelectronics to new
therapeutics for pathological diseases such as malaria. The 2017 conference has
a particular focus on the self-assembly of meta-materials, a new class of
materials that is expected to form the basis of novel applications, ranging from
energy harvesting to self-healing materials. This conference, with support from
NSF's Division of Materials Research (DMR), gathers leading scientists
representing the major areas in the field of crystallization and brings them
into contact with each other and, more importantly, with the next generation of
researchers in the field to promote broader outreach within the crystal growth
community. With respect to this larger goal, the meeting seeks to provide a
common language for our diverse student body; to raise the comfort-level of our
student/postdoc participants; and, through these efforts, to develop a tightly-
woven community held together by a common interest in the principles of
materials assembly. The accompanying Gordon Research Seminar that is dedicated
to and organized by graduate students and post-doctoral researchers aids in the
active participation of this new generation of scientists.