* 1740587
* Collaborative Research: ICARUS - Index of Chamber Atmospheric Research in the United States
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Lea Hildebrandt Ruiz, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2021
* USD 73,190.00

This is a collaborative proposal to build an online, open-access, searchable,
central repository for atmospheric chamber data in the United States called
ICARUS (Index of Chamber Atmospheric Research in the United States). Fundamental
data obtained from chamber studies are routinely used as empirical inputs and
constraints in atmospheric models. There are nine major U.S. research
institutions participating in this project, including the National Center for
Atmospheric Research (NCAR). This sustainable web-based infrastructure for
storing, sharing, and using atmospheric chamber data will synergistically
facilitate atmospheric chemistry research in the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific objectives of the project are to (1) provide a searchable public index
of the chamber experiments from each participating research group; (2) archive
past chamber data from each participating group under their indexed chamber
experiment; (3) standardize chamber data reporting formats; (4) provide a
uniform template for chamber metadata; and (5) streamline future data
submissions. The data products included in ICARUS are: (A) gas phase data that
describes the time-resolved profiles of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) such
as gaseous hydrocarbons, oxidized VOCs, oxidants (OH, O3, NO3), NOx, SO2, and
other data; (B) particle phase data that describes yields of secondary organic
aerosols (SOA) as well as optical properties, composition (detailed molecular
and bulk elemental ratios), and chemical functional groups; (C) supporting
information such as relative humidity, temperature, and light flux; (D) the
experimental notes required to understand the data (such as reaction timing,
mixing procedures, seed particle addition, and so on); and (E) vapor and
particulate wall deposition rates that are needed to correct chamber data. At
the end of the 3-year project, the database will be transitioned to the Data
Stewardship Engineering Team at NCAR.