* 1740916
* EAGER: USBRCCR: Collaborative: Lightweight Policy Enforcement of Information Flows in IoT Infrastructures
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Darko Marinov, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2020
* USD 136,286.00

As Internet of Things (IoT) systems become deployed more widely, their security
is becoming a serious concern in many domains, including smart homes, autonomous
cars, or industrial control systems. Security exploits in IoT systems can lead
to loss of privacy, data theft, financial losses, and even physical harm. The
proposed work will develop a novel approach to harden security of IoT systems
via cross-layer defense. The approach will be developed and evaluated in
collaboration among three participating institutions in the US and Brazil. The
project aims to provide technical foundations to harden the defense against
several types of security attacks in IoT systems, and the project will also
create broader impact through dissemination of results and education efforts.

More technically, the proposed approach considers cross-layer defense at IoT app
layer, network layer, and devices. The central concept is flow policies: the
proposed work extracts flow policies from IoT apps, and then uses these policies
to enforce desired flows and to detect violations at both the device and network
layers. In contrast to general-purpose applications, the flows in IoT apps are
expected to be often predictable and expressive enough to capture important
properties such that detected flow violations indicate real problems and not
false alarms. If policies are indeed found to be expressive enough, and checking
them is lightweight in IoT systems, the approach will provide substantial
benefits to improve defense of IoT systems in practice.