* 1740919
* Thermodynamics and Computation: Towards a New Synthesis
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Joshua Grochow, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 06/30/2018
* USD 45,000.00

This workshop will bring researchers from various science fields together at the
Santa Fe Institute for three days to foster development of a new synthesis of
thermodynamics and computation. Researchers from non-equilibrium statistical
mechanics, theoretical computer science, and those in computer engineering
focused on energy-efficient computing will participate in meeting. Approximately
5% of US energy consumption is used to run computers and this energy bill
accounts for a large fraction of the lifetime budget of a modern high-
performance computing center. Improving the energy efficiency of computers is
crucial for reducing the total energy usage, which is a focus of this workshop.
Using recent developments in non-equilibrium statistical mechanics, now is the
time for a new synthesis between physics, theory of computing, and computer
engineering to make great strides in energy-efficient computing. Graduate
students and postdocs will participate, building up the next generation of
researchers in this highly cross-disciplinary, nascent area of research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since Landauer and Bennett's pioneering analysis, none of
the theoretical analyses of energy-efficient computing has yet taken advantage
of the new understanding coming from non-equilibrium statistical mechanics, such
as partially reversible computing, approximate computing, and average-case
complexity. Computational scientists and computer engineers that have focused
their effort on phenomenological, practical successes in energy-efficient
computing will participate in the workshop. Insights from the fundamental
physics will suggest new opportunity areas for the practice of energy-efficient
computing. Computer scientists participating in the meeting will interact with
the rest of the scientists to understand which are the most relevant
thermodynamical questions to determine the next directions in energy-efficient
and large-scale computing.