* 1740383
* Isotope Ecology and Paleoecology in East Africa in the Past 4 Ma
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2023
* Thure Cerling, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 01/31/2023
* USD 601,799.00

The goal of this funded project is to study how diets of the major mammal groups
in East Africa have changed over the past 4 million years. The project will use
stable isotopes and tooth morphology, which evolves in response to diet
preference, to understand changes to diet over time. This project will provide
insight into the evolutionary processes that relate diet to tooth morphology,
and it will provide a better understanding of how to use isotopes to interpret
diet in humans and other mammals. This project includes a strong team of
international collaborators, an education and outreach program that will link
students in Utah with students in Kenya, and will contribute to understanding
dietary evolution at ecological timescales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In East
Africa, where early humans evolved, stable isotopes provide an important tool
that can be used to study how diets have changed over time. Previous work has
shown that the modern dietary preferences for some mammalian groups is quite
different than their most closely related ancestors. By using modern
observations and working in the controlled environments of zoos, it will be
possible to better quantify the diet-tissue-isotope relationship that is related
to physiology (e.g., hindgut versus foregut digestion). In addition, carbon
isotopes will be used to study grazing versus browsing preferences, and Mg-
isotopes will be used to study trophic structure. Further, the research
components of the project are strongly integrated with the broader impacts goals
of the project, and students will learn how to use isotopes to study dietary
preferences and spatial variation between different domestic animals (e.g.,
goats, sheep, cattle) from different regions.