* 1740526
* Collaborative Research: Geophysical characterization of a karst aquifer using dynamic recharge events
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2018,10/31/2018
* Susan Bilek, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 10/31/2018
* USD 530,451.00

Karst aquifers are important water resources, providing water for up to a
quarter of the world?s population. These aquifers are complex hydrogeologic
systems, where flow and transport predominantly occur through preferential flow
paths or conduits that range in size from cm-scale openings to passages much
larger than required for human access (caves). Despite their hydrologic
importance, the location of karst conduits and characteristics of the larger
aquifer are typically poorly constrained. To address these problems, we will
monitor recharge-induced responses that arise as water flows into the subsurface
in a karst aquifer in Florida using geophysical instrumentation to characterize
the conduits, subsurface flow, and the larger karst system. The noninvasive
remote sensing investigation will generate knowledge for direct societal
benefit, including tools to improve the creation of karst hazards maps that
highlight areas susceptible to sinkhole formation, the identification of
preferential flow paths relevant to contaminant transport, and the development
of a methodology to determine subsurface flow for water supply considerations.
We will develop a temporary, interactive traveling exhibit in collaboration with
the National Cave and Karst Research Institute that will frequent visitor
centers near the field site in Florida and in New Mexico to increase public
engagement and scientific literacy about karst hydrogeology and environmental
seismology. The project will also contribute to the education of the next
generation of the scientific workforce through the involvement of two graduate
students at New Mexico Tech, an undergraduate student at the University of
Florida, two undergraduate student interns through the IRIS undergraduate
student intern program, and two early career scientists and a mid-career female
scientist in an EPSCoR state. Finally, collected datasets will be incorporated
into lecture material and homework sets of undergraduate and graduate courses at
New Mexico Tech, which is a Hispanic-serving institution.&lt;br/&gt;A previous
pilot study demonstrated the generation of seismic signals during artificial
recharge experiments and a natural recharge event in a karst aquifer. These and
other geophysical signals are caused by processes during flow through karst
aquifers and includes pressure pulses generated as recharge enters conduits with
full pipe flow, pore pressure changes in fractures and the rock matrix, mass
loading induced subsidence due to changes in water mass, and turbulent
interaction of flow with the wall rocks. To capitalize on the information
content provided by these signals, we will use simultaneous, large-scale
observations of recharge events at two co-located geophysical sensor networks to
characterize the conduit network, flow processes within this network, and
material properties of the larger karst system. Seismometers, tiltmeters, and
other instruments will be deployed at the Santa Fe River Sink-Rise system in
Florida to observe karst recharge events over a two-year period. This field site
has a well-constrained conduit network, and thus it permits verification of the
interpreted geophysical signals that arise from hydrologic processes. This
transformative project will not only enable delineation of the karst conduit
network, but will do so while providing a regionally integrated analysis of the
karst aquifer flow system based on deformation observations on the timescales
between fractions of a second to months. As recharge activates new flow paths,
geophysical monitoring enables extensive 3D characterization of the dynamics and
evolution of flow during recharge-induced changes in the aquifer. Furthermore,
the signals will help to determine the architecture in the subsurface between
the conduits and the surface, advancing knowledge of critical zone environments,
for example, by specifically determining soil and regolith thicknesses and
depths to the soil-rock interface. The young field of environmental seismology
encompasses studies of a range of Earth surface processes, and this project will
use and expand the respective methods to transform the understanding of karst
aquifers across the full frequency range of deformation and develop techniques
in preparation for a future karst critical zone
observatory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.