* 1740911
* EAGER: USBRCCR: Collaborative: Securing Networks in the Programmable Data Plane Era
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Kirill Levchenko, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

Recent advances in software-defined networking (SDN) and programmable data
planes allow datacenter and enterprise network operators to quickly deploy new
protocols, customize network behavior, and develop innovative services. These
advances promise to improve and streamline network operations, improving the
quality of service provided to end users. However programmable data planes also
introduce new complexities to network management, notably, ensuring that the
network satisfies critical security properties. Current network verification and
analysis tools cannot handle these complex new networks. This work aims to
address three important problems at the intersection of networking and computer
security: First, the work proposes to develop new techniques that allow
operators to verify that their network satisfies security properties like tenant
isolation in a cloud hosting environment. Second, this work proposes to use the
data plane to implement a security mechanism to enforce security properties, an
approach that complements verification as a way to ensure correct network
behavior. Finally, the work proposes to develop new security services that
leverage the capabilities of a programmable data plane. Results of the proposed
work will promote the adoption of more secure and flexible next-generation
networks by providing operators the tools necessary to verify and enforce
critical network security properties.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;As programmable data
planes are poised to transform modern the architecture of modern networks, the
proposed work will advance the current state of the art in networking by
extending verification and enforcement techniques to programmable data plane
networks, for which neither network verification nor security policy mechanisms
currently exist. To do so, investigators will transform data plane programs,
expressed in P4, into assertions suitable for analysis using existing network
verification tools based on SMT solvers. Investigators will also develop a
security kernel implemented as a P4 data plane program to enforce network-wide
security properties at run time. Finally, this work will also develop new data
plane services that will enable a new class of security functions to be deployed
in the network in order to improve the overall security of computer networks.