* 1740391
* RAISE: Deep Gravitational Wave Exploration, Instrumental Insights and Noise Removal Through Machine Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Imre Bartos, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,000,000.00

This is a RAISE Award supported by the Office of Integrative Activities, the
Signal Processing Systems program of the Division of Computing and
Communications (CCF) of the Computer &amp; Information Science &amp; Engineering
Directorate (CISE), the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate (MPS) and the Gravitational
Physics program of Physics Division in MPS. The recent discovery of
gravitational waves from colliding black unveiled a new era of broad
opportunities for studying the Cosmos. The coming years will bring about the
proliferation of detections of black hole mergers as well as other sources of
gravitational waves, including stellar explosions. For every discovery, there
will be numerous weak gravitational wave signals buried in the detector noise
that will be difficult to unearth. Gravitational-wave detectors are incredibly
complex systems, where there are myriads of independent ways noise sources can
interfere with the recorded data, occasionally producing curious data artifacts
that are difficult to distinguish from gravitational waves. Machine learning is
uniquely suited to make sense of this complexity, and disentangle data from the
noise to broaden our horizon to detecting gravitational
waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will design machine-learning techniques to
make sense of LIGO's 400,000 auxiliary data channels and identify patterns in
detector behavior to enable the identification of cosmic signals in the midst of
highly non-linear and non-Gaussian background noise. The PIs will research and
use optimal strategies, including sparse regression and robust principal
component analysis, to distinguish detector or environmental artifacts from
astrophysical signals to discover gravitational waves that otherwise could have
remained invisible.