* 1740288
* SI2-SSE: Abaco - Flexible, Scalable, and Usable Functions-As-A-Service via the Actor Model
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Joseph Stubbs, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2021
* USD 418,593.00

Researchers in virtually every field of science rely heavily on computing to
perform their research. In addition, increased availability of data has enabled
entirely new kinds of analyses which have yielded answers to many important
questions. However, these analyses are complex, and require advanced computer
science expertise. This project seeks to simplify the manner in which
researchers can create analysis tools that also scale better and more reliable.
This project, Abaco, adopts and adapts the "Actor" model, which is a technique
for designing software systems as a collection of simple functions, which can
then be provided as a cloud-based capability on high performance computing
environments. Doing this will significantly simplify the way scientific software
is developed and used. Scientific software developers will find it much easier
to design and implement a system. Further, scientists and researchers that use
software will be able to easily compose together collections of actors with pre-
determined functionality in order to get the computation and data they need.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will combine technologies and techniques from
cloud computing, including Linux Containers and the "functions-as-a-service"
paradigm with the proven Actor theoretical model for computing. Each Actor is
implemented as a Linux container, and provides a single function on a cloud. The
resulting system allows for small, lightweight programs to be run on virtually
any system. This project will also extend Abaco's ability to implement data
capabilities, such as data federation and discoverability. Abaco programs can be
used to be used, for example, to build federated datasets consisting of separate
datasets from all over the internet. By reducing the barriers to developing and
using such services, this project will boost the productivity of scientists and
engineers working on the problems of today, and better prepare them to tackle
the new problems of tomorrow. Abaco has broad applicability across science
domains, from biology to engineering to environmental studies. Further, the
Abaco team will conduct substantial training and support activities aimed at
empowering researchers to benefit from this approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.