* 1740768
* Scale invariance of sea ice deformation: identifying how boundary conditions define the spatial ranges of these relationships
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2023
* Jennifer Hutchings, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 03/31/2023
* USD 469,735.00

The goal of this work is to identify physical mechanisms controlling sea ice
deformation in the winter Beaufort and Chukchi Seas. Sea ice moves under the
influence of winds and ocean currents. The ice pack is in constant motion, and
as it is brittle, cracks. Cracks open into leads, which form fracture patterns
that reorganize with changes in the weather. At fractures, the ice pack shears,
opens and closes, and displays ridging. Moreover, the pack ice deformation
follow particular relationships common to brittle materials. For example, the
size of fractures follow a relationship where the distribution of sizes do not
change with the resolution they are measured over. This is termed scale
invariance. We also see other emergent behavior of pack ice deformation, with
the ice acting as a granular or brittle plastic under the influence of the
surface stresses and coastal boundary constraints. We will investigate over
which scales that deformation is scale invariant and how the ice pack responds
to wind and seasonal changes in ice cover. The insight our project brings to
this problem will result in improvements to modeling sea ice drift and
deformation in climate and forecasting. This in turn will improve risk
assessment and hazard mitigation for Arctic marine operations. It will also
allow realistic contaminant dispersion modeling for response to potential
environmental disasters such as an oil spill that could become
uncontainable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our aim is to settle a debate on whether the
sea ice internal stress field is anisotropic or isotropic, and whether sea ice
displays different plastic behavior over a range of scales, identifying over
which scales that deformation is scale invariant. We will investigate the role
of boundary conditions and forcing in confining sea ice deformation on scales
covering the Arctic Basin, synoptic, and submeso- scale (the spacing of leads
and cracks). Following evidence for a transition in the physical mechanism
controlling deformation between the synoptic and sub-mesoscale, we will identify
how this relates to self-organization of fractures within the ice pack. Our
hypotheses are: large-scale deformation is controlled by geometry of the ice
pack and surface forcing, winds and ocean currents; apparent transitions in the
fractal scaling of deformation are related to changes in the forcing and
boundary conditions defining plates of ice between the larger scale fractures;
strain weakening along these plate boundaries result in smaller scale ice stress
controlled by local heterogeneity in forcing and ice strength; and there is a
seasonal transition in scaling of deformation as the pack evolves from confined
and consolidated to unconfined and granular. Testing these hypotheses will be
through observation directed modeling, using a discrete element method model of
the mechanical behavior of pack ice. Controlled comparison experiments with
continuum models will verify if particular rheological models are appropriate
for sea ice across a variety of scales. We expect to identify models with
improved representation of sea ice drift, lead opening and sea ice
dispersion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.