* 1740136
* E2CDA: Type I: Antiferromagnetic Magneto-electric Memory and Logic
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Peter Dowben, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,382,282.00

There is a critical need for new technologies as the semiconductor industry
reaches the limits of how small a transistor can be made and how much power can
be used in an increasingly small space. This project will meet this need through
the development of novel memory and logic devices. Continual interaction between
academia and the semiconductor industry will ensure in new semiconductor device
concepts that lead to faster and better electronics that use significantly less
energy than current approaches. These advances will exploit the unusual magnetic
properties of magnetoelectrics, a special class of materials that tie together
magnetism and voltage. An important aspect of the devices will be their
nonvolatility, a feature that makes them prime candidates for use in the
emerging Internet of Things. Nonvolatility refers to the property that once
written, information can be recovered, even if electrical power has been absent
for an extended period. An example of such a situation is the shutdown of a
computer. A computer equipped with this type of "instant on" circuitry will
restart to the exact state when power failed. Nonvolatility will also lead to
energy savings by enabling electronics to operate longer on smaller batteries
with less need for recharge. Reducing the energy cost of consumer electronics
could also lead to some world-wide energy savings, as new less energy expensive
electronics become available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops novel
device concepts to greatly extend the practical limits of energy-efficient
computation, focusing primarily on magnetoelectric materials, enabling
interfacial magnetism to be reversibly switched by voltage. This approach to the
writing of magnetic information via voltage will result in a significant
reduction in energy consumption, while improving the computing speed of
integrated circuit technologies. To enable electronic applications based on
these devices to come to fruition, the new concepts must allow for
miniaturization, inexpensive fabrication on a huge scale, and long working
lifetimes. Just as for conventional electronic circuits, to ensure reliable
operations, the new devices will be capable of operating repeatedly at well
above room temperature. By exploiting more than just electrical charge in each
device, these new devices will have more function than a simple transistor,
which in turn, will present new opportunities for the development of circuit
ideas that go beyond existing technologies ? ideas that will also be explored as
this research program develops.