* 1740082
* INFEWS/T1:   Scarcity Amid Abundance: Understanding Trade-offs in the Food-Energy-Water Nexus in the Willamette River Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Anne Nolin, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,457,608.00

Food, energy, and water security are required for the health, prosperity and
welfare of growing populations. Three resource security is also needed to
prepare for anticipated land use change, wildfire, population change, climatic
alterations and unpredictable future events. Food, energy and water security
cannot be achieved in isolation, with supply chains that are linked at every
stage, and influenced by a range of common factors (markets, laws, policies). In
order to to make all resource supply chains more secure, it is necessary to
address the problem as a whole (as well as each link) and to assess its impact
on the stability of the full system. These complex supply systems involve a
number of interdependencies and vulnerabilities which, once characterized, will
allow for the identification of a number of actions that will lead to reduced
waste, increased efficiency, greater resilience and enhanced security. To that
end, this project will 1) prepare a comprehensive model of the interrelated
food-energy-water system; 2) use this as a basis for fully characterizing the
food-energy-water system of the Willamette Valley, Oregon, a test case of
sufficient size to demonstrate the system model's capabilities; 3) engage
stakeholders in the development and refinement of the system model to
investigate the regional consequences of changes in policy related to the
management of forests, reservoirs and agricultural production; 4) critically
evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the approach through an enhanced
understanding of system interdependencies and vulnerabilities, and 5) produce a
modular and generalizable system model that is transferrable to other regions.
Working closely with decision makers and stakeholders, this project will
contribute valuable new information, tools, and understanding to co-develop
adaptive capacity and improved strategies for managing the security and
sustainability of our food, energy and water supplies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Willamette River Basin (WRB) is one of the few remaining watersheds in the
western US that currently has sufficient water to reliably support agricultural
and municipal demands. Anticipated stressors in the region include: doubling in
population, snowpack decline of up to 95% in the coming century, and a 200-900%
increase in forest fires. Stakeholders and decision makers also have an
obligation to protect fish populations via the maintenance of both streamflow
levels and water quality. In combination, these factors are imposing significant
changes in food, water, and energy security. One emerging key question is: how
can we best use our limited resources to satisfy competing demands while also
securing food, water and energy for growing populations both within and outside
the WRB? Substantial gaps exist in critical information required to address
these questions. With project stakeholders, the problem is to understand the
current and future potential tradeoffs related to food, water and energy in the
Willamette Basin, developing integrated strategies that will lead to productive
and sustainable futures. This project will implement a complete modeling
framework that integrates water, energy, and food within a modeling framework
that incorporates understanding of the natural environment, the engineered
systems, the human decision makers, and the economy. Willamette Envision will
allow a "rehearsal" of the future; an exploration of the potential interactions,
feedbacks, and consequences of policies, resource management decisions, climate
impacts and population growth. The model will be open source and fully
transferrable, such that it can be used for any basin(s) in the world.
Willamette Envision can evaluate how climate change, population growth, and
economic development will alter the availability and the use of water,
consumption and generation of energy and production of food in the Willamette
River on timescales ranging from decadal to centennial. A transferrable nexus
modeling framework, developed via this effort will be distilled from the outputs
of a highly resolved fully integrated social-ecological systems model. The
inputs, uncertainties and feedbacks identified within this framework will
represent the irreducible limit of complexity for a FEWS system model. The
refined and user-friendly model will form the basis of a transferrable
educational, outreach and scientific tool. With this tool, students, managers,
policy makers and stakeholders will be able to explore resource tradeoffs, and
the impact of policy decisions, regulations, and economy. In conjunction with
the simplified model development, the project will host training workshops for
teachers in the summer where in class and online instructional modules will be
developed to be used in conjunction with our modeling efforts. The outcomes of
the research will also be transformed into web-based decision support tools and
interactive web-based infographics, to be distributed to stakeholders. The
outreach effort to teachers and students through Oregon Science and Math
Experiences format will provide hands-on STEM experiences to 650
underrepresented students (through 63 teachers) in grades 4-12 using already
established lines of communication.