* 1740802
* I-Corps: Internet of Things for Condition-Based Maintenance of Medical Assets
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Ekundayo Shittu, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 03/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to improve
safety and minimize equipment maintenance costs. In healthcare, equipment
malfunctions are a major patient safety issue because of direct patient care
impact, and also due to equipment maintenance costs in general. The technology
developed here monitors the health of biomedical equipment asset with the
purpose of predicting, in real-time, biomedical equipment asset failure in order
to reduce the rate of equipment failure, thereby, improving safety and reducing
costs. This project will equip healthcare and military facilities with a tool to
better manage their assets, eradicate equipment downtime, reduce maintenance
cost and eliminate unanticipated failures. The added benefit of the commercial
potential of this project comes from the opportunity for Original Equipment
Manufacturers (OEMs) of equipment assets to improve their technologies with the
condition-based maintenance strategy that this innovation offers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project seeks to develop a low-cost, power-
efficient, wireless, mesh-networked family of microprocessors, sensors and
software designed to give real-time reporting on equipment status and offer
condition-based maintenance schedules. The instrumentation innovation is the
combination of different sensors to capture periodic data on pressure,
temperature, humidity, position, current and vibration on an equipment asset for
condition-based maintenance of the asset. This project will be based on the
Internet of Things (IoT) in the connection and management of different assets in
a healthcare facility or military materiel supply chain. This project will
develop a template for the integration of mesh radio frequency identification
(RFID) of emitted but encrypted radio frequency (RF) signals in conformance to
IEEE 802.15.4 standards over the 2.4 GHz industrial, scientific, and medical
(ISM) radio band. The device will be used in conjunction with the cloud where
data will be processed in a wireless configuration. Coupled with the development
of this module is a dynamic data analytic procedure that incorporates novel
machine learning statistical routines for maintenance forecasts.