* 1740229
* SI2-SSE: Collaborative Research: A Sustainable Future for the Glue Multi-Dimensional Linked Data Visualization Package
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Michelle Borkin, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 09/30/2022
* USD 164,142.00

Glue is a free and open-source application that allows scientists and data
scientists to explore relationships within and across related datasets. Glue
makes it easy create a wide variety of visualizations (such as scatter plots,
bar charts, images) of data, including three dimensional views. What makes Glue
unique is its ability to connect datasets together, without merging them into
one. Thus, for example, two Earth-based mapping data sets may be connected and
jointly visualized by using the coordinates (e.g. latitude and longitude) to
glue the maps together, so that when a user selects (e.g. with a lasso tool)
regions in one data set, the corresponding selected subset of data will
highlight in all related visualizations simultaneously. These ?linked views" are
especially powerful across wide varieties of plot types. For example, if a user
interested in air traffic control glues a data set with information about the 3D
locations of all airplanes to a second data set giving weather information, that
user could make a combination of selections that would highlight (on maps, in 3D
views, or any other display) planes at particular altitudes where thunderstorms
might be likely to occur within a specific period of time. In particular, Glue
makes it easy for users to create their own kinds of visualizations, which is
important because different disciplines often need very specialized ways of
looking at data. The software is already being used widely across several
disciplines, in particular, astronomy and medicine, for which has been specially
optimized. This project will add new features to make Glue more useful in more
fields of science (e.g. bioinformatics, epidemiology) where there is demand for
linked-view visualization, as well as making it more accessible as an
educational tool. In addition, this project will train new users and developers,
who will expand Glue into a much more sustainable community effort.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Glue is an open-source package that allows scientists to
explore relationships within and across related datasets, by making it easy for
them to make multi-dimensional linked visualizations of datasets, select subsets
of data interactively or programmatically in 1, 2, or 3 dimensions, and see
those selections propagate live across all open visualizations of the data (e.g.
graphs, maps, diagnostics charts). A unique feature of glue is that datasets
from different sources can be linked to each other, using user-defined
mathematical relationships between sets of data components, which makes it
possible to carry out selections across datasets. Glue, written in Python, is
designed from the ground-up for multidisciplinary work, and it is currently
helping researchers make discoveries in geoscience, genomics, astronomy, and
medicine. It is also giving insights into data from outside academia, including
open data provided by governments and cities. To become sustainable in the long
term, glue development needs to become a community-driven effort. Through
tutorial and developer workshops, coding sprints, and strategic collaborations
with researchers in several disciplines and experienced open source developers,
the glue team will help user communities extend glue by developing new
functionality useful within particular fields of research. The team will help
users contribute the most widely-needed functionality back to glue, and will
recruit active contributors to participate in core glue development. As the
community grows, glue development will be guided to focus on several major
features useful to the broad research community, including: support for very
large datasets, support for running glue fully in the browser (inside Jupyter
notebooks and Jupyter Lab), and improved interoperability with third-party
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria