* 1740217
* Workshop:  Summer School on Methods for Case, Protocol, and Controlled Experiment Research on Design and Systems Engineering; Clemson, South Carolina; May 14-26, 2017
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Joshua Summers, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Stone
* 08/31/2018
* USD 49,870.00

This award provides partial support for a summer school that will provide an
intensive and interactive educational experience to graduate students from the
fields of engineering design and systems engineering who are interested in
studying designers, design teams, and design organizations. It is specifically
intended to provide educational opportunities for students and graduate programs
that do not have coursework in these fields. The summer school will bring
together students and experts in the use of research techniques such as case
study, protocol study, and controlled-experiment study. This will provide
students with foundational understanding about how to use these techniques in
engineering and systems design research, create a network of peers who are
studying these issues, and advance community research standards. It is
anticipated that the summer school will have a broad impact in the research
community, including other NSF-supported research projects, by advancing
training and standards in this area of research. Travel and participation
scholarships will serve to ensure a broad participation that maximizes community
impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The summer school will be held May 14-26, 2017, at
Clemson University in Clemson, South Carolina. Experts from the community will
provide instruction and experiential insights in topics that include case study
methods, protocol studies, and controlled experiment research. Major activities
include mini- lectures, practice-oriented exercises, and student-led research
topic discussions. An expert panel will discuss with students future directions
for research in the area. Social events scheduled throughout the two weeks will
enable students to develop their networking skills. A survey of summer school
participants will be conducted to provide information about success and can
inform similar efforts on other topic areas within the engineering design and
systems engineering research communities.