* 1740563
* CAREER: Tunable Dynamics from Interlinked Feedback Loops in Synthetic and Natural Gene Circuits
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Mary Dunlop, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 08/31/2020
* USD 450,479.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Organisms must cope with a
wide range of time-varying stresses, owing to fluctuations in nutrient
availability, chemical stressors, and environmental changes. Genetically
identical populations of cells can use random, stochastic expression of genes to
diversify their response and hedge against this uncertainty. However, when
environmental changes are slow and can be sensed and responded to, there is
little need for a diversified response. This raises a fundamental question as to
how cells reconcile these two potentially contradictory demands: the need to use
phenotypic diversity to anticipate stress and also employ well-defined
deterministic responses. Achieving this requires gene regulatory networks that
are tunable, switching between stochastic and deterministic responses depending
on environmental conditions. Recent theoretical studies have suggested that
interlinked positive and negative feedback ("mixed feedback") networks, can
provide this type of tunable response. Using single-cell time-lapse microscopy
and microfluidic experiments supported by mathematical modeling, this project
will quantify the tunability of synthetic and natural mixed feedback circuits
and will test how cells handle time-varying environments. This work is
significant because it will reveal genetic mechanisms that allow otherwise
identical cells to choose random fates in some circumstances and exhibit
deterministic responses in others, allowing organisms to cope with environmental
uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research plan is
integrated with an outreach program focused on systems and synthetic biology
education at the community, high school, and undergraduate levels: First,
through a partnership with ECHO Science Center in Burlington, Vermont, the PI
will produce a special summer exhibit and talk aimed at communicating cutting-
edge systems and synthetic biology topics to community audiences. Second, the PI
will host undergraduate Barrett Scholars in her research group and will provide
mentorship for student presentations to high school students in the Governor's
Institute in Engineering. Third, the PI will introduce systems and synthetic
biology examples into two core engineering courses that currently focus on
traditional mechanical and electrical engineering applications.