* 1740524
* I-Corps: Ceramic Composite Heat Exchangers and Components for Harsh Environments
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Jayanta Kapat, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is in
fabrication of improved structures for use in harsh environments. The core
technology was originally developed for inexpensive heat shields for space
vehicles. It can now be used for complex heat exchangers or for hot-section
components for aviation and power generation engines, or for radiation resistant
liners in nuclear applications. In all these applications, the proposed
technology can reduce the original equipment cost while improving performance
and reliability, or can be used to reduce replacements cost of original metal-
based components. When applied to aviation or power generation, the net benefit
can in the form of lower emissions from the engines, and lower cost of flying or
lower electricity cost due to both lower fuel cost and lower maintenance cost.
As the underlying manufacturing technology has significant overlap with that for
polymer composite structures such as boat hulls or wind turbines, manufacturing
personnel employed in such traditional industries can be easily retrained for
manufacturing of high-value added, hot-section components for capital goods such
as gas turbine engines for aviation and power
generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps Project focuses on potential
applications of a relatively new type of high-temperature structural materials,
known as Polymer Derived Ceramic Composite (PDCC). PDCC fabrication is
inexpensive as it involves similar fabrication techniques as other polymer
composite structures like wind turbine blades or boat hulls. However, ceramic
fiber and special resin are to be used for PDCC. Currently available resin-fiber
combinations offer maximum use temperatures between 1200C and 1700C, depending
on the choice of ceramic fibers. This maximum use temperature is much higher
than creep-onset temperatures of common high-temperature alloys. The PDCC
process is significantly less inexpensive compared to many monolithic ceramics
or alternative ceramic matrix composite processes. Also, use of appropriate
molds during formation of the polymeric state can lead to relatively complex
shapes. PDCC?s share the typical properties of other ceramics, such as corrosion
resistance or radiation tolerance.