* 1740683
* Collaborative Proposal: EarthCube Integration: Accelerating Scientific WorkflowS using EarthCube Technologies (ASSET)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Yolanda Gil, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2020
* USD 110,273.00

A major need in the geosciences is to reduce the amount of time geoscientists
spend on "data wrangling" tasks (finding, accessing, subsetting, gridding,
processing, reformatting, visualizing) so that they can spend more time on
complex scientific analysis. This project will develop a means for scientists to
document and interact with all of the data management and analysis tools that
they need to create a scientific result, and it will add tools to find common
patterns in their work to help find tools that could reduce the time needed to
produce the result. This work may also help to make moethods and analyses more
transparent by providing the means to track the steps in creating a scientific
result.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on relationships among
cyberinfrastructure experts and geoscientists examine current scientific
workflows and the integration of EarthCube tools. The work will include a
workflow sketching interface to specify the steps, dependencies, current tools,
current duration, and other important aspects of a scientist's workflow. As part
of the proposed pilot project, the team will examine two geoscience use cases
(hurricane risk and water resources) in detail and assign cyberinfrastructure
experts to integrate EarthCube tools into these science workflows, to
demonstrate the increases in productivity that are realized. In addition, the
team will conduct a workshop/clinic at a major geoscience conference to collect
additional use cases from the community, where geoscientists will describe their
workflows and receive personalized advice on the use of EarthCube tools. If
successful, the researchers may expand on this pilot project to conduct many
more workshops at other venues and to map many more scientific workflows to
corresponding EarthCube technologies.