* 1740247
* EAGER:  The CHANDLER Reactor Neutrino Detector
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Jonathan Link, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 05/31/2018
* USD 53,500.00

Neutrinos from nuclear reactors have played a central role in our understanding
of the properties of these elusive, hard-to-observe fundamental particles. Three
different types of neutrino are known to exist, having been detected through
their interaction via one of the known forces of nature. A fourth type of
neutrino has been postulated, a so-called light sterile neutrino, that is
presumed to only interact via gravity. Persistent, unproven hints of such a
neutrino have been around since the late 1990's, when some accelerator data were
shown to be incompatible with the 3-neutrino framework of the Standard Model of
Particle Physics. More recent results and re-analyses of older data continue to
suggest the existence of this type of new physics, but no experiment has been
able to definitively demonstrate or rule out their existence. Going forward,
reactor neutrinos offer a promising means to resolve the cluster of anomalies
commonly attributed to a light sterile neutrino. One hint of particular
relevance is the so-called reactor neutrino anomaly whereby all reactor
experiments find a deficit in the neutrino interaction probability when compared
to calculations of the reactor neutrino flux. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technologies
for reactor neutrino detection may have applications beyond basic science. It
has been pointed out that a high-efficiency detector with good energy resolution
could determine the plutonium content of a reactor in situ. Such a capability
could be used to evaluate new reactor designs, or as a part of a verification
scheme for nuclear non-proliferation. A real-world application to non-
proliferation safeguards will require a detector technology which can operate at
the surface, in close proximity to a reactor, with minimal shielding and without
hazardous liquids. The CHANDLER technology was conceived with these requirements
in mind. The CHANDLER project will continue to be an excellent training ground
for young scientists. This project also involves two high school teachers
through the QuarkNET program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discovery of a light
sterile neutrino would be truly transformative to the field of particle physics,
while a thorough debunking of the ~1 eV sterile neutrino hypothesis would
simplify interpretations of future long-baseline experiments. This EAGER award
provides funding to perform a full systems test of a new reactor neutrino
detector technology, known as CHANDLER, by deploying the 80 channel, 80 kg
MiniCHANDLER prototype, at the North Anna Nuclear Power Plant. The goal of this
deployment is to evaluate the detector's performance. In particular, it will
determine whether MiniCHANDLER can adequately isolate reactor neutrino events
from the background, and whether this technology is capable of the high
precision spectral measurement required to definitively discover or rule out the
sterile neutrino hypothesis. A successful demonstration will prove the
suitability of this technology for a full-scale short-baseline neutrino
oscillation search.