* 1740549
* CCI Phase I: NSF Center for Genomically Encoded Materials (C-GEM)
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Alanna Schepartz, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 03/31/2020
* USD 1,800,000.00

Developing synthetic routes to polymers consisting of a defined sequence of
monomers is a current challenge in chemistry. Proteins are natural polymers, and
are specific sequences of amino acids put together easily and efficiently by the
living cell. The NSF Center for Genomically Encoded Materials (C-GEM) takes a
bio-inspired approach making a sequence of synthetic polymers by re-engineering
the cell's systems. In this case, the cell becomes a new translational machine
that synthesizes new chemical polymers of specific sequence and length. NSF
C-GEM establishes a new, transformative field of chemistry and fosters
innovation at the chemistry-biology-materials frontier. The applications of the
new materials with novel properties range from information storage to anti-
counterfeiting and drug delivery, from environmental remediation to drug
discovery. NSF C-GEM engages scientists and non-scientists in a variety of
research and educational activities, including improved communication to the
public. These education and participation programs integrate research with
training to establish a diverse chemical workforce. NSF C-GEM presents a new
online platform and data management system, GEM-Net, to promote data sharing
within and outside the research team. NSF C-GEM is also developing an online
video game that allows citizen scientists to participate in the research process
and track results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Center for Genomically Encoded
Materials, NSF C-GEM, is focused on the challenge of preparing polymers whose
monomers and dispersity are defined with protein-like control. Sequence-defined
polymers possess extraordinary potential for information storage, anti-
counterfeiting, drug delivery, environmental remediation, and even drug
discovery, but strategies to prepare them are barely in their infancy. NSF
C-GEM's approach synthesizes sequence-defined chemical polymers by repurposing
the E. coli translational apparatus. The translation machinery, which normally
promotes bond formation between alpha-amino acids, now promotes bond-forming
reactions between monomers that are the building blocks for aramids,
polyolefins, polyurethanes, and other polymers. The approach demands orthogonal
enzymes that acylate orthogonal tRNAs with each monomer, efficiently and in
vivo; orthogonal ribosomes that accept these tRNAs as substrates and elongate
the products; genomically-recoded organisms with multiple open codons to enable
mRNA-templated synthesis of sequence-defined polymers; and high-resolution
structural data to deepen understanding and inform design. The project develops
the multi-disciplinary tools and technologies that demonstrate the proof of
concept of the approach and establish practical methodologies to this aim. NSF
C-GEM fosters innovation at the chemistry-biology-materials frontier, and
engages scientists and non-scientists in research and educational activities. A
diverse set of education and participation programs integrates research with
training, establishes a diverse chemical workforce, and improves communication
with the public.