* 1740822
* TRIPODS: Data Science for Improved Decision-Making: Learning in the Context of Uncertainty, Causality, Privacy, and Network Structures
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Steven Strogatz, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,496,655.00

The researchers propose to create a center of data science for improved
decision-making that combines expertise from computer science, information
science, mathematics, operations research, and statistics. Their goal is to
pursue basic research that will contribute to the theoretical foundations of
data science. The research topics chosen have applications that can benefit
society as a whole and integrate the perspectives of the disciplines that the
project brings together. The five concrete research directions proposed are:
Privacy and Fairness, Learning on Social Graphs, Learning to Intervene,
Uncertainty Quantification, and Deep Learning. The aim of the Center is to
advance knowledge in these areas and to broaden the range of disciplines and
perspectives that can provide contributions to these challenging issues. The
researchers plan to incorporate the community beyond Cornell through online
seminars, workshops, and student conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
findings will provide an urgently needed foundation for data science in several
topic areas of importance to society. As the center is placed at the
intersection of multiple disciplines, the intellectual merit spans all
disciplines involved and findings may translate to new algorithms and approaches
in each one of them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focus spans five core
areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Privacy and Fairness. As data science becomes
pervasive across many areas of society, and as it is increasingly used to aid
decision-making in sensitive domains, it becomes crucial to protect individuals
by guaranteeing privacy and fairness. The investigators propose to research the
theoretical foundations to providing such guarantees and to surface inherent
limitations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Learning on Social Graphs. Many of the
fundamental questions in applying data science to the interactions between
individuals and larger social systems involve the social networks that underpin
the connections between individuals. The researchers will develop new techniques
for understanding both the structure of these networks and the processes that
take place within them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Learning to Intervene. Data-
driven approaches to learning good interventions (including policies,
recommendations, and treatments) inspire challenging questions about the
foundations of sequential experimental design, counterfactual reasoning, and
causal inference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. Uncertainty Quantification.
Quantifying uncertainty about specific predictions or conclusions represents a
key need in data science, especially when applied to decision-making with
potential consequences to human subjects. The researchers will develop
statistical tools and theoretical guarantees to assess the uncertainties of
predictions made by popular algorithms in data science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;5.
Deep Learning. Deep Learning algorithms have made impressive advances in
practical settings. Although their basic building blocks are well understood,
there is still ambiguity about what they learn and why they generalize so well.
There are indications that they may learn data manifolds and that the type of
optimization algorithm influences generalization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances
in our theoretical understanding of these phenomena requires combined efforts
from optimization, statistics, and mathematics but could lead to insights for
all aspects of data science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds for the project come
from CISE Computing and Communications Foundations, MPS Division of Mathematical
Sciences, MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, and Growing Convergent
Research. (Convergence can be characterized as the deep integration of
knowledge, techniques, and expertise from multiple fields to form new and
expanded frameworks for addressing scientific and societal challenges and
opportunities. This project promotes Convergence by bringing together
communities representing many disciplines including mathematics, statistics, and
theoretical computer science as well as engaging communities that apply data
science to practical research problems.)