* 1740263
* SI2-SSE: Expanding the Scope of Materials Modeling with Electron Phonon Wannier (EPW) Software
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Madhusudhan Govindaraju, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Introduction of efficient non-empirical computational methods for modeling and
predicting advanced materials properties is at the heart of the on-going effort
to accelerate theory-guided materials discovery. The open-source software
Electron-Phonon-Wannier (EPW) code offers unique capabilities for high-accuracy
calculations of properties at the quantum mechanical level. In particular, EPW
provides insight into the microscopic mechanisms that govern the interaction
between electrons and atomic vibrations. Within this project, the existing
capabilities will be extended to model a wider range of materials with complex
electronic and magnetic properties. The knowledge can be used to design new-
generation materials for harvesting of solar and thermal energy, making
transition from electronics to spintronics, or realizing exotic states of
matter. EPW will serve the broad electronic structure community of physicists,
materials scientists, chemists, and engineers who work on modeling and designing
next-generation materials for thermoelectric, photovoltaic, superconducting,
spintronic, and other applications. The development of high-performance
materials is crucial for addressing emergent societal challenges related to
energy and environment, transportation, and information and communication
technologies. The developed computational tools will be released under the GNU
General Public License to ensure that the scientific community will directly and
timely benefit from this technology. A broad spectrum of educational and
outreach activities proposed within the project will promote and popularize
scientific research in diverse communities. Planned hands-on workshops on EPW in
the US and Europe will help create a strong EPW community for further
development of the code and foster new research collaborations among
participants from different countries. Interactive events for elementary school
students in the upstate New York area will help attract a new generation of
scientists from underrepresented groups into the STEM disciplines.

The current focus of the electronic structure community is to introduce new
capabilities enabling the design of emerging high-performance materials for
thermoelectric, photovoltaic, superconducting, spintronic, and other
applications. Function-defining properties in these applications are notoriously
difficult to evaluate with desired accuracy using present density functional
theory-based methods. The aim of this project is to expand the functionalities
and broaden the impact of the open-source software Electron-Phonon-Wannier (EPW)
in the area of materials research. EPW, now distributed as part of the Quantum
ESPRESSO suite, has emerged as a unique computational tool that offers
functionalities not available in standard electronic structure packages. By
combining density-functional perturbation theory and maximally-localized Wannier
functions methods, EPW makes it computationally feasible to calculate millions
of electron-phonon matrix elements. The proposed work will expand the current
capabilities of the EPW code to modeling an important class of spin-dependent
materials properties. The proposed methodological, and user-oriented objectives
are chosen to align with the focal directions of the SSE program and the DMR
pertaining to creation, expansion, and deployment of robust software targeting a
large user base. In particular, predictive calculations of spin transport, spin
relaxation, and spin dynamics can yield fundamental insights into processes at
the atomic scale and provide the necessary foundation to rationally design new
materials and guide experimental work. The project will also provide easy
management and execution of day to day scientific experiments on large-scale
computing infrastructures. The introduction of workflows for automating,
storing, managing, and sharing simulations will facilitate data transparency and
communication as well as advance data-driven materials design to new frontiers.
Successful implementation of these objectives will substantially enhance the
functionalities of the EPW code and ensure the continued growth of the EPW user
community. The developed computational tools will be released under the GNU
General Public License to ensure that the scientific community will directly and
timely benefit from this technology. The research program will be tightly
integrated with educational and outreach activities. It will enable
interdisciplinary training of students in advanced electronic structure methods,
computational material science, and high-performance computing. Other efforts
will include science demonstrations to elementary school students, development
of a special course in materials modeling to incorporate computer simulations in
the Binghamton University's undergraduate and graduate curriculum, and
organization of workshops to teach the underlying theory and optimal usage of
the EPW code.

This project is supported by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the
Directorate for Computer & Information Science and Engineering and the Division
of Materials Research in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences.