* 1740079
* CPS: Small: Self-Improving Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Susmit Jha, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 499,835.00

Traditional cyber-physical systems operate in heavily constrained and controlled
environments with limited exposure to unexpected changes and uncertainties.
Examples include robots operating on manufacturing assembling-lines and cyber-
physical control systems of chemical plants. The model-based design paradigm,
where design, implementation and verification are all guided by mathematical
models of the system, has proven to be very successful in building such non-
adaptive cyberphysical systems and proving their safety. The recent success of
data-driven approaches based on the collection of a large amount of data
followed by learning and inference has enabled modern cyberphysical systems to
be more adaptive. Examples include self-driving cars and warehouse robots.
Learning algorithms embedded in these systems allow them to learn as they
execute and modify their behavior as needed. Such systems are capable of a wide
range of non-preprogrammed behaviors. But this creates a new challenge. Model-
based design paradigm is no longer sufficient. Formal guarantees on safety,
robustness or improvement in performance are difficult to establish since the
system evolution is no longer static; instead, it is data-driven and guided by
the system's dynamic experience. The goal of this project is to build and
evaluate a formal framework that combines data-driven and model-based
development of adaptive cyber-physical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project develops a new approach for designing safe, data-driven, and model-based
adaptive cyber-physical systems (CPS). Model-based techniques are used initially
to bootstrap the system and find the most liberal safety envelope for the
system.  A combination of design robustness and runtime monitoring of
quantitatively-interpreted rich temporal logic is used to keep the system within
the safety envelope. Data-driven techniques are used to actively explore, adapt,
and improve system performance while constraining the system behavior to lie
within the safety envelope.  New data is summarized by tight learning of
temporal logic properties from it; the learned logical specification is, in
turn, used to guide active exploration. The key advances in this project include
(a) data as model paradigm, where data from past runs is treated as a first-
class object in the design of CPS, (b) tight learning from positive-only
examples, where previous runs (that are all safe runs, and hence provide only
positive examples) are summarized into rich temporal logic formulae, (c) safety
envelope synthesis for robustness-metric guided monitoring and optimization of
system performance within the envelope, (d) data-driven extensions of model-
based control, where data is used to extend classical model-predictive control,
and (e) active exploration, where an adaptive CPS actively executes some safe
manoeuvres solely for the purpose of improving its knowledge and performance.