* 1740627
* Collaborative Research: EarthCube Integration--Brokered Alignment of Long-Tail Observations (BALTO)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* David Fulker, Open Source Project for Network Data Access Protocols
* Standard Grant
* Subhashree Mishra
* 08/31/2021
* USD 326,435.00

This project, Brokered Alignment for Long-Tail Observations (BALTO), is
supported under the EarthCube program. The development team seeks to build a
tool and infrastructure to allow the community to easily submit long-tail
observational data that cannot easily fit into existing data repositories. A
data brokering technique will be developed to accomplish the goals of the study.
Graduate students, including from underrepresented minority groups, will receive
training opportunities via this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To facilitate
access to long-tail observations this work seeks to develop a core capability
for the future EarthCube (EC) architecture in the Architecture and
Implementation Plan - Brokered Alignment for Long-Tail Observations (BALTO).
BALTO entails an open-source interface to discover, access and transform
geoscience data sources through a brokering solution implemented by user-
developed accessors. BALTO integrates core attributes of successful prior EC
Building Blocks, BCube and ODSIP, to create a next generation EC capability.
Leveraging its large installed base and its open-source flexibility, BALTO will
extend Hyrax OPeNDAP's data server for ODSIP with capabilities for distributed
brokering. Results from this project will demonstrate improved access and its
impacts on scientific discovery via three NSF funded interdisciplinary use-cases
that span geodesy, seismology, hydrology, oceanography, and geodynamics.