* 1740687
* DCL:HBCU:EAGER: Development of Wafer-Scale Fabrication of Carbon-Based Integrated Electronic Devices
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Zhigang Xiao, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 07/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

DCL:HBCU:EAGER: Development of Wafer-Scale Fabrication of Carbon-Based
Integrated Electronic Devices&lt;br/&gt;Xiao,
Zhigang&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon nanotubes and graphene are promising
electronic nanomaterials and could be used for the application of future
electronics because of their superior electrical property. In this project,
devices using carbon nanotubes will be made with enhanced electrical properties.
The innovative research will result in streamlining and enhancing current
manufacturing processes for these devices. This will enable the development of
improved integrated circuits and devices for electronics. Semiconductor devices
represent a multi-trillion dollar industry. The novel devices developed through
this project could contribute to the rapidly growing industries of semiconductor
and nano-manufacturing. Thus, if successful, this project could have great
impacts on US and global societies, and provide many societal benefits. The
primary educational goal of this proposal is to integrate the research
objectives to enhance the educational experiences of students. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be mentored to perform research in nanofabrication
in the project. The proposed project will also offer summer research
opportunities for high school students. It will significantly increase
opportunities for minority students to perform research and to be trained in
nanotechnology&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to develop
wafer-scale fabrication of carbon-based integrated electronic devices. A major
problem in the realization of carbon nanotube devices is the difficulty to
position and assemble carbon nanotubes in a controlled way. In this Early Grant
for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project, an unconventional approach, based on
the electric field directed dielectrophoresis method is used to deposit and
align ultra-dense carbon nanotubes. The poor yield of functional devices is
another major problem, because currently there is no effective way to separate
the metallic carbon nanotubes from the semiconducting tubes, and the metallic
tubes unavoidably exist in fabricated transistors, resulting in poor electrical
properties. In this project, semiconductor materials are proposed to replace
metals as the source/drain contacts for solving the problem of poor yield.
Another major research effort in this project is to use electrical fields
together with nanoscale electrodes to grow nanostructured carbon thin films and
graphene using the e-beam/thermal evaporation. The proposed approach could
achieve the wafer-scale fabrication of graphene devices. Intellectual Merit:
This project is potentially transformative, and could create a new wafer-scale
carbon-based device fabrication paradigm. It will greatly benefit the research
community and semiconductor industry by providing new approaches for the
fabrication of carbon integrated devices. The innovative dielectrophoresis
method could effectively align and deposit ultra-dense carbon nanotubes while
the semiconductor contact could greatly improve the electrical properties of
fabricated devices, significantly increasing the yield of functional devices.
The electrical field-directed innovative growth of nanostructured carbon thin
films and graphene, while untested, is novel and unexplored, and could lead to
wafter-scale fabrication of graphene devices. This EAGER project could lead to
the realization of wafer-scale fabrication of carbon nanotube and graphene
integrated devices for the application of future nanoelectronics.