* 1740990
* BIGDATA:  IA:  Collaborative Research: In Situ Data Analytics for Next Generation Molecular Dynamics Workflows
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Harel Weinstein, Joan and Sanford I. Weill Medical College of Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2023
* USD 547,056.00

Molecular dynamics simulations studying the classical time evolution of a
molecular system at atomic resolution are widely recognized in the fields of
chemistry, material sciences, molecular biology and drug design; these
simulations are one of the most common simulations on supercomputers. Next-
generation supercomputers will have dramatically higher performance than do
current systems, generating more data that needs to be analyzed (i.e., in terms
of number and length of molecular dynamics trajectories). The coordination of
data generation and analysis cannot rely on manual, centralized approaches as it
does now. This interdisciplinary project integrates research from various areas
across programs such as computer science, structural molecular biosciences, and
high performance computing to transform the centralized nature of the molecular
dynamics analysis into a distributed approach that is predominantly performed in
situ. Specifically, this effort combines machine learning and data analytics
approaches, workflow management methods, and high performance computing
techniques to analyze molecular dynamics data as it is generated, save to disk
only what is really needed for future analysis, and annotate molecular dynamics
trajectories to drive the next steps in increasingly complex simulations'
workflows. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators tackle the data challenge of
data analysis of molecular dynamics simulations on the next-generation
supercomputers by (1) creating new in situ methods to trace molecular events
such as conformational changes, phase transitions, or binding events in
molecular dynamics simulations at runtime by locally reducing knowledge on high-
dimensional molecular organization into a set of relevant structural molecular
properties; (2) designing new data representations and extend unsupervised
machine learning techniques to accurately and efficiently build an explicit
global organization of structural and temporal molecular properties; (3)
integrating simulation and analytics into complex workflows for runtime
detection of changes in structural and temporal molecular properties; and (4)
developing new curriculum material, online courses, and online training material
targeting data analytics. The project's harnessed knowledge of molecular
structures' transformations at runtime can be used to steer simulations to more
promising areas of the simulation space, identify the data that should be
written to congested parallel file systems, and index generated data for
retrieval and post-simulation analysis. Supported by this knowledge, molecular
dynamics workflows such as replica exchange simulations, Markov state models,
and the string method with swarms of trajectories can be executed ?from the
outside? (i.e., without reengineering the molecular dynamics code).