* 1740214
* Pleistocene to Recent Environments and Species Distributions on the California Coast
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Seth Finnegan, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2023
* USD 333,879.00

This project will take advantage of the exceptional fossil record of coastal
California to examine the distributions of living mollusk species over the past
~125,000 years and, using geochemical analysis of their shells, reconstruct the
environmental conditions where these species lived. This approach will make it
possible to determine if the ancient distributions of species are consistent
with their modern environmental ranges (implying stability) or if some species
once lived outside their present-day environmental ranges (implying evolution).
This work will contribute to an understanding of the stability of species'
ranges in the face of environmental change, and will provide new data on how the
environments and species compositions of economically important coastal
ecosystems have varied through time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of
the proposed work is to determine whether the thermal niches of northeastern
Pacific coastal mollusk species have evolved since the Late Pleistocene, and to
test the performance of ecological niche models in hindcasting Late Pleistocene
distributions. Reliable paleoenvironmental data are essential to this task, and
a large number of stable isotope profiles and clumped isotope measurements for
fossil and modern shells of the common gastropod Callianax biplicata will be
generated to reconstruct environmental conditions along the California coast. At
each of approximately 20 localities, isotope profiles from recent individuals
will be compared with profiles from individuals that lived in the same area
during different stages of the last interglacial complex and subsequent
highstands (Marine Isotope Stages 5 and 3). Reconstructed temperature and
salinity ranges and other paleoenvironmental data will be used to determine
whether the mollusk species occurring at each fossil site were occupying
environmental conditions similar to those of the geographic regions they now
occupy. This work will result in an improved understanding of the determinants
of species distributions in space and time, a more detailed reconstruction of
California coastal environments during the last interglacial complex, and
improved forecasting models for projecting species distributions in an
economically critical ecosystem.