* 1740398
* NSF/CISE Computer Systems Research 2017 PI Meeting
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2018
* Erik Saule, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 03/31/2018
* USD 212,946.00

The Computing Systems Research (CSR) program of the NSF funds a
wide&lt;br/&gt;range of systems research including (but not limited to) systems
for&lt;br/&gt;Internet-of-Things (which makes our homes and city smarter),
systems to&lt;br/&gt;make more affordable and energy-efficient our
Supercomputers (which&lt;br/&gt;furthers medical research, our understanding of
the universe, and&lt;br/&gt;warns the population of tornadoes and hurricanes, to
name a few),&lt;br/&gt;systems to improve the usefulness, security, and
reliability of our&lt;br/&gt;smartphones, and systems to secure and scale the
cloud (which has&lt;br/&gt;expanded the capabilities of IT systems while
dramatically decreasing&lt;br/&gt;the associated costs). The project organizes
and funds a community&lt;br/&gt;event for all the PIs of awards from the CSR
program. At this event,&lt;br/&gt;the researchers funded by the CSR program will
have the opportunity to&lt;br/&gt;meet at-large and share and discuss their
research and ideas for the&lt;br/&gt;future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
organizes a PI meeting that includes mostly three types of&lt;br/&gt;activities.
Plenary presentations will give a forum for the most&lt;br/&gt;remarkable
research in the field to be presented and diffused to a&lt;br/&gt;large
audience. These presentations are also useful to set the tone&lt;br/&gt;and
quality of expected research for the PIs of more recent&lt;br/&gt;awards. Poster
presentations of ongoing award enable casual scientific&lt;br/&gt;conversation
and person-to-person research diffusion; they are&lt;br/&gt;expected to
strengthen the social interaction between CSR researchers&lt;br/&gt;and to lead
to new collaborations and synergy in the field. Breakout&lt;br/&gt;sessions will
focus on subfield of systems research to summarize&lt;br/&gt;recent successful
methodology and identify problems and opportunities&lt;br/&gt;for future work.
The project provides a forum for systems researchers to meet and
to&lt;br/&gt;form new collaborations, to discuss and to disseminate
successful&lt;br/&gt;efforts, to identify the problems and opportunities of the
future, and&lt;br/&gt;to maximize the impact of subsequent systems research
efforts.