* 1740388
* I-Corps: Biodegradable 3D-Printed Oil Absorbents
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2017
* Victor Ugaz, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 09/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project lies in the core
technology's ability to establish a new paradigm for oil spill cleanup that
employs on-demand manufacturing of absorbent structures customized to match the
specific properties of the oil to be collected. Oil spills are typically
expensive to remediate due to the equipment, time, and manpower required.
Consequently, most remediation approaches are focused on large-scale spill
events. However, these account for only approximately 5% of the total pollution
in waterways. Small-scale spills occur much more frequently but are often
ignored because existing cleanup technologies are inefficient to deploy. The 3D
printed oil absorbent technology to be explored in this project uniquely address
this need by delivering customized absorbent capacity and the ability to be
produced on-demand to maximize recovery for a broad range incidents via
customization toward the unique combination of oil properties, quantity, and
environmental and weather conditions at each spill
site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project seeks to explore the commercial
potential of a family of 3D printable oleophilic materials capable of absorbing
and retaining oil within specially designed internal pore networks. These
absorbent materials also leverage shape memory behavior, making it possible for
the absorbed oil to be extracted and recovered by heating the material to a
prescribed temperature at which it automatically contracts to squeeze out the
collected oil. In this way, the absorbent materials can be made to function like
a self-wringing sponge. These materials are produced using poly(lactic acid), an
inexpensive commodity biopolymer that is degradable and environmentally
friendly. This technology emerged from fundamental research performed in a prior
NSF-sponsored project, where optimal pore network designs and processing
conditions were identified to maximize recovery of different petroleum samples
dispersed in water. 3D printing enables on-demand production of designer
absorbent architectures that match properties of different petroleum fractions,
maximize selectivity against water, and permit either strong encapsulation or
easy recovery of the collected oil.