* 1740788
* Building Culturally Responsive Evaluation and Assessment Expertise at Selected HBCU Institutions (HBCU-CREA)
* EHR,HRD
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2018
* Stafford Hood, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 04/30/2018
* USD 98,776.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) supports conferences that seek to increase the research capacity of science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) faculty at HBCUs. The Center for
Culturally Responsive Evaluation and Assessment (CREA) at the University of
Illinois at Urbana - Champaign will conduct a preconference professional
development workshop and subsequent conference sessions at the 2017 CREA
conference, which will directly benefit faculty and administrators at HBCUs.
CREA 2017 will be held in Chicago, Illinois from September 27-29,
2017.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The professional development activities are designed
to support institutional efforts to strengthen competitiveness for research and
evaluation in STEM and promote related institutional capacity in broadening
participation research. Selected conference participants will gain access to
external evaluation expertise, support in implementing culturally and
contextually relevant assessment and evaluation practices on their campuses, and
be introduced to faculty and consultants interested in collaborating on future
research projects. By providing professional development that builds
institutional capacity and expertise within the HBCU community of researchers to
conduct culturally responsive evaluations and assessments, this projects
contributes significantly to the body of knowledge related to broadening
participation and ensures evaluations of projects are rigorous, culturally
responsive, and contextually relevant.