* 1740694
* Collaborative Proposal: EarthCube Integration: Geochronology Frontier at the Laboratory-Cyberinformatics Interface
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Shaun Marcott, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,449,662.00

This grant supports a partnership between geochronologists who have built and
run laboratory facilities that are designed to measure the ages of rocks using
radioisotopic and astronomical methods, geoscientists who are building synthetic
databases that depend critically on accurate and precise ages of rocks in order
to test hypotheses in the Earth and life sciences, and computer scientists who
are building infrastructure components that are now being used broadly in
education and research. The aim is to address a 'grand challenge' in the Earth
sciences: to develop a fully integrated four-dimensional digital Earth so that
we may fully understand dynamic Earth system evolution through time. To meet
this goal the team is developing: (1) a robust cyberinfrastructure to manage and
expose data produced by multiple distributed geochronology laboratory facilities
around the USA, (2) a digital mechanism to enable scientists of all types to
readily discover and use geochronologic data, while at the same time keeping age
estimates closely connected to geochronology lab expertise and underlying,
laboratory-specific data, (3) protocols and workflows that pass geochronological
data and metadata from labs to synthetic geological and paleobiological
databases and data repositories, and (4) software that can harness this new
geochronological infrastructure and leverage it in order to generate age models
for broad swaths of rocks and thereby enable the correlation of Earth system
records across a range of nested spatial and temporal scales. Institutions
formally collaborating in these efforts include: University of Wisconsin-
Madison, University of Arizona, Boise State University, New Mexico Institute of
Mining and Technology, and University of
Minnesota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geochronological data are central to our
understanding of Earth's past and future. This collaboration between geo- and
computer scientists is: (1) creating cyberinfrastructure that better leverages
existing and new laboratory-generated geochronologic data, and (2) integrating
this infrastructure with with synthetic databases including: Paleo Biology Data
Base (https://paleobiodb.org), Neotoma Data Base (http://www.neotomadb.org),
Macrostrat (https://macrostrat.org), as well as the Integrated Earth Data
Alliance (IEDA) Geochron (http://www.geochron.org/) data repository using a
standard that can be widely applied by others. The team's approach is unique in
that it involves the parallel efforts of both the producers and consumers of
geochronologic data as well as technical staff who have a working knowledge of
geologic and biologic databases. The team is also well positioned to broadly
serve geochronology because it engages three different geochemical/radioisotopic
systems that address different geological problems and time scales. One of the
overarching science goals of EarthCube is to characterize the key processes,
interactions and feedbacks operating at and across different temporal and
spatial scales and biological, chemical, mechanical, and physical domains. These
modest, but concrete, steps allow the development of templates for distributed,
laboratory cyberinfrastructure and geochronologically grounded models that can
be adapted and used across Earth science communities. The aim is to share best
practices and move Earth scientists towards an open, frictionless transfer of
data and knowledge. The impacts of this project extend beyond the participating
laboratories and collaborations and include: (1) three young geoscientists (1
PhD student and 2 Postdoctoral scholars) are gaining the cyberinformatics
experience to become next generation faculty/research leaders, (2) a set of
standards for distributed laboratory server operations is being created and
implemented, forming the foundation for establishing a global network of lab-
derived geochronological data, and (3) the GeochronAPI deployed across this
network is providing a mechanism by which to integrate and synthesize
geochronological data into independently developed applications, including
geodiscovery-oriented Flyover Country (http://fc.umn.edu). Through workshops the
team is engaging a wide spectrum of geochronologists to converge on an open
standard for the GeochronAPI system, and their work with the synthetic databases
highlighted above engages a large community spanning bio- and geoscience. All of
the project's software, both lab-centric and external facing, is being made
accessible in public GitHub repositories to encourage open, creative
development.