* 1740267
* Quantifying the Invasive Grass-Fire Cycle and Implications for Carbon Storage in the Continental U.S.
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Jennifer Balch, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 02/28/2022
* USD 389,967.00

This project will investigate how non-native, invasive grasses alter fire
regimes and carbon storage across a range of ecosystems in the continental U.S.
By exploring how invasive grasses impact wildfire, the project will expand basic
understanding of how invasive species affect the ways in which ecosystems
function. By quantifying changes in carbon stocks associated with invasion and
fire, the project will provide a national estimate of how the grass-fire cycle
affects ecosystem carbon storage. The project will benefit society by
quantifying wildfire risks associated with fire-prone invasive grasses. By
highlighting the previously neglected carbon costs of invasive grasses and
associated wildfires, this project also will provide new perspectives, insights,
and information regarding the management and control of fire-prone invasive
grasses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most adverse ecological consequences of
non-native grass invasion is the alteration of fire regimes. The addition of
invasive fuels increases fire frequency and impedes the recovery of native
ecosystems. The invasion of non-native species and altered fire regimes affect
land-cover types ranging from deserts to prairies to forests. Although dozens of
fire-prone grasses have invaded throughout the continental U.S., cheatgrass
(Bromus tectorum) remains the only species for which a regional grass-fire cycle
has been quantified, and the carbon consequences of ecological change associate
with altered fire related to invasive grasses has been measured only for this
same species. The investigators conducting this project will study how invasive
grasses are altering regional fire cycles and how these changes affect carbon
stocks in the continental U.S. They will combine a comprehensive database of
fire-prone invasive grass occurrence locations with fire data gathered using
satellite-based moderate-resolution imaging spectroradiometer (MODIS) and
visible infrared imaging radiometer suite (VIIRS) sensors to identify invasive
grasses that are altering regional fire cycles. They will model the potential
range of grass infestations using parameter-elevation relationships on
independent slopes model (PRISM) climate data, shuttle radar topography mission
(SRTM) topography data, and MODIS and U.S. Geological Survey phenology
vegetation products as predictors. The investigators will quantify changes in
above- and below-ground biomass and soil carbon stocks associated with grass
invasion using a combination of field measurements for three target species and
literature reviews for other known invasive grass species, and they will scale-
up these site-level measurements of carbon loss using the distribution data and
potential range models to calculate the carbon consequences of the grass-fire
cycle. Through integration of these four related project components, the
investigators will provide new insights regarding the connections among invasive
grasses, fire, and the carbon cycle.