* 1740798
* Collaborative Research: Community-Building and Infrastructure Design for Data-Intensive Research in Computer Science Education
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Ken Koedinger, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 12/31/2021
* USD 299,760.00

The Building Community and Capacity in Data Intensive Research in Education
program seeks to enable research communities to develop visions, teams, and
capabilities dedicated to creating new, large-scale, next-generation data
resources and relevant analytic techniques to advance fundamental research for
areas of research covered by the Education and Human Resources Directorate.
Successful proposals will outline activities that will have significant impacts
across multiple fields by enabling new types of data-intensive research. Online
educational systems, and the large-scale data streams that they generate, have
the potential to transform education as well as our scientific understanding of
learning. Computer Science Education (CSE) researchers are increasingly making
use of large collections of data generated by the click streams coming from
eTextbooks, interactive programming environments, and other smart content.
However, CSE research faces barriers that slow progress: 1) Collection of
computer science learning process and outcome data generated by one system is
not compatible with that from other systems. 2) Computer science problem solving
and learning (e.g., open-ended coding solutions to complex problems) is quite
different from the type of data (e.g., discrete answers to questions or verbal
responses) that current educational data mining focuses on. This project will
build community and capacity among CSE researchers, data scientists, and
learning scientists toward reducing these barriers and facilitating the full
potential of data-intensive research on learning and improving computer science
education. The project will bring together CSE tool building communities with
learning science and technology researchers towards developing a software
infrastructure that supports scaled and sustainable data-intensive research in
CSE that contributes to basic science of human learning of complex problem
solving. The project will support community-building and infrastructure
capacity-building whose ultimate goal is to develop and disseminate
infrastructure that facilitates three aspects of CSE research: (1) development
and broader re-use of innovative learning content that is instrumented for rich
data collection, (2) formats and tools for analysis of learner data, and (3)
best practices to make large collections of learner data and associated
analytics available to researchers in CSE, data science, or learning science. To
achieve these goals, a large community of researchers will be engaged to define,
develop, and use critical elements of this infrastructure toward addressing
specific data-intensive research questions.The project will host workshops,
meetings, and online forums leveraging existing communities and building new
capacities toward significant research outcomes and lasting infrastructure
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide an infrastructure that
can support various kinds of research in CSE domain as a one-stop-shop, and will
be the first to focus on full-cycle educational research infrastructure in any
domain. CSE tool developers and educators will become more productive at
creating and integrating advanced technologies and novel analytics. Learning
researchers will have better tools for analyzing the huge amounts of learner
data that modern digital education software produces. Data scientists will have
rich new datasets in which to explore new machine learning and statistical
techniques. Collectively, these efforts will reduce barriers to educational
innovation and support scientific discoveries about the nature of complex
learning and how best to enhance it. The project will support scientific
investigations through community meetings and mini-grants to others addressing
questions such as: What is the optimal ratio of solution examples and problem-
solving practice? How do computational thinking skills emerge? In what quanta
are programming skills acquired? Can automated tutoring of programming be
effective at scale in enhancing student learning?. Many of the innovations
developed under this project will directly impact learning in any discipline.
Educational software will more quickly be developed in the future, that more
easily generates meaningful learner data, which in turn can be more easily
analyzed.