* 1740918
* Fire, Vegetation Change, and Human Settlement
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2017,12/31/2022
* Scott Mensing, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 12/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

This project will study the extent to which forests were altered by Native
Americans using fire to increase the number of trees available for food
resources, such as acorns from oak trees, and to create open woodlands, which
were preferred over the naturally denser forests. After the arrival of
Europeans, fire suppression became common and forests closed-up and became
denser than the open forests described at contact by early European explorers.
Many researchers have suggested that the open forests found by Europeans were
the result of fires started due to lightning and are generally not ascribed to
Native American landscape manipulation. Distinguishing forest change caused by
Native Americans from lightning fires has challenged scientists for a long time.
Many U.S. national forests now are experiencing larger and more destructive
forest fires that impact many species and threaten homes and property. One cause
of these increased fires is the increased density of forests following fire
suppression. Creating new policies that use prescribed fire to create a more
open forest requires land managers to understand what pre-fire suppression
forests looked like and what caused the forest canopy to remain open. Knowing
whether the open forests encountered by the first European explorers were the
result of natural fire or human set fire provides forest managers with
information regarding which processes created those forest conditions. This
information can then be used to manage modern forests and better protect them.
This study will be conducted in collaboration with local Native American tribes
and will serve undergraduate students from groups underrepresented in the
sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lightning-strike wildfires are a natural part of
any ecosystem, and it is generally assumed that such fires are the primary
determinant of forest structure. There is significant evidence, however, that
despite the presence of natural fires, Native Americans regularly conducted
controlled burns of the landscape to increase productivity of certain
terrestrial resources as a means of sustaining high population densities. The
investigators of this project will use pollen and charcoal analysis to
reconstruct the last 2,000 years of forest history and compare it with
independent climate history reconstructed from tree-ring studies to determine
whether forest structure changes in a manner consistent with patterns of
climate. The investigators hypothesize that if the abundance of tree types that
Native Americans used for food resources but which required drier conditions and
open habitat are found to have increased during cool wet periods, then the most
likely cause would be increased fires set by Native Americans through
traditional resource-management practices. The investigators will use ecological
models to test whether fires caused by lightning alone could have produced
specific forest changes or whether human-set fires also were needed. The
investigators will compare the timing of forest changes with the archaeological
record of Native Americans to confirm whether the changes in forest structure
coincide with more intense use of resources. This project will investigate these
questions through a case study in the Sierra Nevada of California, but the
research insights will be applicable to national forest lands throughout the
United States where forest fire management is a public concern.