* 1740363
* Science Policy Research Report: Employee Non-compete Agreements
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Matthew Marx, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 05/31/2018
* USD 39,280.00

Post-employment covenants (a.k.a. "non-compete agreements") have been used for
more than 600 years but have attracted considerable attention from U.S.
policymakers in the past quarter-century. U.S. states including Florida, Idaho,
Georgia, Utah, Hawaii, New York, Oregon, New Hampshire, and Illinois have
adopted new legislation regarding non-competes. Supreme Court rulings in Texas,
Louisiana, Wisconsin, Illinois, Montana, Colorado, and South Carolina have
materially affected the enforceability of non-competes. Moreover, reform efforts
are underway in Massachusetts and elsewhere. At the national level, legislation
aimed at curbing the use of non-competes for low-wage workers has been
considered. The optimal policy prescription for non-compete agreements is hardly
straightforward, however, as evidenced by the opposing reforms adopted by
various states, some tightening non-compete enforceability whereas others have
loosed enforceability. This ambiguity exists in part given that there are
multiple stakeholders (workers, firms, and regions) for whom the theoretical
impact of non-competes is non-obvious; moreover, the interests of these parties
may be opposed. Given both the importance of the policy issue and its
theoretical ambiguity, empirical evidence is essential to help guide legislative
initiatives.

The project focuses on published empirical articles regarding non-compete
agreements in the context of the United States. Levels of analysis include
implications for workers, firms, and regions. At the individual level, outcomes
analyzed include intra- and inter-state mobility, wages, training, motivation,
and specialization. At the firm level, outcomes analyzed include financial
performance, innovation, employee retention, and merger & acquisition activity.
At the regional and national level, outcomes analyzed include productivity,
entrepreneurship, job creation, and knowledge diffusion. Causal evidence across
these outcomes at various levels is critiqued by reviewing the identification
strategies to produce the findings as well as the datasets used to execute those
strategies. These identification strategies include assessing the changes in
state-level non-compete enforceability, comparing firms or workers more vs. less
likely to be affected by non-competes, using instrumental variables that account
for the endogeneity of actions that might be influenced by differential non-
compete policies across time and states, and randomized controlled experiments.
In addition to causal evidence, stylized facts regarding the use of non-competes
from surveys and other fieldwork are assessed.