* 1740898
* LSAMP Inspire Scholars Program
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Bethany Sansing-Helton, Madison Area Technical College
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 06/30/2021
* USD 277,005.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority
populations (African-Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians or Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians or Other Pacific Islanders) to successfully complete
high quality degree programs in STEM.

Over the next two years, Madison Area Technical College (MATC) will increase the
number of students transferring from its applied science programs to four-year
baccalaureate institutions with majors in STEM disciplines. The overall goal of
the pilot project is to improve on the goal of broadening participation in STEM
degree career pathways by:

increasing the STEM transfer readiness of all LSAMP Inspire Scholars Program
participants; increasing the number of students that successfully transition
from remedial math coursework into the STEM transfer track; and, increasing the
number of participants who transfer into four-year STEM programs and graduate
with a STEM baccalaureate degree.

MATC, through the LSAMP Inspire Scholars Program and other NSF-funded projects
such as the Advanced Technological Education (ATE) and Wisconsin Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participaton (WiscAMP) and its participation in a NSF-
funded Science of Learning Center will provide students with academic support
and guidance to improve academic performance and completion rates in STEM
courses; 2) enhance and expand existing connections with transfer institutions;
3) relieve financial stress by providing stipends tied to scholar commitment and
level of involvement; and 4) develop a learning community through shared
experiences.

Throughout this project, the program will track scholar quality points as a key
potential predictor of student success. In addition, this project furthers the
work on STEM Momentum, on-going research conducted by Dr. Xueli Wang, by
considering the impact of the interventions on underserved students that are
unable to attain STEM transfer credits within their first semester or year due
to math remediation requirements.

By increasing the number of URM transfer students in STEM, this program will
make a significant contribution to diversifying the state?s STEM workforce. The
program will also identify barriers and appropriate levels of support that
impact student success in STEM. Though this project focuses on URM students, the
comprehensive programming and design is applicable to all STEM-interested
student populations. It will therefore transform Madison College by improving
the capacity of the college to support student success through math remediation
and on into the STEM transfer track with the college?s new STEM Center operating
as the central driver of these improvements.

Project results will be disseminated broadly via the alliance and partner
institution websites, STEM and STEM educational research journals and
conferences.