* 1740389
* I-Corps: Near-Threshold-Voltage Regulation Module
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2017,06/30/2018
* Ruyan Guo, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 06/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is significant
on low power electronics, especially in markets for wearable devices and
implantable medical devices. As electronic devices continue to shrink in size
they are faced with compounded issues of power consumption, heat generation and
dissipation. As the devices become more sophisticated and the users of such
devices demand more utility and connectivity, a need for providing more
functionality with less power consumption, decreased heat management, and
extended battery life is in critical demand. The Near-Threshold-Voltage (NTV)
modular regulator is adaptable to commercially available integrated circuits and
provides an innovative solution to these issues. The commercial impact of this
NTV modular regulator technology could be realized by saving power consumption
and by cutting expenses in development costs to qualify for new generation of
low-power electronics. Similar savings and an even broader impact may be
envisioned when the modular designing tool is used for a variety of applications
using legacy CMOS circuitry and enabling seamless updates to newer technology
without substantial development costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
further develops a Near-Threshold-Voltage (NTV) modular regulator that is
practical for semiconductor integrated circuit (IC) products. The regulator
reduces power consumption of many commercially available ICs by running at
slightly higher than NTV regions auto-set by the design. It lowers the IC
internal operating voltages and enables them to run smoothly at above 95%
regulation while minimizing the noise effects. With this module, the ICs will
not require external voltage regulators, which further minimizes the unused
space on circuit boards. The module is adaptable to ICs without making expensive
and drastic changes to their original VLSI designs, especially avoiding the
costly technology process transfers for manufacturers. Many devices utilizing
System-On-a-Chip (SoC) architectures will realize the advantages of using this
module as part of the layout without changing the core circuitry. As the module
is process adjustable by design, the SoC does not need to rely on software
solutions to regulate power consumption. With the NTV module, existing ICs can
easily adapt to emerging CMOS technologies thus sustaining or reviving their
period of performance.