* 1740850
* TRIPODS: Towards a Unified Theory of Structure, Incompleteness &amp; Uncertainty in Heterogeneous Graphs
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Lise Getoor, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,581,509.00

This project brings together researchers from mathematics, statistics, and
computer science to develop a unified theory of data science applied to
uncertain and heterogeneous graph and network data. Most real-world applications
of networks involve complex phenomena, such as socio-behavioral interactions,
biological and/or chemical processes, technical systems like data centers, and
communication systems for smart cities. These data are heterogeneous, including
multiple modalities and multiple scales. Crucially, the data observed is often
incomplete and very noisy. A new foundation for data science needs to be built
in order to address these challenges in the context of graph and network data.
Similarly, we lack a clear unified theory that allows us to understand how to
quantify the uncertainty in the system that arises from the uncertainty in the
relationships among its actors. This is a fertile area for transdisciplinary
collaboration between statisticians, mathematicians, and computer scientists,
with strong impacts on industry, academia, government and broader society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project centers around two research themes. In the
first theme, the PIs will investigate models of algorithms on uncertain network
data, and specifically combine techniques from sub-linear algorithms with
Bayesian methods. The second theme focuses on how algorithms can benefit from
data uncertainty, in the context of privacy, disclosure, and robustness to
noise. In both these themes, technical advances will be achieved by marrying
computational approaches to uncertainty with statistical and mathematical
approaches for uncertainty. In addition to the research agenda, the project
involves an ambitious vision for data science capabilities spanning academia to
industry. The education aspects of this vision include a series of themed
workshops and the development of comprehensive educational resources spanning
secondary, undergraduate and advanced graduate materials. The project also
involves collaboration between UC Santa Cruz and Silicon Valley companies that
will ground our proposed theoretical and algorithmic advances with practical
applications to real-world problems and data. Furthermore, these collaborations
with industrial partners will lead to specialized workforce development. Looking
forward towards Phase II, the project aims to develop collaborations with
industry partners and various academic institutions in the area to develop a
Silicon Valley/Greater Bay Area Institute on Foundations of Data Science,
potentially to be located at University of California Santa Cruz Silicon Valley
campus in Santa Clara. Funds for the project come from CISE Information
Technology Research and MPS Division of Mathematical Sciences.