* 1740895
* EAGER: USBRCCR: Improving Network Security at the Network Edge
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Donald Towsley, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,995.00

Recent years have seen the Internet playing an increasingly critical role in our
daily lives with home networks hosting PCs, tablets, mobile devices along with
more specialized devices such as smart televisions, thermostats, and other
Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices. While these devices offer users an array of
services and conveniences, they come at the cost of introducing security
vulnerabilities into the home network. Thus users are confronted with the dual
challenges of securing their networks and devices against malicious software
(malware) and botnets that may perform distributed denial of service attacks on
commercial and public websites and of maintaining the privacy of increasingly
personal flows of data through IoT devices.

This project takes a multifaceted look at the problem of securing home networks
in the face of these challenges. Specifically, it includes a partnership with a
Brazilian Internet Service Provider giving access to data from thousands of home
network connections. This allows the creation of a baseline of network behavior
against which to identify malicious behavior due to malware or compromised
devices. Second, the project will develop behavior models of typical use of IoT
in the wild. This will allow a better understanding of how sensitive and
personal information can leak from IoT devices to IoT providers. The baseline
and the IoT behavior models will lead to new methods for identifying the
presence of anomalous/malicious behavior as well as leakage of privacy
information. The research conducted in this project provides significant
benefits to society. First, the results will allow users to enhance the security
of their home networks and better protect personal and sensitive information.
Second, the project will provide substantial opportunities for students to
develop software and research skills along with cybersecurity skills.

This project tackles the problem of securing modern home networks. The approach
to this problem will be analytical and empirical. The project will consist of:
(i) Development of techniques based on statistical analysis and machine learning
that rely on data gathered in home networks to detect and classify malicious
network activities. These techniques will focus on malicious activities both
within and outside home networks. (ii) Fingerprinting of home network traffic to
enable detection of compromised devices and characterization of the behavior of
such devices even when flows are encrypted. (iii) Development of tools that will
help users control access to their data.