* 1740420
* RI: Doctoral Student Consortium at the Seventh International Conference on Computational Creativity
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Ashok Goel, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 05/31/2019
* USD 10,000.00

This grant supports student travel for select students participating in the
Doctoral Student Consortium at the Seventh International Conference on
Computational Creativity, Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta, GA from
June 19th through June 23rd 2017. ICCC is an international conference series
covering a broad range of research on computational creative systems, including
evaluating creativity, generating creative artifacts, developing creativity
support tools, computationally modeling factors that enhance creativity,
computational analogy, and applications in industry, business and government.
This activity will bring together a broad community of junior researchers in the
field of AI and related disciplines around the challenging interdisciplinary
notion of computational creativity. These events combine to provide educational
opportunities for students and experienced researchers alike, covering topics
that are important and relevant to the success of these students in their
research careers.

Participating students will an opportunity to present their research to
internationally recognized researchers in the field, as well as to their peers.
Students will be introduced to key challenges in research in computational
creativity and discuss evaluation methodologies, best practices, and ongoing
research efforts. The consortium fosters a culture of collaboration across the
many research groups that are pursuing research in computational creativity and
related fields. Selected students will have the opportunity to give an oral
presentation at the consortium. All students will attend several invited talks
from world-leading computational creativity researchers, with an emphasis on how
to get started in the field and advice for conducting research to tackle the
hard interdisciplinary challenges of creativity, leading to future systems that
are novel, innovative and useful.