* 1740907
* EAGER: USBRCCR: HealthSense: Assessing and Protecting Privacy in Wireless Wearable Sensor-Generated Medical Data
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Guevara Noubir, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Medical and body-worn sensors will enhance human health monitoring and diagnosis
of critical ailments in the next decade. As the popularity of such devices
increases, there will be an emergence of new and varied types of attacks
targeting privacy intrusions. In all such cases, ensuring that user's
physiological data is only accessed by authorized entities and confidentially
transmitted to the remote medical experts is of critical importance. The project
will first investigate the attack vectors resulting from wearable devices such
as inference of private health information by analyzing the sensor data traffic
transmitted over-the-air. To address such threats, the project will involve the
design of a secure method of key establishment and communications between a body
sensor and an external device, where signals are sent through the human tissue
to eliminate eavesdropping. The project goals will be accomplished with
collaboration from wireless security experts in Brazil, which will also lead to
joint publications, student and faculty exchanges, and joint coursework
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of the research undertaken in this
project, the PIs will investigate how cross-layer and joint hardware-software
fingerprinting techniques can be used to track a given user over time and space,
and then identify with high probability, which types of medical sensing
applications are active. This will be the first traffic analysis of health-
specific body sensor traffic and building a comprehensive set of reference
signatures for wearable sensors, which has so far not been addressed by
classical techniques developed for Internet applications. The proposed tasks
will also demonstrate a first-of-its-kind side-channel technique, using a non-
radiating body channel, for secure key establishment, communications, and multi-
factor authentication between body-worn sensors and the information-relaying
device, such as a mobile phone. Underlying these methods is a technique called
galvanic coupling, where weak electrical currents are modulated with the data
signals, and then transmitted via highly conductive pathways of the human
tissue. This shared secret can be both an encryption key as well as a randomized
traffic shaping seed that eliminates RF sniffing, thereby mitigating the above
types of privacy intrusions.