* 1740047
* CPS: Medium: Distorting the adversary's view: a CPS approach to privacy and security
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Suhas Diggavi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 993,584.00

This project develops a novel Cyber Physical System (CPS) centric approach to
privacy and security for wireless networked CPS systems, by reconciling the low-
delay and low-jitter requirements of CPS applications with the requirements
imposed by security and privacy. Our starting observation is that, in CPS, an
adversary's primary goal is not to learn all the raw data, but instead core
attributes, such as the state or control actions that are derived from data.
Building on this observation, we propose to use a distortion measure for
security that maximizes the difference between the eavesdropper's estimate and
the true value of the function computing the attributes of interest, reducing
the adversary's ability to disrupt normal operation of CPS. We posit that we can
protect these core attributes with fewer resources than needed to protect all
the raw data. Ensuring secure and private information exchange over networked
CPS systems is essential to building a thriving ecosystem of applications that
range from autonomous cars and drones, to the Internet-of-Things (IoT), to
immersive environments such as augmented reality for health, education, and
collaboration. Our educational plan engages not only graduate students and
postdocs but also high school and undergraduate students. It also reaches out to
engineers and the lay public, by providing open source implementations of our
algorithms making them available both to industry and hobbyists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project considers both passive and active attacks. We
will quantify novel privacy and security measures for CPS systems that are based
on distortion measurements in a metric space; we will develop fundamental bounds
as well as low complexity and low overhead coding schemes; we will quantify the
disruptive power of active adversaries and design pro-active and retro-active
defense mechanisms; and we will illustrate our approach over a flagship
application, drone localization. Our approach will offer an alternative to
wireless network encryption methods, by designing for low-delay, low-jitter
requirements of CPS.