* 1740151
* SI2-SSE: Deep Forge: a Machine Learning Gateway for Scientific Workflow Design
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Akos Ledeczi, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Recent advances in machine learning have already had a transformative impact on
our lives. However, astonishing successes in diverse domains, such as image
classification, speech recognition, self-driving cars and natural language
processing, have mostly been driven by commercial forces, and these techniques
have not yet been widely transitioned into various science domains. The field is
ripe for innovation since many science fields have readily available large-scale
datasets, as well as access to public or private compute infrastructure capable
of executing computationally expensive artificial neural network (ANN) training
workflows. The main roadblocks seem to be the steep learning curve of the ANN
tools, the accidental complexities of setting up and executing machine learning
workflows, and the fact that finding the right deep neural network architecture
requires significant experience and lots of experimentation. DeepForge overcomes
these obstacles by providing an intuitive visual interface, a large library of
reusable components and architectures as well as automatic software generation
enabling domain scientist to experiment with ANNs in their own field. There is
unmet high demand of talent in machine learning, exactly because it has so much
potential in a wide variety of application areas. Therefore, any tool that helps
scientists apply machine learning in their own domains will have a broad impact.
The promise of DeepForge is to flatten the learning curve, hide low level
unimportant details and provide components that are reusable within and across
disciplines. Therefore, DeepForge will have transformative impact on a number of
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DeepForge, a web- and cloud-based software
infrastructure raises the abstraction of creating ANN workflows via an intuitive
visual interface and by managing training artifacts. Hence, it enables domain
scientists to leverage recent advances in machine learning. DeepForge will also
integrate with existing cyberinfrastructure, including private and commercial
compute clusters, cloud services (e.g. Amazon EC2), public supercomputing
resources, and online repositories of scientific datasets. The DeepForge visual
language for designing ANN architectures and workflows is powerful enough to
capture the concepts related to common deep learning tasks, yet it provides a
high level of abstraction that shields the users from the underlying complexity
at the same time. DeepForge will provide a facility that allows for sharing
design artifacts across a wide interdisciplinary user community. Curating a rich
library of reusable components, integrating with a wide variety of existing
cyberinfrastructure resources from data sources to compute platform and
providing data provenance in a seamless manner are other advantages of the
project. DeepForge will promote "data as product," "model as product," and
"service as product" concepts through integration with the Digital Object
Identifier (DOI) infrastructure. DeepForge will enable scientist to assign DOIs
to their shared assets providing data provenance enabling citing and publicly
reproducing research results by executing the referenced ANN workflows with the
linked data artifacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.