* 1740991
* Teaching Through Technology (T3) Alliance
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* John Monahan, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 09/30/2020
* USD 2,051,407.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;As the need and demand for technically
skilled workforce increases to meet the technical advances of the 21st century
life, it is important to attract and sustain the interest of youth, especially
those from groups that are traditionally underrepresented in the fields of
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). This award from the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) aims to engage
pre-college students from under-represented minority groups as well as
prospective first-generation college students in an after-school and intensive
summer programs and train them in three emerging technologies - unmanned aerial
systems (UAS), 3-D printers, and code-able digital devices. The "Teaching
through Technologies (T3) Alliance" program will recruit instructors and
students from the nationally well-established Upward Bound sites and provide
them the needed online and in-person support to adopt a curriculum detailing the
scientific background and hands-on use of these three technologies. In addition
to the technological instruction, students will also receive instruction in STEM
communication and leadership and will participate in a team or individual
service project in which their new skills can be used to address and solve an
issue of relevance to their local community using the acquired technical
knowledge. Over the three years of the project, it is expected that 360 or more
underrepresented minority, low-income, and first-generation-to-college students
from 36 institutions of higher education in 18 EPSCoR jurisdictions will be
engaged in this project.&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The vision of
this project called, "Teaching through Technologies (T3) Alliance," is to
provide a replicable, adaptable, and scalable curriculum and a comprehensive
support mechanism that can be widely adopted to increase the STEM interest and
engagement of high school students from underrepresented minority groups. The
project will focus on three emerging technological areas related to unmanned
aerial systems, 3-D printers, and codeable digital devices. Course content,
instruction, and robust interactive communication will enable instructors and
students to: 1) exchange current activities and ideas across sites; 2)
collaborate on problem-solving challenges; 3) discover STEM fields and career
paths; 4) access robust instructor training and support; and 5) establish two-
way communication with STEM career professionals and societies. The program will
be led by Alaska Upward Bound program with close partnership with the Council
for Opportunity in Education, Educating4Leadership, and Thrive Design
Enterprises in Alaska. The project plans to engage 36 Upward Bound sites in 18
EPSCoR jurisdictions. By engaging the students in hands-on technical learning
and enabling them to apply this knowledge in a service project of relevance to
their communities, the project will encourage the students to further pursue
STEM study and careers.