* 1740141
* Piping In(Out) of High Computer Science Curricula:  Magnet School Lenses and Influencing Factors
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2019
* Fay Payton, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 12/31/2019
* USD 299,958.00

Piping In(Out) of High School Computer Science Curricula: Magnet School Lenses
and Influencing Factors addresses the relationship between the availability of
computer science courses in high school and equitable access to those courses.
On the heels of the CSforAll initiative, K-12 school districts across the
country are developing an infrastructure to design and deliver rigorous CS
education for the nearly 50,000,000 students in U.S. public schools. In places
where CS courses already exist, students of color are often not enrolled,
raising the distinction between availability and access.

Piping In(Out) of Computer Science examines the relationship between
availability and access in two magnet schools in Wake County North Carolina. The
schools have significant representation of students of color, but their
enrollment in the CS courses is not representative of their population in the
schools. Because the high schools are magnet, all students are high achievers
and many of the extracurricular arguments for lack of enrollment for students of
color in advanced technical courses do not hold. This study examines the school
structures that affect equitable student engagement in computer science in
schools that do not have the challenge of availability. As school districts
around the country prepare for the implementation of CSforAll, Piping In(Out) of
CS offers insights into equitable deployment.