* 1740962
* EAGER: Exploration of THz Backscattering as a Side-channel in Computer Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Alenka Zajic, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Kundu
* 07/31/2019
* USD 199,866.00

This project looks into a new side channel information that attackers can use to
learn a computer chip design. This is important for advancing the science for
understanding what vulnerabilities there are from this side channel.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new side-channel, which is called Terahertz-frequency
(THz) backscattering, is the focus of this project. A computer system directly
emanates virtually no THz-frequency signals. Instead, a THz signal is
transmitted toward the desired part of the targeted system and is reflected
back. The signal contains information about the activity in the targeted part of
the system because the signal's reflection depends on the impedance of the
material it reflects from, so the reflected signal is modulated by the switching
state of any transistors that are in the target area (or connected to metal
wires that are in the target area) of the incoming THz beam. The project will
construct the first-ever measurement testbed for THz backscattering side-
channels, use this testbed to evaluate the key properties of THz back-scattering
from system boards, chip pins, and circuitry within a chip, and characterize the
advantages and disadvantages of THz back-scattering for various use scenarios,
e.g. as a "signature" of a specific chip, as a way of validating a chip's
activity against a "known good" reference, as a potential threat (when used for
side channel attacks), etc.