* 1740369
* I-Corps: Smart Health Platform for Dental Implant Treatment Planning
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2018
* Kumar Shah, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* cindy walkerpeach
* 03/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impacts and commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to
reduce the complications and failures of dental implants. Treatment planning a
critical part of the dental implant treatment process. With more than 6 million
dental implants placed per year in the US there is growing need for improved
treatment planning processes. This need is enhanced by the increased adoption of
dental implants as a procedure performed by general dentists who had
traditionally referred such cases to specialists. Inadequate treatment planning
is recognized as the single biggest cause of implant failure, which presents an
unnecessary health risk for the patient. The adoption of this treatment planning
tool will enable greater confidence among both practitioners and patients of
dental implant treatments.

This I-Corps project develops a novel smart health platform that generates
dental implant treatment plan considering the factors required for the
successful execution of treatment. The system considers pertinent medical
information, information about the tooth intended to be replaced, the available
anatomical spaces, the quality of soft tissue of the patient and information
about the patient?s oral habits. Research-based algorithms correlate the amount
of bone remaining, space available and the type of implant to be used. After
assessing the data received, the platform provides an analysis of possible
outcomes and, if appropriate, a proposed treatment plan including the type of
surgery recommended, the type of implant, and if there is any supplementary
surgeries needed to be performed, such as bone or gum grafts. The software will
also recommend healing times and post-operative care guidelines for the
practitioner that are specifically customized to the patient. This technology
combines all the factors which directly affect the osseointegration of the
dental implant, the bone-implant surface interaction and the response of the
soft-tissue of the patient to the treatment.