* 1740330
* SI2-SSE: Software Elements to Enable Immersive Simulation
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Kurt Maute, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2021
* USD 499,997.00

Parallel computers have grown so powerful that they are now able to solve
extremely complex fluid flow or structures problems in seconds. Unfortunately,
it may take a researcher many hours or even days to set up a complex problem
before it can be solved. Furthermore it may take hours or often weeks to extract
insight from the volume of data the simulation produces, if using standard
techniques. For discovery and design questions, where the next variant of the
problem requires a change to the problem definition, these delays disrupt the
flow of experimentation and the associated intuition and learning about how the
change in the problem definition relates to a change in the solution. To address
this issue, a paradigm shift, referred to here as "immersive simulation", is
planned to enable new approaches to problem definition editing that allow
practitioners to interact with the simulations (visual model iteration) in a
manner where they can dynamically experience the influence of parameter
variations from a single, live, and ongoing simulation. Examples include a
surgeon virtually altering the shape of a bypass graft on one computer monitor
and then virtually observing the change in the blood flow patterns not only
within the bypass but throughout the vascular system. Likewise, an engineer
altering the shape of a virtual car to see if the flow pattern improves or
worsens. These applied research examples have parallels in fundamental research
where live insight into the flow physics of unsteady, turbulent flows and their
sensitivity to live parameter changes will be made available to researchers for
the first time. Visually connecting the solution change to the visually iterated
geometry and/or parameter change will enable a new age of intuition-driven
discovery and design. This paradigm shift will also be incorporated into
foundational undergraduate and graduate courses to enable deeper, experiential-
based learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of this project is to
advance state-of-the-art tools into generic components that, when integrated,
will make the following capabilities available to any partial differential
equation solver: 1) live, reconfigurable visualization of ongoing simulations,
2) live, reconfigurable problem definition to allow the dynamic solution insight
to guide the choice of key problem parameters, 3) real-time parameter
sensitivity feedback, 4) adaptive simulation control to account for
discretization errors and geometry changes, and 5) integration and demonstration
of reliable, immersive simulation. The first communities that these software
components will be developed with include cardiovascular flow and aerodynamic
flow control. They have already articulated a need for software to more rapidly
explore the performance of their systems under a broad parameter space with
intuitive and quantitative parameter sensitivity. This software will enable not
only design (applied research e.g., exploring bypass vs. stent type and
placement for a particular patient's diseased vasculature or flow control
actuator placement), but also discovery (fundamental research e.g., explore
physics of flow response to discover completely new surgical procedures and flow
control processes and devices). This twofold and complementary software
application will have a similar impact on education, where foundational courses
will use the integrated software modules to create immersive simulations that
build intuition about flow physics, and then reinforce that learning in an
applied nature in capstone design courses. While the ideas will be prototyped
and proven within the field of fluid dynamics, they will be developed generally,
with sustainable software engineering, for easy adoption by other fields that
make use of simulation. The successful development, integration, and
demonstration of these tools at scale will transform massively parallel
simulation from a series of I/O-intensive steps to live, reconfigurable
discovery using carefully designed interfaces that blaze the trail for all
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.