* 1740142
* NSCI SI2-SSE: The N-Jettiness Software Framework for Precision Perturbative QCD Calculations in Particle and Nuclear Physics
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Francis Petriello, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2021
* USD 476,976.00

This project will develop computational tools needed to interpret increasingly
precise instrument data from particle accelerators such as the world's largest
and most powerful, the Large Hadron Collider (LHC). These computations will
advance our knowledge of physics at the smallest scales and may potentially
reveal deviations between measurements and theory (the Standard Model of
particle physics). The detailed scrutiny of the recently-discovered Higgs boson
and searches for deviations from the Standard Model will guide the physics
community for the coming decades. The success of this program will rely upon
increasingly intricate and precise theoretical calculations. In the words of the
U.S. Particle Physics Project Prioritization Panel (P5) report which describes
the next decade of high energy physics: "The full discovery potential of the
Higgs will be unleashed by percent-level precision studies of the Higgs
properties." The difficulty in achieving predictions at this precision is an
enormous theoretical and computational challenge. The project members have
developed a novel approach to the necessary calculations that is especially
adapted to run on the nation's largest high-performance computing systems. This
method has made previously unobtainable results possible, and there is great
promise for similar future rapid progress. The software development in this
project will provide the tools needed to answer some of the most outstanding
issues facing fundamental physics: What is the underlying origin of the Higgs
boson? Can we discover dark matter at the LHC? What is the microscopic mechanism
which gives the proton its observed spin? Through the involvement of junior
scientists in answering these questions the younger generation will be trained
in applying cutting-edge computing knowledge to answer future scientific
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is
the development and deployment of codes incorporating the N-jettiness
subtraction approach to perturbative QCD calculations in order to address the
ever-increasing precision needs of collider experiments in particle and nuclear
physics. This theoretical framework very effectively uses previous community
investments in software development by extending publicly-available next-to-
leading-order (NLO) codes to next-to-next-to-leading order (NNLO), where the
expansion parameter is the strong coupling constant. This advance improves their
achievable theoretical precision by an order of magnitude, while maintaining the
interface familiar to the user community. The specific objectives of this
project are as follows: the public release of NNLO corrections for jet
production processes at the LHC into a public simulation code that is both fast
and user-friendly; the expansion of the functionality of DISTRESS, a new code
designed for precision simulations for RHIC and a future electron-ion-collider;
the preparation of these precision simulation tools for future multi-core
computing architectures that feature smaller memory per core. The N-jettiness
subtraction approach is optimized for the massively-parallel computing
architectures in which the United States government has invested heavily, and
therefore advances the goals of the National Strategic Computing
Initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Office of
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer &amp; Information
Science and Engineering, the Physics Division and Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences.