* 1740595
* Collaborative Proposal: EarthCube Integration: ICEBERG: Imagery Cyberinfrastructure and Extensible Building-Blocks to Enhance Research in the Geosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Heather Lynch, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 09/30/2022
* USD 632,179.00

Satellite imagery is rapidly transforming the way we see the planet, including
our ability to study the most remote parts of the Arctic and Antarctic.
Satellite imagery can help us map networks of rivers, study changes in the flow
and thickness of glaciers, identify rock and soil types, and even find animals
like penguins and seals. Because the availability of imagery in polar areas has
increased rapidly over the last decade, we are now faced with a challenge: To
move from small pilot-studies to pan-Arctic or pan-Antarctic analyses of
geological and biological processes requires new infrastructures that link
scientists, satellite imagery, and fast computing. The project, called ICEBERG -
Imagery Cyberinfrastructure and Extensible Building-Blocks to Enhance Research
in the Geosciences, aims to build the cyberinfrastructure required to make the
most of satellite imagery for geosciences, starting with researchers working in
polar areas, and then branching out to the larger community. The Broader Impacts
of this proposal include the training of undergraduate and graduate students, as
well as young investigators and female scientists. Moreover, the scientific
findings enabled by this proposed cyberinfrastructure will have immediate
benefits for our ability to predict the future dynamics of the polar regions,
and critical to the management of Arctic and Antarctic resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polar geosciences stands at the precipice of a revolution,
one enabled by the confluence of cutting edge analytical tools, petabytes of
high-resolution imagery, and an ever growing array of high performance computing
resources. With these tools at hand, we can look beyond incremental improvements
in our understanding of the polar regions. Near-real time datasets of geological
and biological importance at the continental scale are within our reach if we
create those critical cyberinfrastructure components that allow the geosciences
community to exploit existing assets and establish a common workflow for
reproducible imagery-enabled science. The research objective of this proposal is
to understand the biological, geological, and hydrological functioning of the
polar regions at spatial scales heretofore beyond the reach of individual PIs,
and to develop tools for imagery-enabled science that can be applied globally.
The resulting cyberinfrastructure, which we call ICEBERG - Imagery
Cyberinfrastructure and Extensible Building-Blocks to Enhance Research in the
Geosciences, is an extensible system for coupling open-source image analysis
tools with the use of high performance and distributed computing (HPDC) for
imagery-enabled geoscience research. We propose a project to (1) develop open
source image classification tools tailored to high-resolution satellite imagery
of the Arctic and Antarctic to be used on HPDC resources, (2) create easy-to-use
interfaces to facilitate the development and testing of algorithms for
application specific geoscience requirements, (3) apply these tools through use
cases that span the biological, hydrological, and geoscience needs of the polar
community, (4) transfer these tools to the larger non-polar community.