* 1740218
* NSCI: SI2-SSE: An Extensible Model to Support Scalable Checkpoint-Restart for DMTCP Across Multiple Disciplines
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Gene Cooperman, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 12/31/2021
* USD 408,000.00

Checkpointing is a technique that periodically saves the state of a long-running
computer program to disk. If a computer crash occurs during the running of the
program, one can then restart the program state from a previously saved
"checkpoint" file on disk. The goal of this project is to discover, implement
and deploy novel techniques for adapting checkpointing so as to provide a more
robust capability easily usable across applications supporting the research of a
variety of scientific and engineering disciplines. In particular, a problem with
the classic (transparent) checkpoint model is that these packages do not model,
and hence cannot recreate upon restart, communications between the original
program and other external processes or programs. In this project, a
virtualization model for commonly used mechanisms for communication will be
developed so that on restart, external communications are emulated.
Checkpointing is used across academia, industry, and government, particularly by
those with long-running high performance computing programs. Thus, the project
outcomes have broad applicability and value. The project has the added benefit
of educating the next generation of students in valuable and highly transferable
system skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today, transparent checkpoint-restart today
is used primarily for fault tolerance, and primarily in closed systems with no
external communication. DMTCP is a twelve-year old open source checkpointing
project. Its currently evolving process virtualization model of checkpointing
enables an application to support complex applications that interact with
external subsystems. The project explores and extends a model of process
virtualization in order to adapt checkpoint-restart to multiple, novel
applications, and to extend its use across multiple scientific and engineering
disciplines. Example disciplines that will benefit include: supercomputing (and
in particular, forging a path toward practical exascale checkpointing); novel
strategies for flexible resource managers (batch queues) for computer clusters
that adapt to the current workload; and better support for hardware circuit
emulators for Electronic Design Automation (EDA). Example challenges include the
need to support transparent checkpointing over the newer low-latency networks
such as Omni-Path, integration of application-specific checkpointing with
transparent DMTCP-style checkpointing, the need to avoid "flooding" back-end
storage during checkpointing in high-end clusters, and new types of resource
managers that benefit from the flexibility of arbitrarily suspending running
jobs through checkpointing. Rather than build ad hoc solutions for each of the
above, this work will provide a simple model allowing end users to easily build
their own extensions to support checkpointing of the external subsystems. The
simple model will be derived by generalizing over solutions to many of the
example challenges described above. In addition to fault tolerance, the
technology holds advantages for: fast startup (checkpoint after process
initialization,in order to restart and skip this phase in future sessions);
debugging (e.g. checkpoint every 30 seconds); reproducible bug reports; extended
interactive sessions (e.g. checkpoint before dinner and restart the next day);
and so on.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.