* 1740219
* Collaborative Research: NSCI: SI2-SSE: Time Stepping and Exchange-Correlation Modules for Massively Parallel Real-Time Time-Dependent DFT
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Andre Schleife, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2022
* USD 249,940.00

Recent advances in high-performance (HPC) computing allow simulations of quantum
dynamics of electrons in complex materials, and such simulations are central to
advancing various medical and semiconductor technologies, ranging from proton
beam cancer therapy to fabricating faster and smaller electronics. At the same
time, the increasing scale and complexity of modern high-performance computers
exposed a need for development of scientific software that is tailored for
computers with large numbers of processors so that simulations can efficiently
take advantage of increasing computing power. This project advances scientific
software for simulating quantum dynamics of electrons for high-performance
computers with tens and hundreds of thousands of processors that are becoming
widely available. This work builds the HPC academic research community around
the proposed software by extending the existing software available for quantum
dynamics simulation with better user-friendly features and analysis techniques.
In the process, this project engages graduate students and early-career
researchers to use and further develop scientific software for high-performance
computers in general. Additionally, a summer school for hands-on training will
be conducted. The open source software will be made available to the community
on Github (public repository). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Real-time propagation in
time-dependent density functional theory (RT-TDDFT) is becoming increasingly
popular for studying non-equilibrium electronic dynamics both in the linear
regime and beyond linear response. RT-TDDFT can be combined to study coupled
dynamics of quantum-mechanical electrons with the movement of classical ions
within Ehrenfest dynamics. In spite of its great promise, RT-TDDFT is
computationally very demanding, especially for studying large condensed-matter
systems. The large cost arises from small time steps of numerical integration of
the electron dynamics, rendering accurate (hybrid) exchange-correlation (XC)
functionals unfeasible, despite their clear benefits. In addition, while modern
high-performance computing (HPC) helps tackling great scientific questions,
massively parallel, hybrid-paradigm architectures present new challenges.
Theoretical and algorithmic methods need to be developed in order to take full
advantage of modern massively parallel HPC. This work builds new modules for the
RT-TDDFT software component of the Qb@ll code, that enables a large community of
researchers to perform advanced first-principles simulations of non-equilibrium
electron dynamics in complex condensed-phase systems, using massively parallel
HPC. This is done through developing (1) new modules for numerical integration
that propagate the underlying non-linear partial differential equations in real
time with high efficiency and accuracy, and (2) new modules for improved
approximations of the underlying electronic structure, using a modern meta-
generalized-gradient XC functional. Furthermore, the work builds the HPC
academic research community around RT-TDDFT within the Qb@ll code through (1)
development of user-friendly features that interface Qb@ll with other code and
analysis techniques and (2) engagement of early-career scientists by
incorporating hands-on training on RT-TDDFT using the Qb@ll code in TDDFT summer
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering, the Materials Research Division and Chemistry Division in the
Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences.