* 1740315
* SI2-SSE: MetPy - A Python GEMPAK Replacement for Meteorological Data Analysis
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Ryan May, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2021
* USD 499,693.00

The MetPy project aims to make atmospheric science research and teaching easier
and more reproducible by providing a set of well-tested and modern software
tools. Meteorologists require many specialized calculations and maps in order to
understand the weather and make reliable predictions. The tools they use must
provide correct results, since lives and property depend on accurate forecasts
and research. This project will port the bulk of the functionality from a widely
used and trusted -- but aging and minimally supported -- software program called
GEMPAK (the GEneral Meteorological PAcKage) into MetPy, developed using the
Python programming language, and with a well-designed, new software
architecture. Python has been selected as the language of choice because it has
become very popular in many scientific communities. MetPy will be the
meteorological community's entry into this growing scientific software
ecosystem. In addition to making GEMPAK's functionality available in MetPy, this
project will implement a better user-interface, which will help students and
researchers get started more easily. The software team will use software
development best practices in its development of MetPy, and ensure that it can
work with all common meteorological data sources. Every relevant aspect of MetPy
will be documented in an easy to digest way on the MetPy project webpage. The
development team will work with university instructors to help revise their
course materials to integrate MetPy. In addition, the team will teach MetPy and
Python training workshops each year, allowing university professors, students,
and professionals to get hands-on training on how to do their research in a
faster and more robust way. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to fill a
need within the atmospheric science community by bringing key functional
elements of a foundational software program, GEMPAK, to the innovation-rich
Python ecosystem. By devoting software development resources to increasing the
number of data types and file formats MetPy can work with, improving the
underlying data model, and reaching feature parity with GEMPAK, MetPy can be
positioned as a community-supported replacement for the older package. This
effort leverages the entire Python ecosystem, and supports the movement (already
well under way) of the atmospheric science community to Python-driven
reproducible workflows. This transition will provide a number of community
benefits. By bringing needed functionality from GEMPAK to the Python ecosystem,
this project will allow atmospheric scientists to: simplify the process of
exploratory analysis, have a cross-platform toolchain that can be carried from
the classroom to the workforce, simplify the research workflow to make science
easier and more reproducible, provide a tested library of domain-specific
calculations with literature references, and create publication-quality data
visualizations. Educators and researchers will be able to replace their use of
legacy software, which is no longer being developed and is increasingly hard to
maintain, with a modern toolkit that allows increased flexibility and
reproducibility within atmospheric science research. Sustainability of the
atmospheric science software workflow will be enhanced by the inclusion of
modern automated software build-and-test tools, robust community-supported
documentation and learning materials, and the ability to quickly incorporate new
sources of environmental data. Finally, modernizing the atmospheric science
toolchain opens the door to the use of innovations like web-based tools (Jupyter
notebooks, for example) that would be difficult or impossible to take advantage
of when using legacy software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.