* 1740940
* Unraveling the evolutionary dynamics of high symbiont diversity in the fungus-farming ant genus Apterostigma: A phylogenomic approach
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Christian Rabeling, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 03/31/2019
* USD 317,428.00

The best known fungus-farming ants are the leaf-cutting ants of the genera Atta
and Acromyrmex, which are the dominant plant harvesting animals of the New World
tropics. These ants use plant leaf cuttings in order to cultivate a single,
recently evolved fungal species, which they then eat. However, a more poorly
known group of fungus-farming ants in the genus Apterostigma, cultivate a
greater diversity of fungal species than all other fungus-farming ants combined.
Closely related species of Apterostigma cultivate closely related groups of
fungi, but major shifts to distantly related fungal groups have occurred
multiple times during 40 million years of co-evolution between Apterostigma ants
and fungus. This research aims to better understand the co-evolution of leaf-
cutting ants and the fungi they cultivate. This includes developing new
knowledge about the numbers, diversity and distribution of Apterostigma ant
species and their associated fungi, as well as determining the evolutionary
relationships among both ants and fungi. Questions to be addressed include: Why
do leaf-cutting ants in the genus Apterostigma cultivate a greater diversity of
fungal species than all other fungus-farming ants (leaf-cutting and non-leaf-
cutting) combined? Why do some Apterostigma ant species cultivate only a few
fungi that are closely related to each other, while others cultivate diverse
fungi that are only distant relatives? The results from this research may
benefit society in general because fungus-farming ants provide a rare non-human
model system for the emerging fields of Darwinian agriculture and Darwinian
medicine, which aim to improve human agriculture and disease management through
the study of analogous natural systems. Recently several antibiotics and
antimalarial quinones have been isolated and described from fungi and bacterial
species living in association with leaf-cutting ants, making their biology
particularly relevant to issues of health. Further, some fungi associated with
leaf-cutting ants have become models for more efficient biofuel
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will proceed by comprehensive
field collecting of ants and fungi from nests throughout their distributions in
nature, and documenting the presence or absence of co-speciation patterns in
Apterostigma ants and their fungal cultivars, by comparing phylogenetic analyses
based on genomic data for both ants and fungi. The researchers will employ
targeted enrichment of Ultra-Conserved genetic Elements (UCEs) to infer the
species-level phylogenies. These phylogenies will be used in testing hypotheses
of co-evolution and fungal species fidelity and mobility among host ant species
over time. The genomic UCE data will also be used to resolve species boundaries
(identify species) among poorly known species-complexes of Apterostigma ants.
This is essential for reconstructing species-specific ant-fungus co-evolutionary
interactions as well as for revising ant taxonomy and producing pictorial
identification keys to various ant species.