* 1740211
* SI2-SSE: Highly Efficient and Scalable Software for Coarse-Grained Molecular Dynamics
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Gregory Voth, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Molecular simulation provides a powerful complement to conventional experimental
techniques, offering both high-resolution information and unusual levels of
control over the experimental conditions. While atomic-resolution molecular
simulations are well established and widely used, it is also possible to remove
extraneous detail from molecular representations to create highly efficient
"coarse-grained" (CG) models. CG approaches can expand the potential
applications of molecular simulations far beyond atomic-resolution models: the
computational efficiency of CG models allows the scientist to investigate not
only significantly larger systems, but also phenomena that require significantly
longer time scales. These CG approaches are of particular interest in the study
of systems where key aspects of various processes emerge from interactions
between large numbers of molecules over relatively long distances. CG models can
therefore provide crucial insight into the molecular basis of such systems,
e.g., new materials. However, CG models can require significant scientific
understanding to create and use effectively. To bring cutting-edge CG
methodologies into a wider degree of use, this project will implement key
algorithmic advances and associated CG functionalities into the widely-used
LAMMPS molecular dynamics simulation code. Furthermore, the project will
implement a publically-accessible repository for CG model parameters and input
files to accelerate the dissemination of exemplar CG models throughout the
scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will integrate
key functionalities for very large-scale and dynamic CG models into the LAMMPS
molecular dynamics package. These functionalities include not only sparse memory
optimizations (e.g., template molecular topology descriptions and spatial data
structures for link cell algorithms) but also user-defined transition
information for the propagation of "ultra-coarse-grained" (UCG) models;
parameterization of the latter can be achieved by using the integrated multi-
scale coarse-grained force matching code (MSCGFM). Furthermore, direct
incorporation of experimental data into CG models will be assisted
by implementations of the "experiment directed metadynamics" (EDM) and
"experiment directed simulation" (EDS) algorithms. Taken together, these
enhancements will provide cutting-edge CG model generation and simulation
techniques to a wide user community. To complement the extended functionality of
the LAMMPS code, a user-driven data and metadata repository for CG models will
be provided to assist with efficient dissemination of model parameters
and simulation/validation data to the scientific community.