* 1740578
* 2017 Cargese Summer School on Theoretical Biophysics in Corsica, France June 25-July 6, 2017
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Ilya Nemenman, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 06/30/2018
* USD 10,000.00

This project will support participation of United States researchers at the 2017
Cargese Summer School on Theoretical Biophysics, June 25-July 6, 2017. The
school will train 50 students (close to half of them from the United States),
and the training will be done by 19-20 core and seminar lecturers and
organizers. From the point of view of physics, biological systems stand out due
to their complexity and heterogeneity. The school will be structured around core
lectures (self-contained mini-courses), seminar presentations, and discussions.
Student projects and symposia will provide an active learning component. The
school will be aimed primarily at junior researchers in physical and
mathematical disciplines, but interested in biological questions. The School
will contribute to training the next generation of theorists on the interface of
physics and life sciences, focusing especially on promoting women and
traditionally underrepresented minorities. The School will further contribute
towards the establishment and growth of the international, collaborative
community of young researchers in this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Living
systems span many length and timescales, and are constantly kept out of
equilibrium by active energy-consuming processes. Understanding their
functioning poses a major challenge to traditional physical approaches. Despite
their diversity, questions on the interface of physics and biology have in
common the emergence of a global and collective phenomenon from a sum of local
interactions. How to formulate these problems in a common language, and use it
to make relevant and reliable biological predictions will be a major goal of
this this summer school. The school will aim at understanding the functioning of
biological systems, from cells to groups of organisms, in light of the laws of
physics. Diverse topics from neuroscience to cellular signaling and how
complexity emerges will be discussed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being
jointly supported by the Physics of Living Systems program in the Division of
Physics and the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences.