* 1740130
* SI2-SSE: Entangled Quantum Dynamics in Closed and Open Systems, an Open Source Software Package for Quantum Simulator Development and Exploration of Synthetic Quantum Matter
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Lincoln Carr, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2022
* USD 499,978.00

On the way to universal quantum computing, quantum simulators, literally
"analog" quantum computers, have already been a huge success and are fulfilling
Feynman's original 1982 vision of quantum computing.  Each such simulator
requires a dedicated experimental platform, and costs on the order of several
million dollars to build.  Such experiments have many interacting parts often
requiring a complex rearrangement and months of work in order to perform a
specified quantum computation.  A widely accessible and easy to use software
tool to shortcut design considerations for quantum simulator experimentalists is
much needed.  This project will create such a tool.  Initially, the project
researchers will design and release on SourceForge an open source software
package centered around 1D matrix product state (MPS) and matrix product density
operator (MPDO) methods, for both closed and open quantum systems, which any
experimentalist can download and easily use locally to design and benchmark
their quantum simulator architecture of choice.  The software elements will
include (i) prebuilt generalized Ising, Hubbard, and other models, (ii) multi-
legged ladders to extend into quasi-1D, (iii) different time propagation methods
for short and long-range interactions, and (iv) supplemental exact
diagonalization and quantum trajectory methods.  Secondly, the project members
will create an even simpler graphical version via a web interface in
collaboration with the Science Gateways Community Institute which allows any
experimentalist to run quick simulations and tests on local dedicated high-
performance computing resources at the Colorado School of Mines in a secure and
user-friendly format.  Finally, the project team will develop a key new software
element in terms of a series of increasingly accurate discretization schemes to
model continuum quantum simulators and mesoscopic limits, as well as control
systematic error in experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MPS/MPDO
methods enable the treatment of outstanding quantum problems for design of new
materials dubbed synthetic quantum matter, push the boundaries of quantum
mechanics into strongly correlated physics, where particles and even
quasiparticles lose meaning, and allow exploration of totally new realms of
entangled dynamics.  The software package proposed here will make these
extraordinary capacities accessible to the over 150 quantum simulator
experimental groups, as well as the many theoretical/computational groups
investigating entangled quantum dynamics, thus greatly speeding up exploration
of quantum simulator physics.  The software package will provide a platform for
exploring far-from-equilibrium open quantum system dynamical models, an
important topic in the theoretical and computational physics community at
present due to the new and expanded capacity offered by quantum simulators; and
it will provide an educational venue for new graduate students entering research
groups and faculty developing courses in computational physics and related
areas.  Broader impact activities include integration of computation across the
Colorado School of Mines undergraduate physics curriculum as a model for
departments across the country to achieve this AAPT/APS goal, e.g. redesigning
the mathematical physics course to cover equal parts analytical and
computational methods, including specific research skills for summer REUs and
internships.  Finally, graduate students will be trained in critical analysis
for scientific problem solving and rigorous numerical techniques for high-
performance computing, including open source science via a science gateway, an
approach key to success in a number of arenas in society, from the materials
genome initiative to the space program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for
Computer &amp; Information Science and Engineering and the Physics Division,
Materials Research Division, and Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the
Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences.