* 1740839
* Spatial Location and Biogeochemical Drivers of Mercury Methylation and Demethylation in the Rice Rhizosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2022
* Rebecca Neumann, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 10/31/2022
* USD 367,859.00

Rice, a staple food of more than four billion people, can serve as a primary
route of human exposure to methylmercury (MeHg). Methylmercury bioaccumulates in
organisms and is highly neurotoxic. Even at trace levels, MeHg adversely affects
human health. By contrast, inorganic mercury is less bioavailable and does not
bioaccumulate. Thus, MeHg contamination of rice is a global public health
concern. The MeHg content of rice grain originates from the paddy soil, where it
is taken up by rice roots and transported to the developing grain. All soils
contain inorganic mercury derived from natural, as well as modern and historical
anthropogenic sources. The MeHg in paddy soil is produced by aquatic
microorganisms from this inorganic mercury, a process known as methylation.
Another suite of microorganisms transform MeHg back into inorganic mercury,
termed demethylation. The availability of MeHg for plant uptake depends on the
relative rates of methylation and demethylation in the soil zone surrounding
rice roots, an area called the rice rhizosphere. The roots of rice plants
release both oxygen and organic carbon into rhizosphere soil. The supply of both
organic carbon and oxygen can modulate methylation and demethylation. This
project is clarifying how plant inputs of oxygen and organic carbon affect rates
of methylation and demethylation and thus alter rhizosphere MeHg concentrations.
Results can inform agricultural strategies to minimize MeHg contamination of
rice grain. For example, findings may guide selection of rice cultivars that
release oxygen and carbon in amounts and proportions that favor demethylation
over methylation. Project personnel will disseminate results to K-12 students,
laypeople, policymakers, and rice growers by creating an artistic, high-quality
video that presents health hazards of MeHg in rice and other foods, introduces
the complex MeHg cycle, and discusses strategies for minimizing MeHg production
in rice paddies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project combines experimental
manipulations of root exudates and soil oxygenation with mercury isotope
speciation methods and two-dimensional, real-time visualizations of rhizosphere
oxygen concentrations to test hypotheses about how carbon and oxygen influence
rates and spatial occurrence of methylation and demethylation within paddy soil.
During peak vegetative growth, enriched isotope MeHg and inorganic mercury
tracers are injected at the mm scale into rhizosphere soil, guided by oxygen
visualizations, to assess rates of methylation and demethylation in different
redox zones. After plants complete their lifecycle, grain is collected to
identify the net, integrated effect of altered root exudation or soil
oxygenation on MeHg concentrations in rice grain, the endpoint most relevant to
human health. This unique approach allows examination of the spatial
distribution and biogeochemical drivers of MeHg production at a fine scale in an
intact, living, plant-soil system. Such spatial resolution is necessary to
characterize how organic carbon and oxygen enhance or diminish the net
production of MeHg in the rhizosphere of rice, and thus help control MeHg
contamination of rice grain. Importantly, the project directly studies mercury
demethylation, an important pathway for MeHg degradation in soils, but a process
that is poorly understood in comparison to mercury methylation.