* 1740425
* RCN: DIMACS/Simons Collaboration on Bridging Continuous and Discrete Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Richard Karp, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Optimization tools and algorithms have transformed fields ranging from biology
to finance, and they touch everyday lives through more efficient supply chains,
better traffic management, and more secure power grids. New applications,
particularly those stemming from machine learning and data science, are now
challenging the field to solve larger and more complex problems on smaller
devices in less time. The field is responding with innovative approaches leading
to advances such as faster algorithms for maximum flow and near-real-time
approximations, more efficient interior-point methods, and faster cutting-plane
methods. Many of these breakthroughs bring together ideas from both continuous
and discrete optimization. The DIMACS/Simons Collaboration on Bridging
Continuous and Discrete Optimization aims to accelerate progress by stimulating
collaboration across the many communities of optimization. The planned
activities bring together computer scientists, mathematicians, operations
researchers, engineers, statisticians, and algorithm developers to advance both
the foundations and applications of optimization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project begins with an intensive program at the Simons Institute during the fall
semester of 2017 that launches the collaboration and builds momentum for
activities conducted over the ensuing two years as part of the DIMACS Special
Focus on Bridging Continuous and Discrete Optimization. The DIMACS special focus
includes seven workshops that sustain the project through the end of 2019 and
expand it to include more people and more topics. The project aims to improve
the performance of optimization methods in challenging real settings with the
potential to positively impact society by improving traditional applications in
logistics, supply chains, engineering, infrastructure, and finance, as well as
growing applications in machine learning and data science. The project will
involve a large number of people in various scientific communities and expose
them to new ideas, new problems, and new opportunities for collaboration.
Participants will be diverse across a variety of dimensions, including women and
other under-represented groups; a mix of junior and senior participants; people
from multiple disciplines; and both industry and academic participants. There
will also be international coordination with the Centre de Recherches
Math√©matiques and Polytechnique Montreal.