* 1740927
* I-Corps: Silicon Nanoneedle Chip Technology for Massively Parallel Gene Editing
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2018
* Rhonda Shrader, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 03/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be
engineering a new silicon-based cost-effective, precise, mechanical chip
technology to perform gene knockdowns and editing at the single-cell level. The
technology will enable this on a parallel scale as well as the eventual
applicability to T cell immunotherapy. The ability to target and profile
specific genes and pathways in single cells with a nanoneedle-based microrobotic
device will constitute a major technological advance that will enable
researchers to monitor cancer progression, study the- underlying mechanisms and
develop therapeutic T cell engineering. The technology is primarily addressing a
fundamental problem associated with cell and gene therapy: viruses used to
program cells before transplant into the body provoke undesirable immune
response, may cause adverse effects as viral DNA integrates into the human
genome, involve costly production and lengthy protocols, and can typically only
be used once. This technology will enable an alternative engineering solution to
this fundamental therapeutic problem which can eliminate such toxicity issues
encompassing major applications in other areas including livestock, industrial
biology, agriculture, drug discovery and development.

This I-Corps project will further develop a technology that allows editing of
single T cells with high transduction efficiency and minimal invasiveness.
Parameters such as target efficiency, sensitivity/specificity of manipulation
and delivery, device functionality after repetitive transduction, uniformity of
manipulation across different single cells, as well as precision,
reproducibility, hysteresis and stability of the motion of the microrobotic
actuator will be optimized. The silicon-based microrobotic actuator is designed
such that it can accurately track and target desired positions within single
cells under an open loop control without a position feedback sensor, thus
avoiding complicated control system electronics. A platform has been developed
that includes a microrobotic actuator, which consists of a microstage driven by
capacitive components that moves in 3D using an electrostatic field responsible
for the independent motion to the nanoneedles. The key innovative concept here
is to integrate the parallel architecture based 3D actuator technology with
multiple nanoneedle biosensors so that each of them can be independently moved
for targeted single-cell manipulation.