* 1740965
* Determining in Vivo Protein Complex Stoichiometry from Superresolution Microscopy
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Steve Presse, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 06/30/2018
* USD 151,382.00

Determining in vivo protein complex stoichiometry from superresolution
microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteins form one of the basic building blocks
of life. In living cells, proteins typically assemble into macromolecular
complexes in order to perform targeted tasks. Knowing the location and exact
composition of protein assemblies enables investigators to understand the
molecular mechanisms underlying their activity during key cellular events such
as division or movement. Unfortunately, relatively little is known about the
composition of such complexes in living cells, and it is clear that composition
can vary depending on the cellular environment. This project will develop an
optical/computational method to count subunits in protein assemblies in living
cells, and enable exceptionally detailed information to be gathered about
biological processes in native, non-invasive environments. This project combines
expertise from the biological, mathematical, and physical sciences and as such
provides exceptional interdisciplinary training opportunities for students and
postdocs. Moreover, the project will yield methods that will have broad
applicability in the optical biological sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will extract protein complex stoichiometry directly from the
superresolution microscopy technique called PALM (PhotoActivated Localization
Microscopy). PALM works by genetically encoding proteins of interest with
photoswitchable fluorescing protein (FP) tags. Under sufficiently low light,
each FP photoactivates and subsequently photobleaches. Thus, the number of
fluorescence spikes over one small region of space should coincide with the
number of protein subunits confined to that region (and normally confined to a
specific protein complex). In practice, FPs fluoresce on and off (i.e. they
'blink') with blinking properties dependent on the local cellular environment.
This blinking has been a major challenge in using PALM as a quantitative tool.
The project will adapt the mathematical and statistical inference tools used in
the analysis of ion channel patch clamp experiments to determine protein complex
stoichiometry directly from PALM data (Goal 1). To determine the complex
stoichiometry more accurately, the FP's blinking properties will be
simultaneously extracted while determining the complex stoichiometry (Goal 2).
The method will be tested on synthetic as well as real data sets where the
protein complex stoichiometry is already known. The analysis will then be
extended to protein complexes where the stoichiometry is still under current
investigation (SpoIIIE and the kinetochore). If successful, this counting method
will have several decisive advantages over existing counting methods, which
assume specific FP photophysical properties or do not treat FP properties
stochastically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is funded jointly by
the Cellular Dynamics Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences and the Physics of Living Systems Program in the Division of
Physics.