* 1740756
* Understanding the low frequency dynamics of the throughflow from the Pacific to the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 01/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Allan Clarke, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 06/30/2023
* USD 499,966.00

The Bering Strait is a narrow ocean gap between Alaska and Russia and is the
only ocean pathway between the Pacific and the Arctic. In the past, ocean
transport through this region may have played a key role in climate
fluctuations. In the future, disappearing Arctic ice may make the Bering Strait
the Pacific gateway to an Arctic ship route between the Pacific and Atlantic.
Lying at the southern end of the Bering Strait is the Bering Sea, a shallow
continental shelf hosting some of the most valuable fisheries in the U.S. and
huge populations of marine wildlife. Although winds on average blow southward
through the Strait, the average flow of ocean currents is northward, carrying
nutrients, heat, and fresh water into the Arctic. Previous work suggests that a
pressure head at the southern end of the Strait drives flow to the north against
the southward wind, and evidence suggests that this pressure head has increased
by about 70% since 2001. The origin of year-to-year and longer-term variability
of this pressure head is unknown. This project will combine existing data on sea
surface height, coastal sea level, theory, and modeling to understand changes in
the pressure head and the basic dynamics of the Bering Sea continental shelf. A
graduate student will be supported. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Bering Strait
connects the Pacific and Arctic Oceans, and serves as a conduit of nutrients,
heat, and fresh water. Therefore, understanding the factors influencing that
connection will help predict current and future regional ocean conditions.
Analysis of satellite altimetry, coastal sea level, theory, and a model will be
used to: determine the origin and dynamics of the low-frequency pressure head
that drives flow through the Bering Strait into the Arctic; understand the
origin and basic dynamics of the interannual sea level and flow on the wide
Bering Sea shelf; and determine the low-frequency variability of volume, heat,
and fresh water flux of the Alaskan Coastal Current. A wealth of along-track
satellite altimeter data available from TOPEX/Poseidon and Jason1,2,3 (TPJ123)
will be used to address the question of what drives the Bering Sea pressure
head. Preliminary analysis suggests that a major contributor to the low-
frequency Bering Strait pressure head originates on the Gulf of Alaska
continental shelf. This contribution is communicated along the Gulf of Alaska
coastal wave guide, through Unimak Pass in the Aleutian Arc, onto the shallow
Bering Sea shelf wave guide, and then through the Bering Strait. A second factor
is the interannual and lower frequency signal generated on the Bering Sea shelf.