* 1740374
* I-Corps: Software for Aircraft Design and Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Chunpei Cai, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 04/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact and/or commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to
implement a software package can improve aircraft designs, especially for high
altitude, high wind speed conditions. Aircraft design is interdisciplinary, and
important considerations include aerodynamic load computations and external
surface design. There are many physical factors and parameters that must be
considered in different design stages, such as, 1). Fast conceptual or
preliminary designs with approximate parameter estimations; 2). Prototype
development; 3) Optimizations. An improved development of an aircraft design can
create many benefits, e.g., optimal control surfaces can enhance
maneuverability; save long term airplane operation cost; and improve the missile
strike accuracy. This software package offers fast and accurate estimations on
different performances from the size, geometry, numbers, and locations of small
aircraft control surfaces. The package can help aerospace design engineers to
perform fast preliminary designs with correct inclusions of physical parameters
as well as to perform accurate computations for late stage optimizations. The
product may significantly reduce demands on labor, time, space, materials and
devices compared to current design methods.

This I-Corps project further develops an improved Computational Fluid Dynamics
(CFD) modeling software based on groups of air molecules and their collective
behaviors. This overcomes limitations of most CFD packages, which assume dense
gas flows, when applied to high altitude applications where air is dilute and
rarefication effects should be considered. The process developed here also
overcomes typical limitations of single molecule dynamics where the simulation
results are accurate but slow, making them impractical for most engineering
applications. The simulation techniques developed here can be fast and have
rarefication effects properly included. By using this proposed software
packages, accurate databases can be established, with many combinations of size,
shape, locations, and number of control surfaces. Interpolation functions will
be incorporated in the package as well to further increase the computation
speed.