* 1740865
* Analytical Techniques for Studying On-Demand Shared-Use Mobility
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Yafeng Yin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 07/31/2020
* USD 354,941.00

The proliferation of smart mobile devices has given rise to on-demand economy,
which aims to effectively bring together consumers and suppliers with very low
transaction costs. As a typical example of on-demand economy, ride-sourcing
companies, such as Uber and Lyft, are transforming the taxi industry and the way
we travel in cities. The companies provide ride-hailing applications that
intelligently source private car owners who drive their own vehicles to provide
taxi services for profit to riders. These companies have been successful, but
have created controversy. This controversy arises due to regulations in terms of
price, entry and service quality that are imposed on the taxis while
comparatively fewer regulatory requirements have been imposed on ride-sourcing
companies. Unfair competition is argued particularly by cab drivers and their
employers. The success of ride-sourcing services has thus created doubt about
the efficacy of regulating the taxi industry; it challenges the very premise
behind regulation in this industry. This grant will develop methodologies and
tools for analyzing the structure and competition of taxi markets with ride-
sourcing services and deriving insights on their regulation. The grant will
provide timely support for the government agencies of many cities to better
understand the impacts and implications of ride-sourcing companies and develop
policies to guide their deployment. The research results can also shed light on
the analysis and management of other types of on-demand economy and other
emerging urban mobility services such as car sharing and ridesharing. This grant
will involve students at all levels and traditionally underrepresented students,
creating interactive, virtual environments for in-class use. Additionally,
materials related to an on-demand economy and innovative urban mobility services
will be developed to enhance existing courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will be conducted in two main thrusts. The first aims to develop an
analytical framework to investigate optimal regulation regimes of a taxi market
with ride-sourcing companies under simplified aggregate or macroscopic settings.
Representing the matchings between customers and drivers by an exogenous
matching function, the equilibrium properties of an aggregate taxi market will
be examined under different market structures to derive insights on whether it
is necessary or how to regulate the market. The aggregate model will be extended
to network and dynamic contexts to better capture the spatial and temporal
variability of the supply and demand of taxi services. The second thrust
develops an agent-based simulation and a simulated test bed to provide a better
understanding of the working mechanisms of ride-sourcing platforms, validate the
analytical results obtained from developed models, and test various regulations
and policies for more complex cases that are analytically intractable. If
successful, this grant will advance the knowledge of and analysis capabilities
for taxi markets. It will enrich the literature of transportation systems
analysis, network modeling and agent-based simulation and modeling.