* 1740444
* Geological and Paleoanthropological Data Harmonization Workshop
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Christopher Campisano, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2019
* USD 49,978.00

Research findings from one project or site are usually more informative about
underlying phenomena when they can be compared with data from other relevant
research sites. To be meaningful, such comparisons may require shared
vocabulary, methods, and data formats, in addition to collaboration across
research groups. This field-based workshop will bring together geologists and
paleoanthropologists to discuss best practices and protocols for comparing data
across research sites, using several Pliocene and early Pleistocene hominin
fossil locations in the Awash basin of Ethiopia. The workshop will also generate
new research questions for future collaborative projects that span beyond
individual project boundaries. Participants will include graduate students,
early career scientists, international scholars, and groups underrepresented in
STEM disciplines. A component of this workshop will contribute to the NSF-
supported PaleoCore project by helping to synthesize and standardize geological
mapping data and creating a template that can be used by any other geological
project. This award is co-funded by the Office of International Science and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major impediment to the study of human
origins and evolution has been that field studies are often conducted within the
bounds of spatially restricted project areas. These project area boundaries are
rarely based on broader ecological or geological constraints, and these
limitations impede the formulation of overarching research questions that are
critical for understanding hominin evolution and its context over larger scales
of time and space. For geologists, conducting inter- and intraregional
comparisons can be challenging as they do not always have direct knowledge of
information from adjacent research project areas boundaries across which
outcrops are contiguous. As a result, researchers have not effectively and
comprehensively addressed broader regional-scale research questions. This
workshop reflects the idea that substantial progress could be made in
understanding the geological context of human evolution through better
communication, collaborative work, and transparent data sharing. No one
location/research project in the lower Awash River valley preserves a complete
and continuous sequence of Pliocene and early Pleistocene sediments. When
combined, however, they encompass an impressive temporal and spatial coverage of
early hominin habitats within a complex rifting environment. There is tremendous
potential to use the combined record from these project areas to evaluate how
rifting has evolved and to explore the interplay between climate, tectonics,
hominin evolution, and paleoecology in the Afar. The workshop will also result
in a report that discusses best practices for planning and conducting research
across separate but related research sites.