* 1740291
* E2CDA: Type II: Collaborative Research: Nanophotonic Lithium Niobate platform for next generation energy efficient and ultrahigh bandwidth optical interconnect
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Joseph M. Kahn, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2020
* USD 240,000.00

High performance computing systems and data centers dissipate a large amount of
power, much of which is spent on data transmission. Optical technology is well
poised to increase the efficiency of data transfer, however it brings along new
types of energy losses associated with devices responsible for converting the
information from the electrical domain, used for computation, to the optical
domain, used for communication. This program will overcome this hurdle and will
enable realization of efficient and compact electrical-to-optical converters.
The program addresses topics related to optical communications, material
science, computer modeling, nanotechnology, and electronics, and therefore
represents a unique training ground for students at all levels. To engage a
wider audience, the team members will prepare public lectures focused on
discussing the science and technology used to realize the communication systems
that modern society heavily relies on. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is development of highly integrated, micrometer scale, lithium-niobate
electro-optic modulators, that have the potential to enable large communication
rates with minimal energy consumption. This will allow for efficient data
transfer that could meet demanding requirements of future high performance
computing systems. The proposed program will advance the state of the art of
optoelectronic devices, will explore new device concepts and system
architectures, will develop nanofabrication techniques suitable for realization
of integrated modulators, and will develop new communication methods.