* 1740772
* I-Corps: Fluid Collection and Transfer Safety Device
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Michael Schaffer, Texas Tech University Health Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 09/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is focused on
improving occupational safety for workers during the collection and transfer of
potentially infectious or contaminated fluids such as umbilical cord blood or
environmental water to test tubes for transportation to the laboratory. This
fluid collection and transfer technology reduces fluid splash and splatter
during fluid collection and eliminates the need for a needle and syringe system
during transfer thereby eliminating haphazard and dangerous methods currently in
use. These procedures are thereby rendered safer by reducing the risk of
potentially infectious fluid exposures and by reducing the risk of needle stick
injuries. There is considerable commercial opportunity due to the intensity of
interest in improving the occupational safety of staff and personnel involved in
the large number of fluid collection and transfer procedures taking place daily.

This I-Corps project proposes to develop an inexpensive and safe technology for
collecting and transferring potentially infectious or contaminated fluids to
test tubes. The system consists of a collection vessel with a wide opening to
easily collect fluids from various sources and a guide tube assembly (consisting
of a guide tube with a recessed needle installed) which is clipped into to the
vessel. Laboratory tubes are filled with fluid in the vessel in a clean, quick,
efficient and safe manner by inserting the laboratory tube into the guide tube.
As a result, the worker can complete the procedure without the need for removing
the stopper from the vacuum tube (reducing mess and contamination) and without
the need for an exposed needle (reducing risk of percutaneous injury). This
project is focused on workers involved in these commonplace fluid transfer
procedures and the administrative staff concerned with protecting these workers
and reducing liability (and cost) for their institutions.