* 1740506
* ISS:  Collaborative Research:  Thermally activated directional mobility of vapor bubbles in microgravity using microstructured surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Vinod Narayanan, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 09/30/2023
* USD 195,992.00

This study will enable the mobility of vapor bubbles in the absence of gravity-
driven buoyancy from surfaces experiencing boiling. The research team will fly a
slightly modified version of a flight hardware package called the Pore Formation
and Mobility Investigation (PFMI) furnace aboard the International Space Station
(ISS). The inability of vapor bubbles to detach from a surface has long impeded
the implementation of efficient phase-change heat dissipation from electronics
components in space. The research team's efforts are based on a novel asymmetric
surface micro-structure that produces movement of vapor bubbles without the use
of externally applied forces. The textured surfaces are in the form of repeating
millimetric-scale asymmetric ratchets with 30-60 degree faces. The hypothesis to
be tested is that such structured surfaces provide mobility to vapor mass in
boiling for electronics thermal management under adverse terrestrial
orientations and microgravity environments, thereby mitigating premature
burnout. The potential to affect passive motion of vapor bubbles in variable
gravity environments, as well as in adversely oriented heated surfaces could
have far reaching benefits. The long-term goal is to develop a simple, passive,
self-regulating micro-structured surface technology for heat sinks used in
consumer electronics and aircraft electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ISS
experiment design, development, and implementation will be pursued in
conjunction with CASIS implementation partner TBE, leveraging the aerospace
contractor's extensive flight experiment expertise. The specific objectives are
three-fold: to verify lateral bubble motion observed in microgravity flight
experiments aboard the ISS lab, to perform ground-based experiments and analysis
to validate/ refine an analytical model, and to explore terrestrial
applications. Sealed square cross-sectioned ampoules inserted into the PFMI will
be reconfigured to accommodate a planar heated ratcheted surface. The ampoule
design will be guided by terrestrial experiments in a modified open-ended
channel facility. High-speed visualization and sensor measurements in ISS and
terrestrial environments will be generated as a part of the project. These data
can be used by computational experts in the heat transfer community as
validation cases for numerical simulations of boiling. The data and video images
obtained from ISS and terrestrial experiments will be disseminated on NASA's
Physical Science Informatics (PSI) data repository for experiments performed on
the ISS. Apart from providing an avenue for graduate student mentoring, the
project will enable the participation of under-represented undergraduate
students through the McNair scholar program at UCD and the Alabama Space Grant
program at Auburn.