* 1740908
* Conference: "From Computational Biophysics to Systems Biology 2017" (CBSB2017) to be held on May 18-20, 2017 at the University of Cincinnati in Cincinnati, OH
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2018
* Ruxandra Dima, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 03/31/2018
* USD 6,000.00

This award will support participation of students and postdoctoral researchers
in the conference "From Computational Biophysics to Systems Biology 2017"
(CBSB2017) to be held at the University of Cincinnati on May 18-20, 2017.
Systems biology seeks to understand complex biological processes by looking into
the machinery of cells. Because cellular processes are often controlled by
interactions which are formed and broken on a micro- or millisecond time scale,
computational biophysics tools can complement systems biology experiments by
tracing these transient interactions. The conference will bring together
researchers from multiple disciplines by providing a platform for exchanging
information on current trends in computational biophysics and systems biology,
for establishing collaborations, and for obtaining a detailed understanding of
cells at a molecular level. The conference will include a diverse group of
invited speakers and strongly encourages participation of female and
underrepresented minority students.

CBSB2017 will include in-depth discussion of cutting-edge research results
obtained by international scientists at all levels in their careers. The meeting
will include 100-120 participants. Fifteen keynote and invited speakers will
discuss recent algorithmic developments and present successful applications of
high-performance computing in biological science. Students and postdoctoral
researchers submitting the best five abstracts will be selected for young
investigator awards and will be invited to give oral presentations. In addition,
ten contributed talks and the poster session will provide early-career
participants the opportunity to discuss their ongoing research in the context of
the conference. By educating a diverse group of early-career participants,
including female and underrepresented minority researchers, and by providing a
forum for young scientists to present their research into the molecular workings
of cells, the workshop will assist in training the next generation of
computational scientists to solve fundamental problems in biophysics.

This project is co-funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology, Molecular
Biophysics and Cellular Dynamics and Function Programs in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.