* 1740761
* TRIPODS: Topology, Geometry, and Data Analysis (TGDA@OSU):Discovering Structure, Shape, and Dynamics in Data
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Tamal Dey, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project will advance the methodological and theoretical foundations of data
analytics by considering the geometric and topological aspects of complex data
from mathematical, statistical and algorithmic perspectives, thus enhancing the
synergy between the Computer Science, Mathematics, and Statistics communities.
Furthermore, this project will benefit a range of impactful scientific areas
including medicine, neuronanatomy, machine learning, geographic information
systems, mechanical engineering designs, and political science. The research
products will be implemented and disseminated through software packages and
tutorials, allowing widespread application by industrial and academic
practitioners. Through this project, the PIs will develop curricula for cross-
disciplinary, undergraduate and graduate education. There is already extant data
science curriculum offered jointly between Statistics and Computer Science and
Engineering at The Ohio State University (OSU), including the recent Data
Analytics undergraduate major, providing a platform to develop new courses and
an opportunity to engage future industry leaders in basic research.
Additionally, this project aims to develop partnerships with the Translational
Data Analytics and the Mathematical Biosciences Institutes at OSU, as well as
other internal and external research and education centers. Plans for workshops
and summer schools are included for outreach and training
purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past few decades, a large number of
models, methods, and algorithmic frameworks have been developed for data
science. However, as data become increasingly more complex, the field faces new
challenges. In particular, the non-Euclidean nature, the higher order
connectivity, the hidden global cues, and the dynamics regulating the data pose
further challenges to existing methods. This project will explore and leverage
the geometric and topological structures inherent in the data to tackle some of
these problems. The main aims are to discover, model and reveal information in
the form of (i) structures in data, (ii) shapes from data, and (iii) dynamics
underlying data. This project leverages concepts from mathematical areas of
differential and algebraic topology and geometry, applied statistics and
combinatorics, and computational areas of algorithms, graph theory, and
statistical/machine learning. Research in geometric and topological data
analysis has brought forth the need to recast and reinvestigate classical
concepts in statistics and mathematics in the context of finite data,
approximations, and noise. This project investigates explicit or hidden
structures behind data, such as cluster trees, which are the basis for
understanding and efficient processing of data. Additionally, the PIs aim to
model the precise shape behind data globally or locally, which are essential for
providing a platform where various statistical analyses can be carried out.
Particular examples include the shape space of surface models and the tree space
of phylogenetic trees. Finally, this project will consider dynamics in the data,
where the interplay between temporal and topological/geometric features can lead
to deeper insights. All of these areas will inevitably be enriched by new
applications.