* 1740531
* I-Corps: Enabling Electronic Design using Data Intelligence
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Peng Li, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 09/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project stems from its
data intelligence approach to empower electronic design automation. The
semiconductor industry provides vital hardware backbone of the information
technology age through an extremely wide range of integrated circuits (ICs) in
computing devices and consumer electronics. Modern IC development process is
bottlenecked by growing chip design complexity, e.g. measured by large device
count and functionality diversity, and ever-demanding requirements on computing
performance and power/energy efficiency. Advanced IC manufacturing processes are
costly, and yet have unavoidable process variations, making fabricated chips
susceptible to failures. With its revenue reaching $7.8 billion in 2015, the
electronic design automation (EDA) industry supplies indispensable tools and
methodologies that make IC design possible. The potential market and societal
impact of the proposed EDA innovation is substantial. This technology can help
semiconductor and chip design companies develop integrated circuits of improved
performance and robustness with a reduced time-to-market and development
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project demonstrates novel machine
learning algorithms targeting electronic design automation. As the complexity of
integrated circuits scales up rapidly, the need for smart design tools is
prominent. The EDA industry is in the early phase of rapid integration of
machine learning algorithms into commercial IC design flows. The learning
methods focused in this project significantly improve the accuracy of
statistical regression and classification over the current-state-of-the-art, and
offer the much needed understanding of the underlying structure of the data.
Built upon the focused machine learning algorithms, the targeted EDA technology
can efficiently process simulation or measured performance data of existing chip
designs, and intelligently learn the complex hidden relationships between
performance specifications, design parameters, and manufacturing conditions. As
a result, it offers a powerful data science solution to IC design optimization,
verification, and debug. Implemented as high-performance parallel software
design tools, the technology will bring the power of machine learning to the
field of electronic design.