* 1740235
* E2CDA: Type I: Collaborative Research: Nanophotonic Neuromorphic Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Tarek El-Ghazawi, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2021
* USD 552,897.00

With this program, the National Science Foundation has challenged the scientific
community to help solve the problem of energy efficient computing. Data centers
around the world spend almost equal amount of overhead power in cooling and
power conversion for every Watt of computation. As society's appetite for
information continues to grow, data centers will eventually consume a
significant portion of the world's electricity. Today, the entire information
technology industry relies on digital electronics, i.e. electrons carrying
digital bits, which impose a barrier for how efficient a computational task can
be, regardless of how brilliantly software routines can be engineered. This
project will explore the physics of lightwaves to craft a "photonic" processor
that breaks that efficiency barrier. This interdisciplinary endeavor will
attempt to generate foundational science which will support future innovation in
the tech industry. To the end of help building the workforce for the future, the
investigators will continue their commitments in mentoring graduate and
undergraduate students, and support broadening participation of women,
minorities and underrepresented groups through STEM outreach, and NSF REU
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach unites neuromorphic (neural network-
inspired) architectures, nanophotonic devices, and emerging fabrication
platforms. The technical challenge requires vertical integration of new optical
devices, logic units, and control software. It utilizes diverse expertise of
faculty members in nanophotonic devices, photonic systems and computer
engineering. Specifically, the key points of innovation will include: 1) ultra-
efficient electro-optic modulators that will act as neurons at the nanoscale; 2)
reconfigurable hardware interconnection fabric on-chip that uses light as
information carrier; and 3) creation of control software and benchmarks that are
required to orient the project within the broader field of efficient computing.
A strong experimental thrust to design, build, and demonstrate these proposed
systems will serve to reduce the risk of development of this technology and pave
the way for other researchers to join the emerging field of nanophotonic
neuromorphic computing.