* 1740941
* NSF CPS: Student Travel Grant Cyber-Physical Systems Week 2017
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2017,10/31/2017
* Anthony Rowe, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 10/31/2017
* USD 30,000.00

The proposal is to enable students from educational institutions in the United
States to attend the CPSWeek 2017 collection of conferences, which are to be
held April 18-21, 2017, in Pittsburgh, PA. CPSWeek is an annual international
multi-conference for Cyber-Physical Systems, comprising five major multi-day
conferences, five one-day workshops, and four one-day tutorials. CPSWeek is the
premier conference for cyber physical systems research, and and this year's
event will bring more than 700 researchers and attendees. The conferences moves
from country to country each year. Attending the conference will provide
students with a unique opportunity to listen and learn from the keynote
speeches, presentations, posters and demos on cutting edge topics on cyber-
physical systems, and to network with both leaders and other young researchers
in this area. This is the tenth in the series of CPSWeek
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CPS research is expected to have positive
societal impacts in many areas, including transportation, energy, agriculture,
water/sewage treatment, environmental management and manufacturing systems.
These systems must operate safely, dependably, securely, efficiently and respond
to events in real time. A key feature of CPS research is the requirement to
cooperate across disciplines such as computer science, computer architecture and
hardware, material science and sensor design, software engineering, networking,
and control engineering. In this inherently interdisciplinary field, where
collaborations are essential, meeting other researchers is especially important.
Strong participation in this event, especially among students (our next
generation of researchers) is important to maintaining and advancing CPS
research in the US. The proposal includes a mechanism for student selection
based on a research statement and letter from student department. Priority will
be given to under represented minority students studying in the US and to those
not presenting at the conference.