* 1741441
* BIGDATA: IA: Harnessing Language and Interaction Dynamics at Multiple Scales to Maximize the Benefits of Group Interaction
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Claire Cardie, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,007,479.00

The Internet has enabled new kinds of interaction among people at a wide variety
of scales, ranging from small groups to global social networks. The data arising
from these new forms of interaction have been challenging to integrate because
of how they span this wide range of scales; yet without this integration, we
cannot understand how micro-level group interactions build up to macro-scale
behavior or how macro-level factors shape small group interaction. A key data-
science challenge is to bridge this gap between the micro- and macro-levels; and
a crucial but relatively unexplored part of this challenge resides in the lack
of conceptually useful models and techniques at the intermediate scales in
between. This project investigates online social interaction data at different
levels of scale, and develops methods for bridging the extremes by taking into
account not just the global scales but also the intermediate meso-scale
interaction (constituting interactions among hundreds or thousands of
participants). Developing methods for handling the meso-level of data not only
poses scientifically rich questions in its own right but also allows for
transformative theory building across micro- and macro-level phenomena.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project brings together researchers from a wide range
of backgrounds to develop new ways of understanding and designing online
interaction across different levels of scale. The research seeks to identify new
forms of sub-structure that arise as the scale of the group increases to meso-
scale and on to global scale; to identify new ways of maintaining an effective
flow of ideas and processes for reaching consensus when the number of
participants in a discussion grows signi&amp;#64257;cantly; and to develop
techniques for addressing the increased potential for conflict and polarization
when people can participate at a boundary between recognizability and anonymity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team combines multiple research perspectives,
with broad expertise in analyzing social interaction data and developing models
of social network dynamics; opinion extraction, summarization and argument
mining; modeling conversational behavior; large-scale data analysis of
pragmatics of language, including persuasion and information spread; and
computer-mediated communication, social computing and human-computer
interaction. In addition to the underlying research questions, the project also
seeks to provide new knowledge that companies and organizations building meso-
scale platforms can adopt to maximize the effectiveness of their sites; to add
to research infrastructure through the release of datasets, code, and working
applications; to impact education through the interdisciplinary training of
graduate and undergraduate students, including students from underrepresented
groups; and more generally to create mechanisms that can make online
interactions more productive.