* 1741935
* CAREER: Design and Development of Zwitterionic Conjugated Polyelectrolyte Platform as Next-Generation Biomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 02/22/2017,06/30/2022
* Gang Cheng, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 06/30/2022
* USD 483,757.00

Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award by the Biomaterials program in the
Division of Materials Research to University of Akron is to study conjugated
polymers that have attracted significant interests for different applications to
improve the performance of bio-electronic devices. However, conventional
conjugated polymers are not able to provide all required functions. The goal of
this project is to address key challenges of conjugated polymers for different
applications by developing a new zwitterionic conjugated polyelectrolyte
platform. This new biomaterial platform could have potential to be translated
into clinical applications to benefit public health. The proposed project
includes multidisciplinary knowledge from chemistry, physics, materials science
and biology to device fabrication and testing. Thus, proposed activities will
provide excellent educational and outreach opportunities for K-12 students and
teachers, undergraduates and graduate students. The PI plans to expose K-12
students and their teachers to cutting edge and multidisciplinary biotech and
biomedical techniques. The core of the proposed education plan is
project/problem-based learning, since it is a more effective learning approach.
Students, with an emphasis on underrepresented minorities and women, will be
actively recruited to conduct research in this project. The proposed work will
help promote the development of a high-tech environment in northeast Ohio
through this science and engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is to develop a versatile zwitterionic conjugated polyelectrolyte (CP)
platform to address key challenges of conjugated polymers for biomedical
applications. Zwitterionic CPs, consisting of conjugated backbones and
multifunctional zwitterionic side chains, will integrate all essential functions
and tunable properties into one material. Zwitterionic materials will gain
tunable conducting, optical and antimicrobial properties through conjugated
backbones. Low-biocompatible conjugated polymers will obtain outstanding
biocompatibility, controllable antifouling properties and sensitivity to
environmental stimuli via side chains. The proposed work will provide valuable
insights into polymer chemistry and physics of both conjugated and zwitterionic
polymers. It will foster a new multidisciplinary research area in the field of
biomaterials. With this project, the PI plans to build a set of design rules to
guide in creating advanced biomaterials for the future. The proposed research
activities will provide great educational and outreach opportunities to
stimulate K-12 students' interest in science and technology, and motivate
students to face the challenges of interdisciplinary research activities. The
concepts, activities and results from this research will be incorporated into
undergraduate and graduate courses.