* 1741660
* EFRI NewLAW: Mid-infrared topological plasmon-polaritons with 2D materials
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Jelena Vuckovic, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,000,000.00

The mid-infrared spectrum is a technologically important spectral range used for
identifying molecular fingerprints in biology and chemistry, atmospheric
transparent windows for free-space communications, and thermal-related events.
The proposed research consists of establishing non-trivial topological (or
surface-related) phenomena in collective plasmon-polaritonic excitations. This
will then create a platform for novel nanophotonic components (waveguides,
splitters, and others) which can support non-reciprocal and ideally
unidirectional wave-propagation in the mid-infrared frequency. So far, all
designs of photonic topological insulators involve bulk ferromagnetic materials,
metals and dielectrics. The characteristics of these metamaterials are
predefined by design and non-tunable. Our approach is to utilize electrically
tunable quantum materials and their plasmon-polaritonic modes. For example, the
directionality of the non-reciprocal plasmon-polaritons mode can be electrically
controlled on-the-fly. If successful, this research would deliver integrated
mid-infrared nanophotonics solutions, such as optical modulators, isolators and
routers, on-chip mid-infrared lasers, and on-chip sensing of chiral
biomolecules. On enhancing both education and outreach, this project will
implement a three-pronged broadening participation program. First, it will
employ a unified plan of action for the participating PIs to incorporate quantum
materials nanophotonics into current undergraduate curricula, including classes
in quantum materials, photonics, spectroscopy and processing. Secondly, the
research team will organize and establish a summer experience workshop for K-12
students in the local communities. Third, the team will organize summer school
and additional scientific workshops on quantum materials nanophotonics. These
activities will be closely coordinated with the institution and reported to NSF
annually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-trivial Berry phase in its ground state
electronic wavefunction has recently inspired its experimental observation in 2D
materials, such as valley Hall transport and circular dichroism in gapped Dirac
materials. However, it was predicted that the underlying Berry phase of the
electronic ground state should also imbue the collective electronic excitations
with a completely new non-reciprocal character known as Berry plasmons. This
project will investigate two fundamental questions: 1) How are the collective
modes, including plasmons-polaritons of topological materials, impacted by the
non-trivial topology of their single-particle electronic states? 2) How can we
harness topological plasmons for creating new optoelectronic devices? To answer
these questions, we propose a joint theoretical and experimental program, with
the following goals; perform proof-of-principle experiments to verify the
predicted collective excitation, Berry plasmons, and demonstrate a suite of mid-
infrared nanophotonics components such as energy efficient non-reciprocal
optical modulators and routers, on-chip mid-infrared pump and probe lasers, and
integrated platform for sensing of chiral biomolecules. The program integrates
condensed matter physics, materials and electromagnetics modeling, advanced
inverse photonic system design, state-of-the-art 2D materials device
fabrication, advanced hyperspectral imaging with near field infrared techniques,
and mid-infrared integrated photonics components. This 4 years program involves
University of Minnesota, Columbia University, Stanford University and University
of Pennsylvania.