* 1741962
* Workshop: Cultural Competency for Disaster Risk Reduction and Recovery
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Albert Faas, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2018
* USD 18,165.00

This award supports participant costs for a workshop and panel of
anthropologists and anthropologically-informed humanitarian aid practitioners at
the United Nations Global Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction in Cancun,
Mexico, May 22-26, 2017. After a half-century of research on the human impacts
of disasters, anthropologists know that it is necessary to take local cultures
into account to reduce post-disaster suffering and speed recovery for disaster-
affected communities. However, these well-documented findings are almost never
implemented in disaster planning. Therefore, this workshop convenes a group of
anthropologists and anthropology-minded practitioners to communicate
anthropological disaster science findings directly to international policy
makers concerned with disaster response and recovery. At the same time, by
investigating the contexts of disaster policy-making itself, the workshop
provides the anthropologists an opportunity to learn from the policy makers why
local culture is consistently omitted from disaster planning.

Convened by the American Anthropological Association, the workshop brings
together for the first-time practitioners, researchers, and academics whose work
spans the fields of cultural anthropology, risk perception and communication,
disaster risk reduction, recovery management, post-disaster needs assessment,
reconstruction, and resettlement. Drawing on extensive fieldwork to theorize the
persistent issues surrounding the role of culture in disaster policy and
practice, workshop participants will share: (a) lessons learned from past
disaster cases; (b) knowledge about best practices; and (c) action steps to
advance the recognition and inclusion of cultural priorities and values among
groups vulnerable to or impacted by disaster. These action steps will include
strategies for how to adaptive capacity in contexts of disaster risk reduction
and recovery planning. Additionally, the team will conduct a rapid ethnography
of the UN Global Platform and the reactions to anthropological theory and
application and work collaboratively to conduct a thematic analysis of documents
and public statements produced as part of the Global Platform. Outcomes of will
include: a roundtable presentation at the annual meetings of the American
Anthropological Association; publication of a report in Anthropology News and in
Natural Hazards Observer that identifies key themes and opportunities that
emerge from the workshop; a paper that summarizes key themes of disaster
anthropology and the implementation of cultural competency, and which critically
assesses their potentiality within other disaster and risk reduction policy
arenas; and the development of a policy brief outlining the role of cultural
competency in risk reduction and disaster response.