* 1741306
* BIGDATA: IA: Predictive Analytics of Driver's Engagement for Injury Prevention
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Santiago Ontanon, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,015,993.00

Over 30,000 people are killed in motor vehicle crashes on US roadways every
year. Driver distraction from secondary in-vehicle activities, particularly
among young drivers, has emerged as a major cause of motor vehicle crashes. A
substantial amount of research has been focused on analyzing small sets of
naturalistic driving or simulated data to study a small number of features for
detecting the driver's engagement. However, many meaningful dependencies and
patterns can only be discovered by large collections of data. In this project,
the goal is leveraging the two petabytes federal database of naturalistic
driving data to develop predictive analytics for detecting a driver's
disengagement from the driving tasks in order to provide alerts to drivers and
reduce the risk of motor vehicle crashes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
data pre-processing techniques are investigated for the large volume of
heterogeneous data with over 100 variables in Strategic Highway Research Program
2 (SHRP 2). Two scalable predictive analytics algorithm families based on
instance-based learning and heterogeneous network mining for predictive modeling
are developed. In addition, a novel distributed computing infrastructure to
support the scalable predictive analytics in performing pattern mining of
driving behavior analysis, modeling, and prediction are developed. The research
outcomes of this project shed a significant amount insight into current work of
injury prevention due to motor vehicle crashes. The project extends the
capability of machine learning, sensor informatics, and driving behavior
analytics. The integrated education plan includes incorporating the research
findings in courses offered at the Master of Science program in Health
Informatics. The outreach plan involves organizing workshops, conferences, and
seminars to disseminate the research outcomes.