* 1741666
* EFRI NewLAW: Voltage-tuned, topologically-protected magnon states for low loss microwave devices and circuits
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Kristen Buchanan, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,997,756.00

This project focuses on the development of voltage-controlled magnetic materials
for low loss microwave devices and circuits, including isolators and circulators
which are key components that allow one way signal propagation. A key innovation
of this program is the use of an organic-based magnetic material to construct
the microwave circuits, much in the same way that organic light-emitting diodes
(OLEDs) have allowed new display technologies. This approach leverages existing
infrastructure developed for commercial microwave magnetic devices. Given the
critical role those devices play in wireless communication and information
technology, the breadth and depth of the impact of this work will be
significant. Additionally, this research program will form the foundation for
broader efforts at increasing public engagement in science via local outreach
activities that are designed to enhance diversity programs in STEM across the
four participating university campuses (Colorado State University, University of
Iowa, Ohio State University, and Yale University). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on the development of novel approaches to achieving/enhancing
non-reciprocity in microwave devices. Specifically, we have defined two parallel
and synergistic Tracks that exploit the existing infrastructure surrounding
magnetic-based microwave devices as a springboard for the development of novel
device architectures based on high-fidelity self-biased magnonic crystals (Track
1) and voltage-control via the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (Track 2). In
both of these architectures, topologically protected propagating states will be
exploited to dramatically enhance non-reciprocity in microwave devices such as
circulators, isolators, and non-reciprocal filters. These projects are
critically enabled by a recent materials breakthrough in which thin films of a
room temperature organic-based magnet have been shown to exhibit magnetic
ordering temperatures of over 600 K, quality factors in excess of 8,000 for
magnetic resonance, conformal and low temperature deposition, and materials
stability under ambient conditions. These projects are individually impactful
and collectively synergistic, providing multiple paths to technological advances
that will transform the phase space for the design of non-reciprocal microwave
devices.