* 1741933
* Successful Pathways to Graduation in Chemistry &amp; Biochemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2024
* Robert Garner, University of The Incarnate Word
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 01/31/2024
* USD 999,746.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, the "Successful
Pathways to Graduation in Chemistry and Biochemistry" project is providing
support to low-income students with demonstrated financial need and academic
promise to succeed in STEM disciplines at the University of the Incarnate Word.
The project is funding 15 scholarships lasting four years for students who are
pursuing bachelor's degrees in chemistry or biochemistry. In addition to
financial support, students will participate in a comprehensive support program
called "Cardinal Chemistry Scholars (C2S)". The C2S program will provide key
resources to students, including peer and faculty mentoring, a supportive
community, research experience, and training to develop the hard and soft skills
they will need to be successful in college and in their professional careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will be recruited from both high school and
community college. In addition to scholarship assistance, this program will
provide students with evidence-based curricular and co-curricular experiences
designed to increase academic success as well as workplace and graduate school
readiness. Students will participate in development activities focused on
improving academic performance and confidence, building professional aptitude
and reasoning abilities, and learning about career and educational
opportunities. Industry partners will deliver career seminars, provide site
tours, and offer students internship and employment opportunities. A structured
peer-mentoring program will provide students with valuable academic guidance,
help with selecting courses, and a chance to pass on the benefits of the program
to STEM students who are newer to college. Experienced faculty mentors will
guide students through registration, help them overcome challenges, support
personal and professional development, explore career options, and guides
students through the graduate admission process. Participants will engage in
research on-campus to build skills in critical thinking, problem solving, and
workplace readiness. They will also be encouraged and supported to pursue
research experiences at major universities. Faculty will study the conditions
under which such curricular and co-curricular activities prove effective and
contribute to this body of knowledge through presentations and scholarly
publications.