* 1741748
* Building Capacity to Retain Underrepresented Students in STEM Fields
* EHR,DRL
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Arthur Powell, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 04/30/2018
* USD 174,396.00

The NSF invests in a number of programs targeting underrepresented populations
and institutions relative to its meeting its goals for broadening participation
in STEM. This workshop provides minority serving institutions with an
opportunity to engage in dialogue about effective ways to create, implement, and
evaluate models of intervention that will advance knowledge about retaining
underrepresented minorities in STEM fields. It will advance knowledge in life
science and the biosciences for K-12 and undergraduate students attending local
schools or eligible minority-serving institutions. The workshop will focus on
assisting minority serving institutions with use of research designs, and review
of best practices for intervention shown to be effective in helping
underrepresented student cope with chronic stresses that interfere with their
retention in STEM fields and careers. The target audience for the workshop will
be the participating institutions and their undergraduate students, in
partnership with local K-12 schools.

In collaboration with Quality Education for Minority and MERAssociates, Rutgers
University Newark will provide a unique setting to convene more than 100
participants to attend the workshop. The participants will include deans and/or
department chairs; STEM faculty; educational researchers, and institutional
representatives such as Vice Presidents of Academic Affairs, Provosts, or other
administrators. The participants will work in teams of 4-5 to address science
research topics and activities related to curriculum development, teacher
support, and student engagement. Outcomes from the workshops will provide
insights about successful strategies, areas of future research, and awareness
about the need for better intervention models that support underrepresented
minority students in STEM.