* 1741695
* Academic Intervention, Social Supports, and Scholarships for Engineering Transfer Students
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Neslihan Alp, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 08/31/2023
* USD 992,996.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (S-STEM) program, the Academic Intervention, Social Supports, and
Scholarships for Engineering Transfer Students project will support high-
achieving, low-income students with proved financial need at the University of
Tennessee Chattanooga (UTC). Over the course of this five-year project, twenty-
eight students will receive two-year scholarships and eight students will
receive three-year scholarships. This project aims to discuss the growing need
for chemical, civil, electrical, and mechanical engineers. In Tennessee and
elsewhere, engineering transfer students often arrive at four-year institutions
with many community college credits, but without the prerequisites needed to
take junior-level or major-specific courses. As a result, transfer students may
need four more years in college to complete the classes needed for graduation,
decreasing the likelihood that they will complete an engineering degree. The aim
of this project is to ensure that transfer students complete their UTC studies
within two years after transferring from a community college. The plan
incorporates mentorship, summer coursework, and summer boot camps to ensure a
successful transition. A Transfer Learning Community will provide students with
a peer support system and help them adjust to university life and overcome
academic challenges. A local advisory board for regional schools will help to
coordinate curricula among the schools. The project's emphasis on faculty
mentoring will help the project have a lasting impact on UTC practices. The
project also has the potential for positive impact on the local community
through strengthened industry ties and employment opportunities. This project is
significant in its potential to find and give best practices to guide four-year
institutions across the nation to support the success of transfer students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use a mixed methods study to compare
quantitative and qualitative data gathered for scholars versus non-scholar
transfer students, non-transfer students, and matched non-scholar transfer
students. The study will investigate five research questions: (1) Does taking
part in the Summer Boot Camp improve transfer students' academic performance and
likelihood of matriculation? (2) Does regular participation in peer tutoring
increase transfer students' academic performance and likelihood of
matriculation? (3) Which activities most reduce "transfer shock" among scholars?
(4) Which activities most improve career placement following graduation? (5) How
does the academic preparation affect a student's likelihood of retention and on-
time graduation? Information from this research study may increase understanding
of interventions, such as learning communities, in improving the academic
performance, retention rates and time to graduation for scholars compared to
non-scholars. Through the Community College Advisory Board and the research
study, this project aims to lay a foundation for a regional alliance that can
promote curricular alignment between UTC and area community colleges, supporting
a seamless engineering transfer pathway that may be replicable across the state
and nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.