* 1741918
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Unaccompanied Homeless Adolescents in New York City
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Michele Lamont, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 05/31/2019
* USD 11,840.00

This project will explore the experiences of the fastest growing but least
researched subgroup of America's homeless population: unaccompanied homeless
youth. This group consists of an estimated 1.6 - 1.7 million young people aged
14-24 who experience homelessness with no parent or guardian each year. This
study will generate a detailed understanding of their trajectories into
homelessness, their survival strategies, their social networks and
relationships, and their connection to - or avoidance of - institutions like
schools and shelters. This research will advance scholarship on poverty and
urban marginality in three ways. First, it will update the sociological portrait
of homelessness, to reflect the disproportionate - and growing - vulnerability
of children and youth to becoming unhoused. Second, it will investigate the
intimate ties between youth homelessness and several other urban social
problems, like incarceration and unemployment, showing how homelessness is an
important but overlooked factor implicated in the reproduction of urban poverty.
Third, the study will contribute to emerging debates about "deep" or "extreme"
poverty in the American city. Findings from this research will be disseminated
to multiple audiences, including sociologists, policy makers, and individuals
and organizations who work with and for unaccompanied homeless youth.
Unaccompanied homeless youth are often missed by policy interventions that
target poor teenagers through families or through neighborhoods. Likewise,
adolescents are often excluded from services aimed at homeless families and at
homeless adults. They also have different needs, vulnerabilities and
experiences. The study will develop a set of detailed policy recommendations
about how unaccompanied homeless youth can be more appropriately and effectively
served.

This study will be based in New York City, a city in which 1 out of every 8
children enrolled in a public school has experienced homelessness in the past
five years. Point-in-time counts estimate that between 2,700 and 7,000 young
people are homeless and unaccompanied on any given night. But the transitory,
hidden nature of this population means that we know little about their lives.
This study has four central research questions. First, what are the events and
trajectories that lead to young people becoming homeless and unaccompanied?
Second, what does daily survival entail, and do these techniques involve risks
or pose barriers to exiting homelessness? Third, how does homelessness affect
social relationships, including with family members and with peers, both
homeless and non-homeless? Lastly, what are the patterns of institutional
engagement and support in the lives of unaccompanied homeless teens? To answer
these questions, this research will use mixed qualitative methods to complement
existing quantitative research by scholars working in other fields. This
research will combine ethnographic fieldwork among unaccompanied homeless youth,
with 50 in-depth interviews with the same group, and 25 interviews with adult
professionals, including shelter staff, social workers, legal advocates and
teachers. This will yield a close and detailed portrait of the trajectories,
daily lives, experiences and needs of young people experiencing homelessness
alone.