* 1741611
* Encouraging Civil Engineering Retention by Increasing Community and Self-Efficacy
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Kevin Bower, Citadel Military College of South Carolina
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 04/30/2024
* USD 999,914.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (S-STEM) program, the "Encouraging Civil Engineering Retention by
Increasing Community and Self-Efficacy" project will support high-achieving,
low-income students with demonstrated financial need at The Citadel in South
Carolina. Throughout its five years, this project will fund twenty scholarships
for students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in Civil Engineering. The
project will also provide boot camp stipends for entering scholars, as well as
summer stipends and travel support for continuing scholars. The project will
seek to address the need to increase the number of STEM graduates with bachelor
degrees in civil engineering. A diverse pool of civil engineers is significant
for ensuring public safety and the efficient movement of people and goods, to
support a robust economy. This project aims to meet this need by recruiting
students to civil engineering, particularly students who are outside of the
traditional pools of engineering talent. The project has the potential to
increase the diversity of the civil engineering workforce and may bring new
perspectives to the civil engineering process itself. It also has the potential
to produce new insights into the impacts that changes to pedagogy and course
sequencing have on student performance, self-efficacy, and
persistence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this S-STEM Track 2 project is to
encourage persistence of diverse, high-achieving, low-income students in civil
engineering. Project objectives include attaining 85% persistence in civil
engineering and 75% persistence within the two S-STEM cohorts. Each cohort of
ten students will form a student academic community of practice. Cohort members
will be scheduled in the same courses, assigned to common dormitories, and
participate together in co-curricular seminars. Prior to their first and second
years, students will live on campus and complete Calculus I and Calculus II in
sections restricted to S-STEM students. During their second year of study,
students will complete Chemistry I and II in small, active-learning sections.
Professional mentorship, research, and internship opportunities will be provided
to enhance students' self-efficacy. The project aims to study the impacts of the
interventions on student self-efficacy, retention, and performance using
validated instruments and follow-up focus groups and interviews. The project has
the potential to develop theoretically grounded and empirically verified best
practices for retention of low-income, high-performing engineering
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.