* 1741691
* EFRI NewLAW: Non-reciprocal, topologically protected propagation using atomically thin materials for nanoscale devices
* ENG,EFMA
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2022
* Tony Heinz, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 10/31/2022
* USD 2,000,000.00

Reciprocity in optics can be described by the familiar observation: "If I can
see you, you can see me." This phenomenon stems from the fact that laws of
nature governing light and its interaction with matter on a microscopic level do
not prefer any particular direction of time. In other words, if we were to
hypothetically reverse the direction of time, the predictions of the laws of
nature would remain unaltered. Of course, at a macroscopic scale, this is not
the case as we know from experience that the arrow of time has a fixed
direction. It turns out that an external magnetic field can break the symmetry
of time even at the microscopic scale by picking a preferred direction of
propagation, which can lead to a break down of reciprocity. In current optical
devices, magnets are used to cause such a one-way propagation of light, which is
crucial for optical communications and the Internet. One goal of this project is
to achieve non-reciprocity of light without the use of magnets by using a new
class of materials, which are atomically thin. Such materials feature an
effective magnetic field due to their unique crystal structure and can be used
in lieu of an applied external magnetic field for one-way propagation of light.
This project aims to realize miniaturized optical devices and circuit elements
based on these novel materials, which will allow for faster optical switches and
defect-insensitive propagation on a reduced footprint. Such devices have the
potential to transform the optical telecommunication industry. During the course
of this project, the research team will provide science education and research
experiences in cutting-edge technologies to middle school, undergraduate and
graduate students, including those students from Historically Black Colleges and
Universities, in an effort to enhance the science and engineering workforce of
tomorrow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to realize on-chip,
non-reciprocal nanophotonic devices and circuit elements operating at optical
frequencies and topologically protected edge states for photons. Such devices
will feature novel functionalities such as reconfigurable one-way propagation
and steering of light. Non-reciprocal propagation of energy and information in a
time-independent and linear system requires broken time-reversal symmetry, which
can be achieved by an external magnetic field. We will achieve non-reciprocal
propagation at nanoscale in a magnetic-free way with the possibility of active
control by external stimuli. Our approach will employ atomically thin materials
such as transition metal dichalcogenides with unique electronic and optical
properties to achieve these goals. In these materials, which break inversion
symmetry, an effective magnetic field in the momentum-space called the Berry
curvature is present. Although no net Berry curvature is present in these
materials, electric control offers the possibility of spatially local time-
reversal breaking and non-reciprocal propagation. In addition, we will rely on
the strong light-matter interactions and non-linearity in these materials to
increase non-reciprocity and also to realize topologically protected edge states
of light. To this end, optical and plasmonic nano-cavities, which enhance light-
matter interactions, will be exploited. This research project will advance our
fundamental understanding of effective gauge-fields like Berry curvature in low-
dimensional materials and how strong light-matter interactions can be exploited
to achieve on-chip, reconfigurable non-reciprocity and topological states of
light-matter.