* 1741954
* Supporting Student Success and Increasing Diversity in Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2024
* Larry Clark, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 03/31/2024
* USD 999,350.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project will support high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need at university of Texas San
Antonio (UTSA). Throughout its five years, this project will fund 62
scholarships for students who are first-year and upper division students
majoring in computer science. Increasing the diversity of perspectives in the
nation's pool of computer science graduates is strategically important to the
nation's prosperity and welfare. Engagement of underrepresented female and
minority students in the computer science workforce is needed to help eliminate
implicit bias in the systems developed. A lack of role models and mentors,
failure to connect with other students and faculty, and low use of campus
resources pose challenges for students who are the first in their families to
pursue higher education. Difficulty with the transition to large, impersonal,
rigorous courses and financial stress pose added challenges. UTSA is the largest
minority-serving institution in South Texas and has a large first-generation
enrollment. The project will investigate the integration of evidence-based and
experience-based activities over multiple years, taking into account the needs
of the individual participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this S-STEM
Track 2 project is to increase the number of high-achieving, low-income students
majoring in computer science at the University of Texas San Antonio (UTSA) who
join the workforce or pursue advanced studies in computer science. The project
objectives include (a) developing new methods and surveys to better identify the
academic needs of individual students, (b) monitoring the academic progress of
each participant, and (c) integrating multiple activities based upon the
learning needs and progress of individual participants. Through research-based
and experience-based, student-centered educational activities, UTSA aims to
increase the retention of students majoring in computer science from 70% to 90%.
It also aims to improve the student graduation rate from 60% to 80%.
Personalized faculty and peer mentoring, individual tutoring, a week-long
orientation "jump start" program, biweekly group meetings, conference
attendance, and involvement in research projects will complement other high-
impact practices to support student engagement and success. The progress of each
student will be tracked. Individualized, early interventions will be initiated
to keep all scholars on track to complete their degrees and proceed to the
technical workforce or pursue advanced studies in computer science. Scholars
will be encouraged to participate in recruiting and outreach events to share
their own stories and provide role models for others. This combination of
activities has the potential to significantly improve the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students, and provide sustainable
solutions to advancing STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.