* 1741982
* Workforce Education: STEM Recruitment, Retention, and Realization
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2023
* Gerald Anhorn, Walla Walla Community College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 01/31/2023
* USD 649,800.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (NSF S-STEM) program and in
collaboration with regional industry partners, this project at Walla Walla
Community College (WWCC) in Washington will coordinate activities between its
Workforce Education and Transitional Studies departments to increase the
recruitment, retention, and realization of students in four science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) workforce education degree programs:
engineering, agriculture, energy, and water. Because graduates from these four
programs are in high demand by employers, this project is designed to impact
degree completion, advanced education and job placement for students. Due to the
demographics of the institution and the targeted recruitment of dual enrollment
high school students and adult basic education/career change seeking students,
the project will help to diversify the workforce. The project will generate
knowledge on the efficacy of courses that use the Integrated Basic Education and
Skills Training (I-BEST) model to facilitate degree completion at a rapid pace
with good student performance by providing contextualized instruction combined
with supplemental support in the classroom. Research will assess the
effectiveness of recruitment strategies for dual enrollment students and adult
basic education/career change seeking students. Research will also evaluate to
what extent the implemented retention strategies result in STEM degree
completion and placement in relevant STEM jobs and/or advanced STEM education.
The project will have a broad impact by (1) studying, developing, and
implementing effective strategies to recruit and enroll women, students of
Latina/o origin, and other traditionally underserved populations into STEM
workforce programs; (2) developing and evaluating the implementation of
coordinated, evidence-based practices that facilitate retention and completion
in STEM workforce education degree programs; and (3) disseminating the lessons
learned from the recruitment, retention, and realization strategies and
practices with the highest beneficial impacts to internal and external
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To increase the number of academically talented
students with demonstrated financial need who are retained in and complete a
program in engineering, agriculture, energy, or water, the project will focus on
combining financial support through scholarships with strategies that center on
(a) developing learning communities through two required courses on learning
strategies/human relations and job seeking skills, (b) regular advising by
Navigators who are experts in available support services, (c) mentoring by
faculty instructors, and (d) frequent opportunities for mentoring by and
interactions with science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
industry professionals. Targeted recruitment activities that will be implemented
include outreach to working farming families, outreach materials in Spanish
and/or that feature women in STEM trades and professions, and quarterly open
houses where STEM program demonstrations are promoted through community
partners.