* 1741934
* Supporting Science Students through Scholarships, Academic and Social Activities, and Reflective Journaling
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Andrew Morrison, Joliet Junior College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 01/31/2024
* USD 649,901.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project at Joliet
Junior College is designed to address the ever-increasing need in Illinois and
surrounding areas for highly qualified STEM professionals. It will add to the
local, regional, and national understanding of learning as it enhances student
retention, performance, graduation, and peer support networks. A structured
research study will be used to determine the impact of course specific tutoring,
mentoring, and reflective journaling among students in STEM courses. The project
will also assess and track the metacognitive skills that students use to advance
their scientific thinking. Data reflecting the activities will be used to
improve the program for all participants, as well as inform the academic
community through conference papers and presentations at national and regional
conferences. Each of these areas will be evaluated by an external evaluator
using surveys, rubrics, and performance in specific courses to gather both
quantitative and qualitative information about the project. Due to the
demographics of the institution and the targeted recruitment of women and other
underrepresented groups from both high schools and the college, the project will
help to diversify the workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To increase the number of
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who begin and
complete a STEM program of study, the college will integrate scholarships and
academic support with STEM faculty mentoring, reflective journaling, social
cohorts, hands-on experiential learning through relevant research projects, and
exposure to industry leaders and topics to provide scholars a pathway to success
in STEM fields. Involvement in STEM classes, increased faculty mentoring geared
to specific student needs, and reflective journals will encourage students to
embrace the STEM community and find their own identity within it, while
simultaneously learning how to mentor the next generation of scientists.
Information gathered during classes, mentoring, reflective journals, student
evaluations will inform the wider STEM community at the college, as well as
increase awareness of student group building within the college student academic
and support programs.