* 1741021
* Thermodynamics of Computation in Chemical and Biological Systems to be held August 14-16, 2017 at SFI
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* David Wolpert, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 06/30/2018
* USD 49,976.00

The workshop "Thermodynamics of computation in chemical and biological systems"
at the Santa Fe Institute (SFI) will explore the role of both thermodynamics and
computation in constraining biological processes, evolution, and metabolism. The
workshop will be held over two-and-a-half days investigating the connection
between thermodynamics and computation in a variety of topics including: pure
computer science, the statistical mechanics of computation, chemical computers,
the thermodynamics and computation of organisms. A synthesis of these topics
will be necessary to more fully understand the general features of the
thermodynamics of computation. In particular, understanding the fundamental
aspects of the computations and energetics of life explicitly requires a
treatment of each of the listed topics. Several graduate students and postdocs
will participate in the meeting and the presentations and discussions will
further their training and provide an array of new collaborations and
opportunities for them in their research. An SFI NSF REU student will be co-
mentored this summer on a project focused on the thermodynamics of biological
computation. In addition, two of the co-organizers will present the new ideas
discussed at the workshop to both the general public and scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will connect three sub-disciplines
- statistical physics, computation and biological and chemical computers - to
each other in an attempt to provide the field with deeper theoretical coherence
and connection. In particular, there is the need to migrate computer science and
statistical physics tools for use in biological and chemical computers, and in
turn, to use the biological and chemical systems to inspire new theoretical
questions and techniques.