* 1741355
* BIGDATA: F: Latent Structure and Dynamics of Big Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Dmitri Krioukov, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 908,000.00

Big data poses big challenges. Perhaps the biggest challenge is to extract small
but useful information from big noisy data. What approach should be used to do
that, and for what data, so that this extraction is scalable, and yields not
spurious artifacts but provably reliable predictive knowledge? Numerous data
science applications are blocked on these questions. For example, the prediction
and control of opinions, (fake) news, and (mis)information is a practical
problem that is becoming of increasingly high and broad impact these days of
pervasion of online social media into everyday human life. This particular
problem is largely blocked on general impossibility of disentangling those who
naturally bond with others like themselves from those influenced by peers in
social networks, except in some specific settings. The specific settings of this
project -- real networks with latent-space structure -- are exactly the settings
in which these theoretical and practical difficulties can be
resolved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will make a series of contributions
in two areas. First, it will resolve a long-standing problem of obtaining a
class of random graph models satisfying four requirements of realism: sparsity,
exchangeability, projectivity and unbiasedness/maximum-entropy. Within this
class, a set of graph-structural properties will be determined such that
unbiased random graphs that have these properties are proved to have latent-
geometric structure, thus rigorously linking discrete combinatorial structure of
random graphs to smooth geometry of latent manifolds. The framework that the
project will develop to prove this, will be quite general and applicable to
other types of big data. The properties responsible for latent geometricity of
random graphs are expected to characterize many real networks, meaning that such
networks will be guaranteed to have latent geometries. The second part of the
project will focus on developing scalable algorithms and software, with optimal
computational complexity scaling linearly with the data size, and with proved
accuracy guarantees, to learn the latent structure of a real network if the
network has it, and apply these algorithms to large real networks. The outcomes
of this latent-geometric learning will make it possible to map dynamical
processes in real networks, such as spreading phenomena in social networks, to
latent dynamics, while the knowledge of latent statistical factors behind this
dynamic can then be used to predict and control it in practice with known
accuracy bounds.