* 1741851
* International Workshop on Bio-Design Automation (IWBDA)
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Douglas Densmore, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 05/31/2018
* USD 10,000.00

The 9th International Workshop on Bio-Design Automation (IWBDA) 2017 will bring
together researchers from electronic design automation (the practice of using
computer software to build complex electronics) and synthetic biology (the
forward design of novel biological systems using engineering principles). The
goal of IWBDA is to make biology more easily, robustly, reliably, and
predictably engineered and therefore, tackle challenges in biology and medicine,
leading to advances in disease diagnosis, treatment and prevention. IWBDA 2017
will take place in Pittsburgh PA. Participants from more than 30 different US
and international universities are expected to attend this workshop. IWBDA will
capture and make public the slides, posters, and abstracts from the session. In
addition, a user survey will be created to learn more about how workshops like
this can better serve the community. Finally, there will be numerous
undergraduate, graduate and post graduate student researchers in attendance.
IWBDA encourages and supports woman and underrepresented minority student
participation and has a diverse technical program and executive committees.

This workshop will provide a venue for between twelve and fifteen technical
talks over two days. These talks are chosen from two page extended abstracts
which are later archived. In addition, there will be two invited lectures, ten
to twenty posters, multiple group discussion sessions, and a featured student
programming competition (BDAthlon). Technical topics will be diverse and include
areas such as: Parts and Standardization, Biological Circuit Simulators,
Biological Circuit Design, CAD Tools for Synthetic Biology and Gene Network
Reconstruction.