* 1741264
* BIGDATA: IA: Collaborative Research: Parsimonious Anomaly Detection in Sequencing Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Jennifer Erway, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 181,060.00

Genomes contain the complete set of instructions for building an organism.
Structural variants are rearrangements in the genome such as insertions and
deletions, whose discovery advances the understanding of the evolution and the
adaptability of species. Recent advances in high-throughput sequencing
technologies have led to the collection of vast quantities of genomic data.
Because of this, fast and robust algorithms are needed to identify structural
variants, which are rare and are prone to noise. This research will contribute
fundamentally to optimization methods for large-scale problems in computational
genomics. The algorithms will be disseminated publicly for use within and
outside the biology, mathematics, and computer science community. Graduate
students will be trained in scientific research and programming through this
interdisciplinary research, and the participation of students from under-
represented backgrounds will be highly encouraged.

The research objective of this award is to develop computational tools for
large-scale data-driven problems arising in computational genomics. These
problems are especially difficult to solve since they are high-dimensional and
the data are noisy and inexact. This study will take advantage of known
relationships in sequenced genomes to improve the accuracy of identifying
genomic variants in population studies when there is both low coverage in the
data and multiple related individuals are sequenced. Specifically, the proposed
research will (i) explore statistical models for describing the presence of
structural variants in genomes, (ii) develop and implement novel sparse
optimization methods for genomic structural variant detection, and (iii)
validate on existing genomic data sets and predict on new data.