* 1741890
* Living and Learning STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 12/15/2017,12/31/2023
* David Broussard, Lycoming College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 12/31/2023
* USD 648,915.00

Living and Learning STEM (L2S) is an S-STEM program at Lycoming College designed
to attract and support 14-16 low-income, academically talented undergraduate
students pursuing degrees in astronomy/physics, biology, chemistry or
mathematics. L2S Scholars will be recruited from the local rural region and from
national and regional charter school networks that are already part of existing
educational partnerships. In addition, Lycoming College will adapt and implement
strategies and practices that will address the academic, financial, and social
factors underlying student retention and academic success. Key components of
this enhanced support include a living-learning community (LLC) that will house
two cohorts of L2S scholars along with other non-participating STEM students; a
mentorship program that establishes relationships with faculty, upperclassmen,
alumni, and an STEM career advisor; and an enhanced academic experience program
that will provide at least one guaranteed paid summer internship and/or research
experience for each L2S Scholar. Finally, these strategies and practices will be
integrated into a holistic system that ultimately ensures graduation of a
maximum number of individuals who will enter the STEM workforce or continue to
pursue graduate studies in STEM-related fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact
of supports aimed at social interactions and psychosocial learning factors have
been under-researched in STEM education in favor of more cognitive and
behavioral factors. The L2S project will generate knowledge about whether a
STEM-based LLC, mentorships, and enhanced academic experiences will improve
retention and graduation rates among academically talented, low-income STEM
majors by minimizing feelings of social isolation and improving like-minded
community interactions throughout their undergraduate tenure. Through assessment
and evaluation, the project will measure the overall effectiveness of the
program by collecting assessments from L2S scholars and their non-participating
cohort. The project will also seek to empirically identify the variables of the
program that best correlate with: (1) improved factors of psychosocial learning;
(2) attraction/recruitment; (3) retention; and (4) graduation, thus allowing us
to recommend improvements to the program as needed.