* 1741707
* EFRI ACQUIRE: A chip-scale high-dimensional entanglement and quantum memory module for secure communications
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Jeffrey Shapiro, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 09/30/2021
* USD 2,051,055.00

A chip-scale high-dimensional entanglement and quantum memory module for secure
communications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: The development of quantum
communication with security guaranteed by the laws of quantum physics is one of
the major benefits of nonclassical information processing. Using communication
bits encoded in quantum states of single photons, called qubits, this project
will improve the bandwidth and reliability of quantum communication channels.
Advancing the art of quantum communication with photonic qubits is a frontier
research topic because although these qubits provide security, the current
technology for quantum communication has some limitations. For example, the
secure-key distribution rate (akin to the number of qubits per second) and the
communication distance can both be improved. These operating parameters are
currently around 1 Mb/s for distances around 50 km, hence their rate-distance
product is many orders-of-magnitude lower than current classical fiber network
communication rates and distances. The team seeks to address this problem via a
transformative multi-pronged approach: (1) encoding more bits per photon by
using the time-frequency degree-of-freedom; (2) developing a chip-scale photon
qubit source for higher rates, higher stability, and easier deployment; (3)
developing a chip-scale photon qubit storage and release module for longer
distance nonclassical communications; and (4) fundamentally new protocols and
architectures for orders-of-magnitude higher secure-key rates. This multi-
pronged approach is supported by the team's recent leading advances in these
areas, and matched with their pedagogical training and education outreach in
chip-scale nonclassical optics. They have an emphasis on women and minority
graduate students in their training. Their effort spans the fields of material
science, nanofabrication and silicon photonics, quantum measurements, and
quantum information theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Quantum
entanglement is a fundamental resource for secure information processing and
communications, and photonic hyperentanglement or high-dimensional entanglement
has been specifically cited in this regard for its high data capacity and error
resilience. The continuous-variable nature of timeÂ¡Vfrequency entanglement makes
it an ideal candidate for efficient high-dimensional coding with minimal
limitations. By storing high-dimensional entanglement in quantum memories, the
range of entanglement distribution can be extended for long distance quantum
communications. While significant progress has been made towards sources of
high-dimensional entanglement and long-term quantum memories, major challenges
remain in matching the frequencies and bandwidths of these components,
integrating them on-chip, room-temperature operation, and developing the
theoretical framework for how they can be exploited efficiently. The
intellectual significance is to address these challenges and demonstrate a
scalable cross-cutting platform towards chip-enabled unbreakable communication
networks. The project has three interrelated thematic Thrusts. In Thrust 1, the
team methods and approaches will develop on-chip biphoton frequency comb sources
and auxiliary devices for quantum communication such as integrated lithium
niobate for biphoton production and single-photon frequency conversion,
microresonator structures for comb creation, electrically-pumped module, and
Franson and conjugate Franson interferometers for security checks. These devices
are matched in frequency and bandwidth with the ones in Thrust 2, where the team
will develop solid-state rare-earth quantum memories for storage of the high-
dimensional biphoton frequency comb, and room-temperature operation via phononic
bandgaps and laser refrigeration. In Thrust 3, the team will develop security
analyses for new quantum key distribution protocols that exploit the full
potential of chip-scale biphoton frequency combs, verified in a full link
performance testbed. Thrust III also examines the memories in quantum repeater
architectures for distributing entanglement in quantum networks, thus extending
the range of high secret-key rate quantum communication. The proposed scientific
advances are coupled directly to multidisciplinary education and pedagogical
training of underrepresented scientists and engineers in nanoscale quantum
information sciences. The PI's interdisciplinary training crosses boundaries in
electrical engineering, materials science, information theory and physics, to
advance the nanoscale chip-based frontiers of quantum communications.