* 1741673
* EFRI NewLAW: Magnetic Field Free Magneto-optics and Chiral Plasmonics with Dirac Materials
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Michael Weinert, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,039,173.00

Most natural phenomena obey "time-reversal symmetry", which states that if the
direction of time is reversed, for example, the propagation of light waves is
the same in both forward and backward directions. But optical transport that
only lets light pass one-way, termed "non-reciprocal propagation", is vital for
energy reduction and noise suppression in telecommunications. The generation of
non-reciprocity requires breaking time-reversal symmetry, and typically can be
realized in magneto-optical materials via the Faraday effect (where light
passing through a material is subject to an external magnetic field, thus
changing the light wave orientation). This fundamental requirement of an
external magnetic field places significant limitations on device miniaturization
and on-chip integration. This program researches a new material platform "gapped
Dirac materials" whose intrinsic Berry curvature, a key and newly-recognized
property of their energy band structure, can act as an effective magnetic field
- thus giving rise to unique chiral edge plasmon resonances that can facilitate
non-reciprocal light propagation. The outcome of this research will enable
compact, magnetic-field-free (and thus lightweight and energy-efficient) tunable
nonreciprocal devices for optical communications and quantum information
processing. This project will train graduate and under-represented students in
STEM in a multidisciplinary environment; provide outreach to the public through
programs such as Research Experience for Teachers, "Science on Tap" public
lectures, and "Broaden the Horizon" that focuses on middle school female
students; and develop and distribute analysis tools and codes under open source
licenses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores a new frontier in magneto-
optics and magnetic-field-free non-reciprocal light transport based on Dirac
materials such as transition-metal dichalcogenide monolayers, where the breaking
of inversion symmetry and large spin-orbit coupling lead to valley-spin locking.
The intrinsic Berry curvature of these materials further acts as an effective
magnetic field in momentum space, which under a valley imbalance can give rise
to chiral plasmon modes that enable non-reciprocal light propagation at mid
infrared and terahertz frequencies. Valley polarization in these gapped Dirac
materials will be induced through three approaches: 1) doping with transition-
metal impurities; 2) proximity to layered magnetic transition-metal phosphorous
trichalcogenides; and 3) electrical spin injection. Electromagnetic modeling and
calculations of the Berry curvature, magneto optical effects, and chiral
plasmons in selected monolayers and heterostructures will provide guidance for
material synthesis by molecular beam epitaxy and chemical vapor deposition, and
atomic scale characterization with spin-resolved scanning tunneling
microscopy/spectroscopy, angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy, and
polarization selective photoluminescence, as well as far-field optical
characterization and near-field scanning optical microscopy imaging. Through an
integrated experimental-theoretical approach, this project aims to demonstrate
wave guiding chiral plasmons in the mid-infrared to terahertz range to enable
magnetic-field-free optical devices such as non-reciprocal Faraday isolators and
tunable optical circulators.