* 1741654
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award:  Long Term Organizational Principles in Multi-Ethnic Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Travis Williams, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2019
* USD 10,332.00

This project will undertake research to investigate how colonial structures and
processes related to plantation agriculture were adopted and negotiated within
an indigenous context. Though there exists a wide array of historical and
archaeological scholarship on plantations and chattel slavery in the American
South and Caribbean, there has been relatively little research on the numerous
corresponding institutions that existed within Native American nations. Such
indigenous contexts encapsulate many of the racial dynamics of 19th century
America and provide a unique opportunity to study the malleability of the
plantation system across national and cultural boundaries. Due to the dearth of
historical documentation on indigenous plantations specifically and the daily
lives of the enslaved everywhere, archaeology is particularly suited to such
research. Broadly, the project will contribute to popular and academic
discussions of the legacies of colonialism and race relations in American
society. Locally, the project will include education and outreach through
community interaction and volunteer opportunities at a publicly owned site and
provide historical context for contemporary debates regarding Native American
Freedmens status as tribal citizens. These local interactions allow the research
team to engage with traditionally disenfranchised groups and shed light on the
historical development of race relations in indigenous settings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is guided by one overarching question: How
were plantations organized in Native contexts, and how was this different than
that of those in Euro-America? To answer this, the research team will evaluate
the spatial organization, internal social organization, and the organization of
agricultural and industrial production at the George M. Murrell Home (also known
as "Hunter's Home"), in Park Hill, Oklahoma, in the heart of post-Removal
Cherokee country. The dissertation student, Travis Williams, will lead a team of
archaeologists, zooarchaeologists, ethnobotanists, and soil chemists to
illuminate the organization of Hunter's Home during the middle of the 19th
century through a combination of archaeological data and relevant historical
information from extant primary sources. A comparison of these data to the
plethora of those from like plantations in Euro-America will reveal differences
and similarities in land use, labor organization, consumer practices, and
agricultural production at plantations within and outside Cherokee country. The
investigators will produce an interdisciplinary dataset germane to comparative
analyses for the broader academic community currently engaging with issues of
the African Diaspora, Native Americans, and colonialism. The study will also
contribute to a growing body of archaeological scholarship exploring the
inadequacy of traditional dichotomous categories of colonialism (e.g.,
colonizer/colonized, continuity/change), as the residents of Hunter's Home moved
through, manipulated, and managed both sides of such dichotomies.