* 1741565
* EFRI NewLAW: Non-reciprocity in Acoustic Systems with Nonlinear Hierarchical Internal Structure and Asymmetry
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Alexander Vakakis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2022
* USD 2,209,993.00

This research program will investigate new theoretical and practical knowledge
on the application of nonlinearity, asymmetry, and mixed scales to design and
fabricate ground-breaking materials and devices. The approach will yield
materials which overcome traditional bounds on time-reversal symmetry and
acoustic reciprocity. These transformative reciprocity-breaking materials and
systems are expected to find wide application in diverse fields, including
noise-mitigating transportation systems; medical ultrasound devices; atomic
force microscope (AFM) sensing; acoustic filters and logic devices; sonar; and
energy control and redirection. The research will also broadly impact education
through planned curriculum development and outreach activities aimed at
increasing exposure of engineering students, and the public, to the exciting
physics of acoustic materials. At the same time, these activities will promote
interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. Planned
activities will include a multidisciplinary collaborative course on non-
traditional acoustic materials; broadening opportunities with outreach
organizations on campus by inviting high school students and teachers to develop
lab modules and earn continuing education credits; a collaboration with Clark
Atlanta University to engage faculty and underrepresented undergraduate students
in research tasks; and industrial collaboration with the Hughes Research
Laboratory to enhance and facilitate technology
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates a new class of
reciprocity-breaking acoustic systems characterized by nonlinear internal
structures, asymmetry and mixed scales. These systems exhibit directed cross-
scale energy transfers which break time reversibility and reciprocity both
locally (within each of the system subunits) and globally (for the entire system
viewed a whole). Non-reciprocal, large-to-small scale energy transfers mimic
analogous nonlinear energy transfer cascades in nature (e.g., turbulence). The
research aims to be transformative in the field of nonlinear acoustics,
promoting a new paradigm for predictive design with nonlinear non-reciprocity
through (i) the theoretical and experimental understanding of acoustic systems
with nonlinear hierarchical internal structures; (ii) the uncovering of the
combined role of asymmetry, disorder, nonlinearity and cross-scale directed
energy transfers on non-reciprocity; (iii) the development of new approaches for
fabricating, characterizing and experimentally testing non-reciprocal lattice
materials combining multiple macro-to-nano scales; and (iv) the translation of
these materials to new technologies and acoustic devices that exploit and
showcase transformative capabilities.