* 1741999
* Integrating Computational Thinking into a Minority Girls Program on Global Challenges
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Karen Lindebrekke, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2022
* USD 846,416.00

As computing has become integral to the practice of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM), the STEM+Computing program seeks to address
emerging challenges in computational STEM areas through applied research on the
integration of computational thinking (CT) and computing activities within STEM
teaching and learning in early childhood education through high school. This
specific project is a program for minority girls and is an Exploratory
Integration STEM+C endeavor to implement and test the integration of
computational thinking in an extant research-based science program for low
income minority girls. The extant program is Exploring Global Challenges, which
will be adapted for the integration of computational thinking in its curriculum
and activities. This integrative education approach is considered an inspiring,
motivating, and rigorous context for bolstering minority girls' science and
computational abilities. The project will afford an opportunity to conduct
research about the potential for urban education in an out-of-school programs to
be a leverage points for altering students' career intentions and preparation
for STEM and computationally intensive careers. This is a collaborative effort
among Southern Illinois University-Edwardsville, the iBIO Institute EDUCATE
Center, and the East St. Louis Christian Activity Center.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds upon an extant research-based STEM
program, Global Challenges and the iBIO Institute EDUCATE Center's Stellar Girls
curriculum. Working with underserved third and fourth grade girls from East St.
Louis, IL, the project will select one, 40-student cohort, to progress through a
two-year program. Support from a team of experienced educators and students will
explore global science and societal challenges that require students to find
solutions for real-world, global issues while applying STEM and computational
skills. Participating girls will engage in this curriculum for 10-weeks, three
hours per week, and academic sessions, for four sessions over the course of two
years. The project fills a gap in the literature by advancing our understanding
of integrated STEM and CT curriculum as a means to foster greater knowledge and
interest in science, CT, and computer sciences among urban minority girls who do
not receive computer science education in their schools. Iterative design cycles
integrating the voices of the girls will reveal emerging design principles that
may be applied in other CT-integration initiatives. Through mixed methods
research, the project will evaluate participant perceptions of the newly
designed CT-integrated curriculum, as well as STEM and CT knowledge skills
acquisition.