* 1741618
* EFRI NewLAW: Topological acoustic metamaterials for programmable and high-efficiency one-way transport
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Kai Sun, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alias Smith
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,000,000.00

In this research, physicists, wave mechanicians and materials scientists will
come together to design, fabricate and characterize novel metamaterials with
nonreciprocal wave propagation attributes. The field of sound waves, which
represent the oldest way of communication between human beings, is experiencing
a revival in the context of modern material technology and engineering, with a
myriad of applications ranging from medical imaging and echolocation to acoustic
cloaking. A fundamental principle governing wave propagation in both fluid and
solid media, called "reciprocity", is that the transmission rate of waves must
be equal forward and backward between any two arbitrarily selected points in a
medium. The ability to break this principle, that is, the realization of one-
directional mechanical or acoustic "diodes" will enable the design of new
classes of mechanical systems with novel functionalities, including adaptive
sensors and vibration isolation devices. It will also provide a transformative
contribution to the emerging field of material logic, a design paradigm where
simple structural and material modules are used as the engineering building
blocks to create mechanical devices of arbitrary complexity. The core conceptual
ideas behind the research originate from the notion of "topological protection",
which is exploited to obtain wave propagation properties that are robust against
disorder and noise. The knowledge developed through this research will advance
technologies, including but not limited to: a) mechanical computing, where
acoustic logic ports can be seen as building blocks capable of carrying out an
array of mathematical operations, and b) devices with novel thermal transport
properties, exploiting the analogy between thermal phonons and mechanical
vibrations at the spatial and temporal scales of mechanical devices. The
research will also be disseminated to the broader community through a workshop
with public tutorials, broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in
STEM fields through enhancing existing programs at the different academic
institutions and will result in YouTube videos to share the discoveries with the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a fundamental
understanding of how the phonon band topology governs the acoustic properties of
systems experiencing spatial-temporal modulation, leading to a formal
interpretation framework for this type of time-reversal symmetry breaking
phenomena. The powerful toolkits to be developed through the project will allow
for a rich variety of designs beyond the current boundaries of the use of
topological states in acoustic wave control strategies. The research will span
frontiers of condensed matter physics, wave mechanics, and materials science.
The two main conceptual ideas to be used for the realization of topologically
protected nonreciprocal wave propagation are: (1) program the phonon band
structure in spatial-temporal modulated materials using principles of
topological band theory, and (2) exploit the contrasting wave propagation
properties of Maxwell lattices in their metal-like and topological insulator-
like phases. The research team will advance the theoretical understanding of the
intimate role played by topological protection in nonreciprocal wave
propagation, use state-of-the-art fabrication techniques to realize prototypes
of acoustic diodes at different scales using a variety of material platforms,
and deploy laser-enabled wave reconstruction capabilities to characterize the
nonreciprocal wave propagation phenomena in the fabricated metamaterial
specimen. By developing and applying principles of topology and material logic
design across the scales, the project will transform a set of simple mechanical
components into a versatile platform for the next generation acoustic logic
ports with programmable acoustic transport and time reversal symmetry breaking
capabilities.