* 1741341
* BIGDATA: F: Towards Automating Data Analysis: Interpretable, Interactive, and Scalable Learning via Discrete Probability
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Suvrit Sra, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,024,363.00

As machine learning (ML) permeates all areas of science and technology, demands
in diverse data domains, inference questions, resource limitations and
reliability fuel several new conceptual and algorithmic challenges. Examples of
current shortcomings that limit the full use of machine learning include
suboptimal use of data and algorithms; painstaking hand-tuning and model search;
validation of results and difficulties in generalization; limited interactivity
with humans; encoding of domain knowledge; and lack of interpretability, among
others. Progress on these questions has the potential to impact the successful
adoption and use of machine learning in a broad range of fields. With the above
motivation, the goal of this project is to create a novel suite of models and
algorithms for analyzing complex datasets, with a particular focus on the
following three factors crucial for next-generation machine learning: (1)
interpretability; (2) interactivity; and (3) automated learning. The overarching
technical concept underlying this proposal is the concept of negative dependence
in discrete probability. This project lays theoretical foundations for a new set
of tools grounded in this concept. Besides practical impacts, the methods to be
studied in the project motivate new theoretical questions, and will help
increase interest in the underlying mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
practical impact of the proposed work has the potential to benefit society on
multiple fronts. Via collaborations, the PIs will evaluate the developed methods
in healthcare (seeking to ultimately impact patient care and well-being),
systems biology (to help with research on cancer and diabetes, among others),
and materials science (to help discover safer, functional materials more
efficiently). The project will also directly have educational impact: training
of graduate students, providing material for data science courses at all levels,
and outreach to the community via general talks as well as focused lectures at
conferences and workshops, including workshops and events targeted at women in
Data Science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, the PIs will develop: (1) New
tools, models, and algorithms for interactive data analysis, especially for
experimental design, information collection, interpretable machine learning,
hypothesis testing, performance validation, and architecture learning; (2)
Theoretical analysis, such as convergence and complexity (statistical and
computational); and (3) Open-source implementations of all key algorithms and
frameworks.