* 1741893
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Alternate Models of Community Formation
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2020
* Ruth Van Dyke, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2020
* USD 25,146.00

Under the direction of Dr. Ruth Van Dyke, Kellam Throgmorton (Binghamton
University) will undertake research that evaluates the role of population
movement in the development of political complexity. Anthropologists have long
been interested in the origins of large-scale, politically complex societies.
Some models imply that political complexity arises when societies seek more
efficient modes of subsistence, labor organization, or exchange. Others
highlight the role of historical contingencies in the development of political
complexity, focusing on how different groups negotiate power relationships
during periods of population movement or social transformation. The debate has
broad implications for contemporary society, as these models offer fundamentally
different characterizations of the capacity for human agents to create change.
Furthermore, archaeological research on this topic can inform the present by
illuminating alternative modes of political organization and by challenging
taken-for-granted assumptions about the nature of power, politics, and
population movement in human societies. Finally, unlike many other disciplines,
archaeology investigates the spatial components of political relations, since
evidence for the emergence of complex societies is often inscribed on the
landscape as monumental structures and patterns in settlement organization.
These landscapes are affected by development and continued human habitation. As
a consequence, archaeological investigation of political landscapes also serves
as a potent means of documenting and preserving critical records of past
political negotiation. In addition, the project will engage a broad spectrum of
stakeholders that are working to preserve aspects of the greater Chacoan
landscape, including tribal groups and federal agencies. The research will
demonstrate how archaeological theory and method can contribute to broader goals
of landscape preservation and development planning.

Dr. Van Dyke and Mr. Throgmorton will use precolumbian Chacoan society as a case
study. Chaco was a politically complex Ancestral Pueblo society that flourished
in what are now parts of New Mexico, Colorado, Utah, and Arizona between A.D.
840-1140, but its origins are murky. Some archaeologists suggest that Chacoan
society arose largely in situ, while others argue that large-scale migration
into the area from the north contributed to the development of Chacoan political
complexity. The researchers will use geophysical survey, remote sensing, and
architectural documentation to produce high-quality, accurate visualizations of
the surface and subsurface archaeology of two Chacoan communities. They will
analyze ceramic and stone artifacts to understand material culture usage across
the communities, which is important for characterizing political relationships
between households. Using these data Dr. Van Dyke and Mr. Throgmorton will
determine how early Chacoan communities in New Mexico formed - as a result of in
situ growth or due to immigration? The results will answer a current debate in
Chacoan archaeology, but will also more broadly inform anthropological models on
political organization in the ancient past.