* 1741910
* Using Collective Argumentation to Develop Teaching Practices Integrating Coding Within the Science and Math Curriculum (Grades 3-5)
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Roger Hill, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie Teasley
* 07/31/2023
* USD 2,144,800.00

As computing has become integral to the practice of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM), the STEM + Computing Program seeks to study
and advance the applied integration of computational thinking and computing
activities within disciplinary STEM teaching and learning in early childhood
education through high school (preK-12). Elementary school teachers have a great
impact on student motivation to pursue STEM fields of study and careers and are
being increasingly asked to emphasize key STEM content, including computer
science in their teaching. However, few of these teachers have the academic
background to achieve these expectations. This three-year STEM+C project will
develop a practice that elementary school teachers can use to integrate the
teaching of coding with the standard practices already used to teach
mathematics, science and other curriculum content. The project also will develop
a model course that prepares teachers to educate students in interdisciplinary,
holistic ways to learn mathematics, science, and coding and equips them to guide
students through reasoning processes while learning to code. Outcomes will
inform the fields of computer science, mathematics, and science education about
an argumentation-based approach that integrates the teaching of STEM, a core
objective of the STEM+C program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
increase attention to computer science coding in elementary classrooms and the
probability that elementary students develop interests in coding and other STEM-
focused areas of study. To do so, the project will create (a) a learning
approach in which novice programmers (i.e., elementary teachers and students)
use arguments to develop a coding sequence using structured reasoning instead of
trial-and-error, (b) help teachers build content knowledge of programming and
extend their knowledge of appropriate mathematics and science pedagogy into the
teaching of coding through argumentation, and (c) emphasize the argumentation
approach as an integrator for the teaching and learning of coding, mathematics,
and science. Activities associated with this project will enhance teachers'
understanding of argumentation and then investigate how the teachers implement
the CALC approach in grades 3 to 5. Participating teachers will enroll in a
graduate-level course that teaches them how to use the CALC approach for coding.
Once the teachers complete the course, they will implement the CALC approach in
their classroom, helping their students to learn how to code. The research team
will coach the teachers in their lesson enactments and will assess the
effectiveness of the CALC concept as an age-appropriate method to teach and
learn computer science content. Assessment data include capturing teacher
actions via video recordings that will be analyzed in an ongoing process,
interviews of teachers and assessment of student work.