* 1741197
* BIGDATA: F: Collaborative Research: Design and Computation of Scalable Graph Distances in Metric Spaces: A Unified Multiscale Interpretable Perspective
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Tina Eliassi-Rad, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,023,986.00

Representations of real-world phenomena as graphs (a.k.a. networks) are
ubiquitous, ranging from social and information networks, to technological,
biological, chemical, and brain networks. Many graph mining tasks -- including
clustering, anomaly detection, nearest neighbor, similarity search, pattern
recognition, and transfer learning -- require a distance measure between graphs
to be computed efficiently. The existing distance measures between graphs leave
a lot to be desired. They are overwhelmingly based on heuristics.  Many do not
scale to graphs with millions of nodes; others do not satisfy the metric
properties of non-negativity, positive definiteness, symmetry, and triangle
inequality. This project studies a formal mathematical foundation covering a
family of graph distances that overcome these limitations, focusing on real-
world applications in biology and social network analysis. It also provides a
universal methodology for parallelizing the computation of graph distance
metrics within this family over massive graphs with millions of nodes, and
scaling it over cloud computing resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
studies, designs, and evaluates graph distances that satisfy the following six
properties: (1) They are scalable -- i.e., they are strictly subquadratic in
runtime and achieve a speedup when computed in parallel. (2) They are metrics --
i.e., they satisfy&lt;br/&gt;non-negativity, positive definiteness, symmetry,
and triangle inequality. (3) They are discriminative, as measured by comparisons
to the "chemical distance", which finds the optimal mapping between two graphs
that minimizes edge discrepancies. (4) They are statistically&lt;br/&gt;robust
-- i.e., they have confidence intervals. (5) They can incorporate auxiliary
information available on nodes and links. (6) They are interpretable to subject
matter experts. Rather than providing a single metric, this project explores a
family of such graph distance metrics. It also provides a universal methodology,
using the Alternating Directions Method of Multipliers (ADMM), to parallelizing
the computation of graph distance metrics within this family over massive graphs
with millions of nodes. The proposed metrics are evaluated over massive real-
world graphs using Apache Spark on a cloud computing infrastructure.