* 1741034
* 1st US-Japan Workshop Enabling Global Collaborations in Big Data Research; June, 2017, Atlanta, GA
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2018
* Calton Pu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Meghan Houghton
* 04/30/2018
* USD 25,000.00

The 1st US-Japan Workshop Enabling Global Collaborations in Big Data Research
brings together researchers from the United States (U.S.) and Japan to discuss
experiences, challenges, and opportunities in international research
collaborations. The workshop provides opportunities for participants from both
countries to identify mutual research interests that leverage resources and
expertise to accelerate advancements in smart and connected communities, cyber-
physical systems, artificial intelligence, and machine learning. The workshop
includes two tracks to support a broad range of participation: track 1, for
participants with prior collaboration experience and significant potential to
advance the field; and track 2, for those without prior collaboration experience
who may benefit significantly from the diverse training environments afforded by
international collaborations. The outcomes of the workshop will be disseminated
through a report describing the main strategic areas, key research
opportunities, and collaboration scenarios discussed during the workshop,
thereby benefiting a broader research community. The workshop is co-located with
the 2017 IEEE International Conference on distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS).
This engagement builds upon prior National Science Foundation (NSF)-Japan
Science and Technology Agency (JST) collaborations.

The areas of smart and connected communities, cyber-physical systems, artificial
intelligence, and machine learning present intellectual challenges of their own,
as well as challenges and opportunities at their intersections. Specifically,
the challenges and opportunities created by growing data, sensors, cloud and
edge computing, and networking at a global scale call for international research
collaborations. For example, advances in machine learning and artificial
intelligence, paired with the development and implementation of large sensor
networks (e.g., Array of Things in Chicago and Fujisawa Sustainable Smart Town
in Japan) can enable city-scale data to improve efficiency, economic prosperity,
and security in our cities and communities. The workshop will focus on research
challenges that are beyond the individual reach of each participant, but that
become feasible goals with effective collaboration between the two countries.
This can be achieved when both sides share similar interests, but with
complementary expertise and skills, (e.g., from different but related areas such
as the examples mentioned above).