* 1741052
* I-Corps: Point-of-Care Physiological Assessment
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Roman Lubynsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* cindy walkerpeach
* 09/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to transform
health, wellness, and disease assessment and monitoring by developing a simple,
cost-effective method of exhaled air analysis. This technology can be used in
diverse scenarios, including in the hospital, primary care settings, in the
field, and directly by the end-user. The long term potential impact of this
technology is the ability to collect physiological measurements frequently, non-
invasively, and deliver results instantaneously. Infrequent measurements or
delays in diagnostic results can lead to avoidable morbidity, mortality, and
direct emergency/terminal care costs. This technology is capable of addressing
unmet monitoring and diagnostic needs in a wide variety of clinical and health
&amp; wellness applications, representing a multibillion dollar value creation
opportunity impacting stakeholders throughout the value
chain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project aims to develop a technology
platform that will enable accurate and cost effective breath gas analysis at the
point-of-care. The breath test is made possible by carbon nanotube chemiresistor
sensor scheme and device integration advancements. This project has a novel
approach to selective detection of gases at part-per-billion concentrations
using a smartphone and near field communication tags modified with a simple two-
step process. The technology platform consists of a circuit design, data
transfer method, fabrication process, and chemiresistor formulations to enable
molecularly-specific detection of biomarkers at biologically relevant (part-per-
billion) concentrations in exhaled breath. This technology produces a
chemically-specific, concentration-dependent electrical output without
compromising on the pattern recognition benefits of 'electronic nose' solutions.
This work may also yield general advancements in chemical sensor performance
optimization and thin-film electronics roll-to-roll manufacturing techniques.