* 1741683
* CAREER: Compiler and Runtime Support for Irregular Applications on Many-core Processors
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Michela Becchi, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 01/31/2022
* USD 424,999.00

Many-core processors (such as GPUs) have been used to accelerate a wide variety
of applications: molecular dynamics, image processing, data mining, option
pricing and linear algebra, among others. Despite their widespread adoption,
these devices are still considered relatively difficult to use, in that they
require the programmer to be familiar both with parallel programming and with
the operation of the hardware. In particular, the effective deployment of
irregular applications on many-core devices is still far from understood.
However, many established and emerging applications (from social and computer
networking, electrical circuit modeling, discrete event simulation, compilers,
and computational sciences) are irregular in nature, being based on data
structures such as graphs and trees. &lt;br/&gt;This research proposes compiler
and runtime techniques to support the deployment of graph and other irregular
applications on many-core processors, while hiding from the programmer the
complexity and heterogeneity of the underlying hardware and software stack.
Since the degree of parallelism within irregular applications is heavily data
dependent, the proposed compiler techniques aim to generate multiple platform-
specific code variants starting from high-level platform-agnostic algorithmic
descriptions. The runtime techniques focus on the selection of the most
appropriate code variant and its tuning to the hardware and the input datasets.
More specifically, this research covers three important issues related to
irregular applications: (i) the effective handling of nested parallelism (in the
form of parallelizable nested loops and recursive functions) within irregular
applications; (ii) the design of a dynamic memory allocation library that can
scale to the degree of multithreading offered by many-core devices, and of graph
encoding schemes suitable for applications operating on dynamic datasets; and
(iii) the effective handling of synchronization on many-core devices.