* 1741784
* Understanding How Integrated Computational Thinking, Engineering Design, and Mathematics Can Help Students Solve Scientific and Technical Problems in Career Technical Education
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Ahmad Javaid, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Bradley Barker
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,955,190.00

Can self-driving cars be hacked? Can US highways become even more dangerous?
This project will engage students in learning how to design and program secure
technologies for the future. Combining multiple theories, such as the fusion of
activity theory, social constructivist learning theory, and project-based
learning (PBL), as the conceptual framework for this study, the investigators
will apply the Concerns Based Adoption Model (CBAM) to guide professional
development that uses PBL to help grade 9-12 science teachers integrate
computational thinking into their teaching. The project will use smart vehicles
as a means to engage career technical education (CTE) and mathematics teachers,
alongside with grade 9-12 students, and to better understand how to embed
computational thinking in the curriculum. The program is designed to contribute
meaningfully to the understanding of effective characteristics of professional
development. The project is funded by the STEM+Computing program, which seeks to
address emerging challenges in computational STEM areas through the applied
integration of computational thinking and computing activities within
disciplinary STEM teaching and learning in early childhood education through
high school (preK-12).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate
whether a PBL focused topic is an effective medium for making mathematics more
engaging and relevant to students. The investigation will address common
concerns inhibiting teacher enactment of computational thinking in mathematics
and CTE, and whether a relationship exists between teachers' CBAM score and
implementation of PBL. The practice of developing collaborative partnerships
between mathematics and CTE teachers to design and test their courses employing
PBL techniques is unique and may serve as a powerful and replicable model for
making mathematics more relevant to students.