* 1741722
* Workshop: US-Italy Collaborative Research in Advanced Manufacturing; Washington, D.C.; June 2017
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Zhijian Pei, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 05/31/2021
* USD 59,900.00

This award provides workshop support to foster collaboration between advanced
manufacturing researchers in the Unites States and Italy. The advanced
manufacturing landscape in both the U.S. and Italy shares many commonalities in
terms of basic research portfolio, federal investments in research and
infrastructural needs for next-generation manufacturing technology and process
development. However, there exist limited venues through which U.S. and Italian
researchers can interact to efficiently combine their complementary strengths
and synergies, while minimizing significant overlap. To this end, the proposed
workshop will bring together American and Italian researchers in advanced
manufacturing to promote joint bilateral projects between the two countries, and
make recommendations for best practices and mechanisms for efficient long-term
collaborations between researchers from U.S. and Italy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is consistent with the NSF-ERC Implementing
Arrangement signed by Dr. Suresh with the European Commission in July 2012, and
will be held in Washington, DC, in June 2017. About 40 American and Italian
researchers in advanced manufacturing, with expertise in broad research areas
and from a range of different universities / research institutions, will attend
the workshop. The objectives of the workshop include: (a) examining research
needs in advanced manufacturing across a broad spectrum of technologies; (b)
identifying best practices and opportunities for collaboration between
researchers from these two countries; (c) formulating recommendations for future
joint research initiatives and funded projects; (d) providing a forum through
which researchers can network and build collaborations; and (e) identifying
administrative, organizational, structural and cultural challenges / barriers
that impede effective collaboration between American and Italian researchers.