* 1741627
* RESEARCH-PGR:  Phenotypic and Genomic Diversity of North American Vitis
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Dario Cantu, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 03/31/2024
* USD 2,574,533.00

The relationship between genome evolution and adaptation to stress has become
increasingly important as environments change. Grapes (Vitis vinifera) are among
the most important horticultural crops in the world, with over 1 million acres
planted in the United States. Products of grape cultivation (table grapes,
raisins, juice, wine and oil) have a value of $5.76 billion at the farm gate and
an estimated $162 billion annually to the American economy. The viticulture
industry has grown steadily over the past decade, but grape cultivation faces
new and continuing challenges from diseases and abiotic stresses. Grape
cultivation relies heavily on wild North American species for rootstocks, and
that reliance is expanding. This project will allow researchers to determine the
genetic composition of four wild grape species from the Southwest that are used,
or have demonstrated promise, for grape breeding. The project will gather
information about the ability of these species to resist Pierces Disease, it
will generate new information about plant biology, genomics, and evolution, and
it will make Vitis one of the best-studied botanical genera. Data obtained from
this project will help worldwide grape breeding programs and will be available
through a community resource, allowing the project investigators to share their
research with members of the public and the wine and grape industries. They will
also train and mentor undergraduate students, graduate students and postdoctoral
scholars. The PIs work at public universities known for their efforts to broaden
participation of underrepresented minorities in STEM fields and serving first
generation college students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cultivation,
sustainability and security of grapes (Vitis vinifera) rely heavily on North
American Vitis species as sources of resistance to abiotic and biotic stresses.
This project aims to make Vitis a leading perennial model for comparative
genomics, landscape genomics and association genomics. It will also further
understanding of the basic biology of resistance to Pierces Disease, which is
critical for the sustainability of viticulture. Researchers will assay hundreds
of natural accessions to identify plants with resistance and study the
geographic distribution of resistance in nature. They will complement phenotypic
assays with whole genome resequencing (WGS) data to identify signatures of local
adaptation, study the phylogenomics of the genus, and associate genetic
variation with climatic variables. They will also employ analyses that aim to
uncover important basic information about candidate genes and the genetic
architecture underlying abiotic and biotic stress responses. An additional goal
is to generate reference genomes for four North American Vitis species that have
been used in rootstock breeding; currently, no reference genomes exist for any
North American Vitis species. These genomes will be a valuable community
resource, facilitate interspecific analyses, form the basis for inferring the
pace and pattern of structural rearrangements during species diversification,
and aid the identification of homologous and syntenous regions between V.
vinifera and its congeners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.