* 1741847
* Supporting Talent for Academic Recruitment in STEM (STARS)
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Sandra Devenny, Delaware County Community College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 05/31/2024
* USD 650,000.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, the Supporting Talent
for Academic Recruitment in STEM (STARS) is providing support to low-income
students with demonstrated financial need and academic promise to succeed in
STEM disciplines at Delaware County Community College (DCCC). Southeastern
Pennsylvania is experiencing an increased demand for highly qualified employees
trained in STEM fields due to the regional concentration of companies that focus
on information technology, biotechnology, pharmaceutical, financial services,
advanced manufacturing, engineering and research. To help address this need,
DCCC will build on its investments in STEM education to recruit, retain, and
graduate/transfer 40 low-income, academically promising students in STEM majors
through its new STARS initiative. The well-established experience of the college
with serving students who are low income, first generation, nontraditional, and
challenged by disabilities will provide the foundation for supporting students
to be successful in STEM majors. Using recruitment activities that target
students who are currently underrepresented in STEM majors at the college, the
project will provide a positive and transformative impact on the diversity of
STEM programs. This will enrich and expand the academic experience for all
students and increase access to educational and professional pathways for
diverse students, including women, students of color and economically
disadvantaged students, thereby diversifying the STEM workforce. A qualified
research team will determine if a STEM Topics course and faculty mentoring
combined with early exposure to research at a community college influence
student academic and careers goals and retention in STEM majors. Dissemination
of lessons learned from this project will inform other community colleges of
effective strategies for broadening the participation of underserved and
underprivileged students in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition
to providing scholarship support, this S-STEM project will create learning
cohorts of students who receive mentoring, tutoring support, access to
specialized services, and individualized assistance to transfer to four-year
institutions to continue their academic preparation. The STARS scholars will
also engage in activities to explore STEM careers through a new seminar-style
course, guest speakers, participation in internships and co-ops, and an
introduction to a research experience in their second year. Faculty members
involved in the project represent diverse ethnicities and have experience in
various academic, corporate and research settings, and they will collaborate
with other college personnel to improve retention through mentoring and other
activities. The project will strengthen the connection between the STEM students
with regional employers while exposing them to career options and opportunities.
In addition, the project will incorporate existing college resources with newly
developed activities to enhance dual enrollment programs by providing students
with well-explained career options. The commitment of the college to student
success is demonstrated by its recognition as a Leader College in the national
Achieving the Dream initiative. By pro-actively focusing on ways to increase
student success at every level, the college has achieved important gains in
retention and completion, particularly among populations that often exhibit the
greatest deficits in academic accomplishment, income levels, and societal
supports. The project will provide a replicable, holistic, and supportive
network of activities and services to strengthen academic achievement,
retention, completion, transfer and employment of students who traditionally
face significant barriers to academic success. It is expected that the college
will replicate proven strategies with other students not included in the STARS
program to improve opportunities in STEM fields for many additional
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.