* 1741694
* EFRI NewLAW: Non-Reciprocal Wave Propagation Devices by Fermionic Emulation and Exceptional Point Physics
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Jacob Khurgin, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Alias Smith
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,000,000.00

No device exists today that efficiently allows light to move forward in one
direction, but stops it from moving in reverse. Devices that serve as one-way
lanes for light propagation can revolutionize communication system design by
adding new functionalities in a compact and more energy-efficient way.
Similarly, electronics can be made more energy-efficient by suppressing back
scattering. New discoveries in the past decade in the physics of wave
propagation in materials have given tantalizing hints as to how one may achieve
one-way devices for light and electron waves. Taking these hints towards
practical engineering devices, however, requires theoretical design and
experimental advances in materials and device fabrication. By bringing together
a diverse and multidisciplinary team with the necessary skills, this project
aims to develop the fundamental science behind such advances and experimentally
demonstrate one-way devices for future information systems. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NewLAW EFRI team will investigate topological,
chiral, and non-reciprocal transport of photons, polaritons, plasmons, and
electron waves. This will be achieved by using specially designed material
systems and device structures that provide non-trivial topological properties
for electrons, for photons, and for light-matter hybrids such as non-trivial
manifestations of collective plasmons and trion-polaritons. By engineering the
interactions between electrons and photons in non-trivial ways, new science and
new engineering technologies will be explored. Instead of photons or excitons,
trions that are fermions with net charge and spin will be investigated for non-
reciprocal light transport in the form of trion-polaritons. Instead of plasmons,
chiral plasmons will be used for non-reciprocal transport. As a demonstration of
non-reciprocal light transport, a novel optical isolator will be realized that
demonstrates simultaneously high linearity, high bandwidth and high dynamic
range - characteristics lacking in previous embodiments. The rich physics of
non-Hermitian systems will be used to realize novel topologically-enhanced non-
reciprocal waveguides. Similar non-Hermitian physics effects in the context of
electron waves will be explored for electronic non-reciprocity. In this case,
propagation in the evanescent complex momentum domain via electron tunneling
will be explored in a device platform in specially designed material
heterostructure. The EFRI team will combine theoretical research, with synthesis
of new materials, and fabrication of non-reciprocal devices to achieve the above
goals. Because the lack of efficient non-reciprocal wave propagation devices
currently limits several functionalities in communication systems, the results
of this team's research are expected to uncover new physics and engineering
possibilities, contributing towards the development of communication systems
that significantly affect the movement of information. The realization of the
proposed devices requires a unifying theme guided by theoretical design to
provide mathematical and physical understanding and guidance, experimental
realization of specially designed materials such as 2D crystal heterostructures
and III-Nitride semiconductors, nanofabrication of the device structures that
assemble these materials in specified geometries, and finally, testing and
measurement of the predicted non-reciprocal wave transport. The overarching
goals are to advance the understanding of fundamental principles of non-
reciprocity in novel electronic and photonic media, and to exploit these
principles to realize non-reciprocal devices with superior performance. The EFRI
team brings together five investigators with the precise set of skills necessary
to achieve these goals.