* 1741771
* 2017 Biomedical Engineering Society (BMES)-National Scinece Foundation (NSF) Special Sessions
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Lori Setton, Biomedical Engineering Society
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

This award will support two special sessions related to NSF funding: "BMES-NSF
Special Session on CAREER and Unsolicited Awards" and ?BMES-NSF Special Session
on Graduate Research Fellowships Program.? Both of these sessions are outside of
the regular program of the Annual Meeting of the Biomedical Engineering Society
being held in Phoenix, AZ, October 11-14, 2017. The funding will be used to
promote, convene and record the session and offset travel costs and registration
fees for NSF awardees (3 research grant and 4 GRFP) and reviewers (5) who will
serve as presenters, panelists, and potential mentors/collaborators for novice
and emerging investigators. The CAREER/Unsolicited session builds on the success
of similar sessions held at BMES annual meetings since 2013. The GRFP session
was added after feedback from last year?s participants indicating a specific
interest in this student-focused program. The 2017 BMES meeting will feature 19
Program Tracks with the theme "Engineering Personalized Medicine and Therapies."
Approximately 800 oral presentations, 1600 poster presentations and over 4,000
participants are anticipated. The BMES Annual Meeting serves as a primary
vehicle for scientific sharing and dissemination of the latest advances in
biomedical engineering, as well as a facilitator of important cross-
fertilizations between the life sciences and engineering technologies, which
foster a multi-disciplinary approach in the practice of Biomedical Engineering.

The research grant focused session will be a 3 hour session, featuring
presentations showcasing NSF funded research and researchers (2 CAREER awardees
and 1 non-CAREER awardee), a Networking Reception, a Tutorial on Essential
Elements to Develop a Successful NSF BME Grant, and an Interactive Grant Writing
and Submission Panel Discussion, will be held on October 13, 2017. The GRFP-
focused session will be 2 hours in length and will be held on October 14, 2017.
It will involve 4 past GRFP recipients, from diverse graduate and undergraduate
institutions, as well as past GRFP panelists. Both sessions will include time
for Q&A with the audience. Both recorded sessions will be posted on the BMES
website for on demand viewing.