* 1741788
* OP: Fundamental Properties and Applications of Plasmonic Metasurfaces Integrated with 2D Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 01/16/2017,07/31/2020
* Gennady Shvets, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 07/31/2020
* USD 375,000.00

Nontechnical description: The objective of this research is to develop novel
artificial materials exhibiting unique optical properties that are yet to exist
in naturally occurring materials. In order to attain materials with custom-
designed optical characteristics, judiciously engineered combinations of
materials such as metals, semiconductors and insulators must be devised. These
new artificial materials, commonly referred to as metamaterials, are fabricated
to be much thinner than the wavelength of light. Potential applications of such
metamaterials include devices capable of controlling and switching light at very
high speeds, as well as infrared sensors and light detectors. Research efforts
encompass computational design, materials fabrication, and optical
characterization of the metamaterials. The research team comprises two graduate
students, who are assisted during the summer months by an undergraduate student
as well as a student from a local high school. All participating students
receive training in modern materials fabrication techniques, laser operation,
and computer simulation methods. An on-going coordination with the University of
Texas at San Antonio - a designated Hispanic Serving Institution - is used to
recruit summer students for this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: The research team is exploiting several unique synergies between
plasmonic metasurfaces and two-dimensional (2D) materials, by harnessing the
ability of metasurfaces to concentrate optical energy to the extreme optical
nonlinearities of 2D materials in the mid-IR. In this way it is utilizing
plasmonic metasurfaces as gating electrodes to engineer the quantum properties
of 2D materials. This enables a new regime of strong optical coupling in hybrid
plasmonic-2D systems. The gating metasurface electrodes are additionally used to
periodically modulate the chemical potential of the 2D material, resulting in a
quantum Bragg reflector for surface graphene plasmons - a novel concept that
bridges materials science and optics. Using first-principles modeling, advanced
fabrication and optical characterization, plasmonic metasurfaces are fabricated
and integrated with 2D materials to create these new hybrid materials. Unique
optical characteristics of this system, such as anomalously high optical
nonlinearities and ultrafast response, are explored and utilized for efficient
optical harmonics generation as well as in ultrafast nonlinear optical devices.