* 1741980
* ASPIRE to Careers in Science
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Manyiu Tse, Molloy College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 03/31/2024
* USD 650,000.00

The Alumni, Students, Professors, Internships, Research, Enrichment (ASPIRE) to
Careers in Science project at Molloy College will support 20 academically
talented students with financial need to pursue a course of study in biology or
earth and environmental sciences and earn undergraduate degrees in these
scientific disciplines. Program activities include a freshman learning
community, three-tiered (alumni, student, professor) mentoring, internships,
curriculum-embedded research, and faculty-sponsored research. These activities
are expected to increase retention and academic perseverance of ASPIRE scholars,
will generate enthusiasm and excitement for science and will encourage serious
consideration for pursuing graduate study in science or entry into the workforce
in a STEM position. These outcomes could be readily adopted by other Molloy STEM
departments as well as by other colleges and universities as best practices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ASPIRE program will recruit two consecutive cohorts of
first year students and support them for four years. It is expected that a
first-year retention rate of 90% or greater and a graduation rate of 80% or
greater of the original cohort students will be achieved. Extensive formative
and summative assessment and evaluation will monitor the effectiveness of the
ASPIRE to Careers in Science project. These data will provide comparative
information on the academic impact of faculty-sponsored student research and
curriculum-based hypothesis-driven research on student-learning outcomes and on
the persistence of students to careers in STEM disciplines. Through workshops,
faculty will be given the opportunity to improve their skills in effective
training methods for early research involvement by STEM students. They will also
have the chance to implement curriculum changes that are engaging for entry
level students. Preliminary data will be generated on the impact of each
mentoring relationship, and the comprehensive multi-tier system through
interviews, focus groups and program evaluation. This program will catalyze the
growth in STEM education at Molloy well beyond the funding period and provide
exciting opportunities in STEM to the diverse local and regional student
population.Â &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.