* 1741744
* Improving the Success of STEM Undergraduate Students in a Rural Community: Learning with Emphasis on Academics, Developmental Experiences, and Research in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* David Shinn, Quincy University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 05/31/2024
* USD 649,415.00

The NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
program supports the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-income
students pursuing STEM degrees. Over the five years of this project, Quincy
University (QU) will award scholarships of up to $6,000 per year to 20 eligible
students, renewable through their senior year. QU is in southwestern Illinois,
in the largest town in a 100-mile radius. Forty percent of its students are from
surrounding rural communities. Thus, the grantee institution provides an
important setting to study the pathways of rural low-income students pursuing
STEM education. These students often do not pursue STEM majors because they lack
exposure to and experience with diverse STEM career options. This program aims
to improve degree attainment, and to equip students with transferable skills
that employers seek. Such skills include critical thinking, oral and written
communication, and leadership. By increasing access to high-quality STEM
education and providing individualized, methodical, and intensive professional
guidance, this project expects to increase opportunities for members of a large
sector of society that has a prominent presence in the region. Moreover, the
project will generate knowledge on how to recruit, retain, and successfully
graduate rural, low-income, high-achieving students in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three goals. First, it aims to increase
opportunities and access to higher education for academically high-achieving,
financially disadvantaged students pursuing non-clinical biology and chemistry
degrees. Second, it aims to enhance the broad understanding of evidence-based
academic and student support activities needed to increase the interest of these
students in pursuing STEM degrees. Third, QU plans to increase the first-year
retention rate and four-year graduation rate for the scholarship recipients.
QU's recruitment plan builds on relationships already in place at surrounding
rural high schools, and includes faculty outreach and an on-campus STEM Career
Fair. Students receiving scholarships will be partnered with a success coach and
faculty mentor, and placed into a learning community. Scholarship recipients
will: be housed together in the residence hall; co-enroll in major and general
education courses throughout their academic tenure; and participate in
programming to support academic success and social integration, such as field
trips to local industries or university research facilities, and service
activities. A new, required sophomore-level "Introduction to Research" course
will give the students the opportunity to participate in laboratory or field
research with a faculty mentor. The project will make use of quantitative and
qualitative data, including student records, surveys, and student products such
as guided reflections and coursework to determine the effect of project
activities on retention, graduation, and learning outcomes for supported
students. Evaluation tools will include Articulated Learning Guided Reflections,
the Inquiry and Analysis VALUE rubric from the American Association of Colleges
&amp; Universities, the Themed Learning Community Questionnaire, Social
Cognitive Career Theory, and the National Survey of Student Engagement. A
control cohort will be established by matching demographic and academic
characteristics of students who were not scholarship
recipients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.