* 1741730
* NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences - Applications of Polynomial Systems - June 4-8, 2018
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Efton Park, Texas Christian University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 12/31/2018
* USD 35,000.00

This National Science Foundation award provides support for a CBMS Regional
Conference in the Mathematical Sciences on the topic "Applications of
Polynomial Systems," to be hosted at Texas Christian University in Fort Worth,
TX, from June 4, 2018, to June 8, 2018. Sponsored by the Conference Board of the
Mathematical Sciences, each five-day conference in this Regional Conference
series features a distinguished lecturer who delivers ten lectures on a topic of
important current research in one sharply focused area of the mathematical
sciences; the lecturer subsequently prepares an expository monograph based upon
these lectures. The principal lecturer for this conference is David A. Cox, the
William J. Walker Professor of Mathematics at Amherst College.  Professor Cox is
a world-renowned master expositor and award-winning author of several popular
and highly-cited books in the mathematical area of applied algebraic geometry.
While this field of mathematics dates back at least as far as the 18th century,
developments in the affordability of computers with substantial memory and
parallel processing power have led to a modern renaissance in both practical
applications and new computational questions. Professor Cox's lectures will
discuss historical developments of the area in light of modern
perspectives, leading up to current research and applications to such
diverse fields as computer aided design, rigidity of mechanical linkages,
and chemical reaction networks. Each pair of lectures by Professor Cox
will develop a chosen topic and be followed by a further lecture by a specialist
he has hand-picked to provide a deeper look at the forefront of current research
on that topic. Additional conference activities will help participants develop a
broad and deep understanding of current research problems while also providing
opportunities for young researchers and members of underrepresented groups in
mathematics to interact with leaders in the area and with each
other.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Cox will lecture on the study
of polynomial systems via methods of algebraic geometry and commutative algebra,
including 1) a history of results underpinning computational methods in
algebraic geometry and commutative algebra; 2) modern computational approaches
to solving polynomial systems and recent advances; and 3) a selection of current
applications, with an eye toward helping participants solve their own applied
problems. Specific lecture pair topics will include Elimination Theory,
Polynomial Systems in the Real World, Geometric Modeling, Geometric Constraint
Theory, and Chemical Reaction Networks. Supplementary conference activities will
include a poster session, a software demonstration, a panel discussion, and a
problem session designed to help new researchers enter the field through
active participation. The conference is also anticipated to have
significant regional impact by bolstering collaboration among the
strong concentration of researchers in applied and computational
algebraic geometry in the Texas area. The conference web site can be found
at http://faculty.tcu.edu/gfriedman/CBMS2018/.