* 1741750
* World Congress of Chemical Engineering, Barcelona 2017
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2018
* Ignacio Grossmann, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 05/31/2018
* USD 30,000.00

This grant is to provide travel support for US-based academic researchers to
attend the 10th World Congress of Chemical Engineering (WCCE) in Barcelona,
Spain, on October 1-5, 2017. The WCCE will cover the major current research
topics in the field of chemical engineering with participants from over 70
countries. The conference will address global challenges with potentially
significant benefits to society. It is anticipated that approximately 15 young
researchers will receive partial travel support to attend this conference.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main topics of the 10th World Congress of Chemical
Engineering include: Education, Unit Operations and Separation Processes,
Chemical Reaction Engineering, Process Systems Engineering, Product Engineering
and Advanced Materials, Applied Biotechnology, and Environmental and Sustainable
Chemical Engineering. Furthermore, the unique feature of this World Congress of
Chemical Engineering is that it will take place together with a number of other
major meetings, including European Symposium of Computer-Aided Process
Engineering, International Process Intensification Conference, International
Congress on Sustainability Science and Engineering, Process Safety Symposium,
European Congress of Applied Biotechnology. In addition, there will be two
sessions on future international trends in education and research. The US-based
conference participants supported by this grant will have the opportunity to
network with leading researchers from around the world and exchange ideas about
the current status and future directions in research and education. They will
benefit from state-of-the-art reviews and presentations by leading experts and
by debating controversial points with their peers. The meeting will also provide
an opportunity for interaction and cooperation among industrial and academic
researchers.