* 1741870
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSI: Open Source Support for Massively Parallel, Generic Finite Element Methods
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Wolfgang Bangerth, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Stefan Robila
* 07/31/2018
* USD 393,703.00

Partial differential equations are used in a wide variety of applications as
mathematical models. Their numerical solution is, consequently, of prime
importance for the accurate simulation and optimization of processes in the
sciences, engineering, and beyond. The last decade saw the emergence of large
and successful libraries that support such applications. While these libraries
provide most of what such codes need for small-scale computations, many
realistic applications yield problems of hundreds of millions or billions of
unknowns and require clusters with thousands of processor cores, but there is
currently little generic support for such problems, limiting access to the many
large publicly supported computing facilities to experts in computational
science and excluding scientists from many fields for whom computational
simulation would be a useful tool. This project intends to build the software
infrastructure that will allow a wide cross section of scientists to utilize
these large resources.

This project intends to support the software infrastructure for the large-scale
solution of partial differential equations on massively parallel computational
resources in a generic way. It will build on two of the most successful
libraries for scientific computing, the finite element library deal.II, and
Trilinos that provides the parallel linear algebra capabilities for the former.
Specifically, we will: (i) Make support for massively parallel computations
ubiquitous in deal.II; (ii) Research and develop seamless support for problems
with billions of unknowns in both libraries and improve the interaction between
the two; (iii) Exploit intra-node parallelism on today's clusters; (iv) Ensure
the applicability of our work on a broad basis by implementing two real-world
applications. Both deal.II and Trilinos have large, active and diverse developer
and user communities, and this project will actively engage these communities
through user meetings, short courses, regularly taught classes, mailing lists,
and direct contact in focused projects.