* 1741390
* BIGDATA:F: Statistical Learning with Large Dynamic Tensor Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Cun-Hui Zhang, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

Time series analysis is mainly applied in the discovery of dependent and dynamic
structure of observations over time, and in accurate prediction of potential
outcomes of such data in the future. In the big-data era, modern data collection
capabilities have led to massive amounts of time series data. Large tensor (or
multi-dimensional array) data are now routinely collected in a wide range of
applications. For example, a group of countries will report a set of economic
indicators each quarter, forming a matrix (2-dimensional array) time series,
with each column representing a country and each row representing an economic
indicator. The import and export volume of different types of goods for a group
of countries over time form a 3-dimensional array time series. The aim of the
project is to lay a foundation and develop a general framework to systematically
study the dynamics of such tensor systems, decipher the joint behavior of each
individual time series in the tensor array, and provide methods for accurate
prediction. The framework will include general and specific statistical models,
practical applications, statistical methods and their theoretical and empirical
properties, computational algorithms and software, and implementation in several
data sets. The research can be applied to application areas ranging from finance
and economics, environmental sciences, and human behavior (e.g. social networks)
to neuroscience and engineering. The project also addresses the training and
education of future data scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the big-data era,
large tensor time series are routinely observed in a wide range of applications.
This project aims to develop state-of-the-art statistical tools to effectively
and efficiently extract useful information from such big complex data. The work
concerns a general framework of statistical learning with large dynamic tensor
data. Specifically, the project will develop a general class of tensor factor
models, with modifications for specific applications, for modeling matrix- and
tensor-valued time series, dynamic networks, and spatial temporal data. The
results are expected to be directly applicable to economic tensor data, import-
export volume time series, dynamic social networks, pollution monitoring,
problems in fluid dynamics, and dynamic brain connectivity networks. Model
estimation procedures, along with their theoretical foundations will be
developed. The research will enrich the toolkit of statistical learning for a
highly important and widely encountered class of big-data problems. The project
also involves research training of graduate and undergraduate students in the
field of statistical learning and its applications. The project will develop and
disseminate free software, including an array of cleaned data sets for research,
and a permanently maintained website as a hub for dissemination of future
dynamic tensor research. An international conference on large dynamic tensor
analysis will be organized. Evaluation of the computational algorithms and
implementation of the methods for large scale applications will leverage cloud
computing resources provided through an agreement between commercial cloud
service providers and NSF for the BIGDATA solicitation.