* 1741685
* EFRI NewLAW: Topological Mechanical Metamaterials Science
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Massimo Ruzzene, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,000,000.00

One of the grand challenges in engineering, physics, and materials science is
the ability to design materials with properties that do not occur in natural
systems. Mechanical metamaterials attempt to achieve this by building an
aggregate system out of linear or nonlinear components, that collectively
exhibit material properties and functionalities that differ from, and surpass
those of, their constituent materials. However, their functionality is typically
compromised by defects and imperfections, which are unavoidable in real world
applications. This begs the question of whether a new paradigm exists, whereby a
new class of building blocks and interactions enables the design of materials
that are robust to imperfections and that are characterized by new
functionalities. These studies will demonstrate that concepts from topology
provide an organizing principle that gives rise to a wide range of impurity-
immune phenomena in areas such as wave guiding, structural stability, and
fracture. The project findings will have implications for the design and
fabrication of mechanical energy control systems and devices whose operation
relies on wave focusing, amplification, localization and attenuation. These
include ultrasonic acoustic transducers, sonars, noise absorbing or enhancing
devices, and material systems for vibration filtering and impact/blast
protection. The objectives of the project will be achieved through the
collaboration of a team that combines experts in topological mechanical
metamaterials, experimental wave dynamics, linear and nonlinear wave
propagation, condensed matter physics and mathematics. This multi-disciplinary
approach to research is rich in opportunities for outreach and for broadening
participation of underrepresented groups in engineering and science. For
example, outreach programs to underrepresented groups will be organized in
collaboration with the Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates topological mechanical metamaterials that
challenge classical notions in mechanics such as reciprocity, time reversal
symmetry and sensitivity to defects. The objective is to investigate their
fundamental properties, such as the existence of topological modes in ordered,
disordered and amorphous systems, the effects of nonlinearities, as well as
energy transport in the bulk. Guided by these studies, the research team will
then explore the engineering implications of topological mechanical
metamaterials, focusing on wave guiding, structural stability and fracture.
These investigations will be conducted on novel experimental platforms ranging
from gyroscopic systems as proof-of-concepts, to newly designed continuous
systems that have potential for material/structural system development. The
research is expected to enable functionalities that shift the paradigm in which
dynamic control devices and materials are designed. The team's unique strengths
in theory, simulation and experiments provide the combination of skills that are
essential for the successful execution of this ambitious research program.