* 1741863
* Collaborative Research: A Bridge to Physics and Astronomy Doctorates for Students with Financial Need
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Frances Leslie, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 08/31/2024
* USD 4,199,545.00

With funding from the NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project at California State Polytechnic
University Pomona (CalPoly Pomona) will support high-achieving, low-income
students with demonstrated financial need. This project will fund 146
scholarships over five years for students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in
physics and astronomy. Participating scholars will join a cohort-based mentoring
and undergraduate research program spanning a diverse network of more than 50
California higher education institutions. These institutions are dedicated to
the goal of increasing the number of students pursuing PhDs in physics,
astronomy, and associated STEM disciplines. Led by CalPoly Pomona and the
University of California Irvine in Southern California, and by San Jose State
University and the University of California Santa Cruz in Northern California,
more than 140 physics and astronomy faculty at the 24 California State
University (CSU) and University of California (UC) campuses in the bridge
network will serve as mentors to scholars supported by the project. In addition
to receiving biweekly mentoring and progress monitoring by pairs of one UC and
one CSU professor, these scholars will also receive full need-based scholarships
during their junior and senior years, monthly professional development
workshops, and supervised research opportunities via the successful NSF-funded
CAMPARE program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the size and diversity of the
California secondary education system, the success of this S-STEM Track 3
project will likely significantly increase the number of PhDs nationwide earned
by underrepresented minorities in the fields of physics and astronomy. All low-
income students enrolled in a participating CSU campus are eligible for this
California Bridge (Cal-Bridge) program, which searches for students with unusual
potential, using holistic review and research-based criteria developed by
successful bridge programs such as the Fisk-Vanderbilt Master's-to-PhD Bridge
program. Unlike other existing bridge programs, Cal-Bridge begins with students
during their formative undergraduate years, focusing on preparation rather than
remediation. This multifaceted support will mitigate known barriers to graduate
school entry for high-achieving, motivated students from economically
disadvantaged backgrounds, and will thus greatly increase the probability they
complete their undergraduate degree and gain entry to PhD programs. The project
also involves multi-method social science research to understand the networks of
scholars and institutions formed because of partnerships between
Minority/Hispanic Serving Institutions and Research Universities, and the effect
of those networks on recruitment and admissions to participating UC physics and
astronomy departments. Over the five-years, social network analysis and
qualitative case study methods will be used to capture patterns in Cal-Bridge
Scholars' graduate school admissions and enrollment, as well as in impediments
to these outcomes. These results, along with the project's growing connections
with institutions beyond California, will have the potential to influence the
national landscape of equitable participation by low-income students in STEM
higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.