* 1741564
* I-Corps: An Objective Clinical Machine Learning Imaging Technology
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2017,09/30/2018
* Roman Lubynsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 09/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is creating
computer-aided classification methods to better identify and distinguish various
diseases. Skin issues are the most frequently addressed issues presented in
primary care: over one-third of primary care visits include at least one skin
problem. Skin issues are visual manifestations of many different types of
diseases, including allergies, injuries, bacterial infections, viral infections,
and hormonal fluctuations. A physician's ability to address skin issues is
highly dependent on a physician's prior visual training experiences. However,
many physicians are not regularly familiar with the over 2,000 dermatology
issues that can arise in a patient. The algorithms developed here allow for
objective and much more accurate screening of exposed skin to improve evaluation
of patient issues in many different care settings. This could be implemented for
many different types of skin diseases and other visual constructions of images
to assist physicians visually and vastly augment their sensitivity and
specificity at identifying dermatology issues and their underlying
causes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on using image
processing and machine learning to distinguish dermatological diseases. Image-
capturing electronics such as consumer-grade cameras and smartphones are
becoming increasingly ubiquitous, capable, and affordable. Image processing and
machine learning based on annotated images has shown great potential for
algorithms to differentiate between images capturing different objects and
patterns. The developments here have created a classification system that
differentiates suspicious from non-suspicious lesions that is easy for a
physician to use in a clinical setting to help with clinical decision-making.
The proof of concept is based on a large dataset of prospective clinical images
where the algorithms classified malignant cases and the methods resulted in a
statistically significant discrimination between suspicious and non-suspicious
lesions.