* 1741536
* BIGDATA: F: Critical Visualization Technologies for Analyzing and Understanding Big Network Data
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Kwan-Liu Ma, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 09/30/2022
* USD 576,000.00

Big data presents both opportunities and challenges to all fields of study and
practice. Visualization has been proven effective as a knowledge discovery and
storytelling tool for big data. This project aims to develop new visualization
technologies for big network data that will both illustrate empirical findings
and generate new discoveries. Although many network visualization techniques and
tools have been introduced, visualizing large, dynamic networks to extract key
entities, structures, and trends from the network data remains a challenging
task. Most of the existing network visualization solutions were not designed for
handling dynamic networks and are too slow for interactive exploration of large
networks. This project will closely examine the integral parts of a holistic
solution for the problem of big network visualization. The research study will
be largely driven by the data analysis needs of sociological studies such as
finding hidden associations between multiple networks; however, the project team
will also investigate the solution's applicability in areas such as emergency
management, life science and cyber security. The resulting technologies are
expected to drastically enhance one's ability to explore and understand large,
complex dynamic networks for knowledge discovery, critical decision making, and
storytelling. This research effort is timely because of the explosive growth of
data and common use of graphs as both the internal data structure and a visual
representation in data-driven applications. Those who must deal with large,
complex dynamic network data for their work will benefit from the advanced
visualization technologies resulted from this research project. Students
participating in this project will acquire strong interdisciplinary research
skills for real-world problem solving. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
underscores the importance of providing a comprehensive solution to the
understanding of big data containing complex relations, structure, and trends.
Primary research topics are: (1) Visual depiction and exploration of big network
data; (2) Modeling and visualizing dynamic network data; (3) Visual monitoring
and analysis of live, streaming network data; and (4) Provenance and
storytelling with dynamic network data. This project will explore and integrate
new network modeling, reduction, and visualization techniques for analyzing
large, multivariate dynamic graphs. The resulting research innovations will both
enhance existing methods and investigate new approaches to dynamic network
visual analytics and drastically improve their usability for real-world
applications. The targeted applications, emergency service and sociology,
present the project team with some of the most challenging problems to address
in making sense of heterogeneous dynamic big networks data. The collaborating
domain experts are fully committed to participating in the evaluation work,
which promises to produce usable technologies that will enable respondents to
look at the data in new ways and uncover intricate relations among different
entities/events for critical decision making and mitigation planning. The
project results will be disseminated to the visualization community and beyond
through annual conferences, workshops, and tutorials, and also through the
project website which will include project status updates and resulting images,
videos, and prototype software.