* 1741588
* CAREER:Functional Heterogeneity in Cell Chemotaxis
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Cynthia Reinhart-King, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 12/31/2017
* USD 81,513.00

The overall goal of this proposal is to develop an integrated research and
educational plan focused on cellular migration. This award, supported by the
CBET division of the National Science Foundation, will enable the development of
novel tools to uncover the mechanisms governing endothelial cell chemotaxis.
Research and education will be integrated through their common focus on cell-
extracellular matrix interactions. The research goal of this proposal is to use
an approach inspired by directed evolution to study chemotaxis. The natural
cell-to-cell variations and heterogeneities within a population will be
exploited to uncover basic mechanisms that drive efficient chemotaxis in
endothelial cells in response to vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). A
novel chemotactic device will be developed which sorts endothelial cells based
on the robustness of their response to chemotactic gradients of VEGF. These sub-
populations will be analyzed for underlying molecular differences that are
contributing to the differential chemotactic behaviors. Experiments will be
performed in both 2D and 3D microenvironments and compared. This work has the
potential to uncover critical insights into the molecular regulation of
endothelial cell chemotaxis. Moreover, it has clear implications in the field of
tissue engineering, where controlled, directed endothelial cell migration could
enable the engineering of vascular networks in tissue engineered scaffolds, and
in cancer research, where a better understanding of angiogenesis could enable
the development of more targeted therapeutics to prevent endothelial cell
chemotactic response. The broader impact of this CAREER program is the
development of an interdisciplinary learning environment that connects biology
and engineering across multiple length scales (molecular, cellular and tissue
level). Innovative teaching methodologies and outreach activities will be
employed to introduce middle and high school girls in the local, underserved,
rural community to concepts in biology and engineering in a tractable way and to
promote lifelong learning in science.