* 1741155
* Symposium on Trust: Psychology and Technology Conference
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Juliana Schroeder, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 06/30/2018
* USD 27,021.00

The purpose of this project is to support a symposium focusing on the influence
of human trust on technology use. This one-day symposium, held during the
Psychology and Technology Conference, will bring together psychologists and
computer/information scientists, and includes advanced graduate students in
these disciplines. The symposium focuses on the ways that people may or may not
use technology. The extent to which people trust hardware and software
platforms, and the people and organizations with whom they interact, influences
their use and misuse. Trust can influence whether people may use reliable
technologies, but also can lead to cybersecurity breaches and other detrimental
outcomes. This symposium will focus on the psychological and sociological
dimensions of trust and the linkages of trust to security, privacy and
trustworthy systems.

Trust plays a key role in determining whether humans will rely on technology.
What facilitates trust calibration and reliance? Over or under trusting
technology can have dire consequences, including cybersecurity breaches and
accidents, loss of data including identity data, and intrusions on privacy. This
symposium addresses a gap between basic research on the predictors and
consequences of trust as manifested in cyberspace. There will be both
theoretical and practical foci. The focus on theory will include presentations
and discussions of new models for understanding when people trust information,
organizations, and artifacts online as well as contexts that moderate these
phenomena. The focus on practical application will include presentations and
discussions of vulnerabilities to abuses of trust. Four keynotes will be invited
to present with an estimated 80 attendees, at this symposium to be held at UC
Berkeley. The implications include arriving at a better understanding of whether
or when people would be willing to allow machines to manage their security or to
assist with their daily routines such as driving cars. Cybersecurity
institutions, companies trying to market new technology to users, and government
officials trying to prevent hacking are constituencies that will find this topic
informative and useful. Moreover, as the human-technology frontier continues to
expand, this topic of this symposium will have continued relevance for U.S.
productivity, well-being, and security.