* 1741635
* OpenEdge:  Toward Open and Transparent Edge Computing and Its Application in Public Safety
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Weisong Shi, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 03/31/2019
* USD 49,964.00

The objectives of this project are three-fold: (1) identify public safety
application challenges; (2) brainstorm the initial solutions to technical
challenges in edge computing in general and public safety applications in
particular; and (3) form the team and prepare for a large proposal. The
identified research challenges call for solutions in all of the components of an
edge computing platform. Edge computing poses a vastly different set of research
challenges due to its distinct infrastructure. We envision several new
technologies will be developed to enable various applications to run on the
developed platform with guaranteed efficiency and safety. New theory on
distributed computing and scheduling/allocation algorithms and systems science
in better understanding the new systems will contribute to the body of the
knowledge base in computer science. The identified public safety applications
will exemplify and capture the essence of the core research in edge computing.
They will illustrate a practical and comprehensive setting for people to explore
the challenging problems in edge computing without losing the touch of
reality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Edge computing is envisioned to enable many
applications in addition to the cloud computing paradigm. Developing such an
edge computing system will shed light on the design and deployment of similar
systems in the industry. The research results will be valuable to many
practitioners in edge computing. The identified application specifications will
be useful to many researchers, for them to understand problem settings and build
new solutions. Forming a team will harness the collective mind of different
expertise and make much broader impacts on the scientific development.
Recruiting a team of scientists will also stimulate and enhance the research,
education, and research result dissemination of edge computing in the local
community of each participant.