* 1741651
* EFRI ACQUIRE: Development of scalable quantum networks using ion chips and integrated photonics
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Mario Dagenais, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Alias Smith
* 07/31/2022
* USD 2,409,999.00

Abstract title: EFRI ACQUIRE: Development of scalable quantum networks using ion
chips and integrated
photonics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
description: Utilizing quantum mechanical systems to transmit and process
information provides a fundamental advantage over classical approaches, with
foundational impact on the fields of communication, networking, computer
science, and fundamental quantum physics. A seminal example is the quantum
network. In contrast to a classical communication networks, a quantum network
stores and transmits information using quantum objects such as single atoms and
single photons. By doing so, a quantum network can communicate with
unconditional security and anonymity, and can also interconnect quantum
computers to form a quantum internet. But realizing these technological
capabilities requires the ability to store and transmit quantum information
while preserving the delicate quantum state of the system. Ions trapped in
electric fields constitute the best quantum memory to date. They can store
quantum information for times exceeding tens of minutes, and can also emit
single photons, the ideal carriers of quantum information that are entangled
with quantum memory. But a number of significant challenges remain before a
trapped-ion quantum network can become a reality. Ions emit visible- and
ultraviolet-wavelength photons that are not compatible with fiber-optic
networks. These photons must also be processed with high efficiency without
destroying the delicate quantum signals that they carry. In this program, we
will combine silicon-chip traps and integrated photonics to overcome these
challenges. If successful, this project will provide the core hardware for a
scalable and efficient quantum network that can process and transmit quantum
information with unprecedented speed and
distance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract: By combining integrated
photonics with silicon-based ion-chip traps, we will develop the technology for
scalable quantum networks based on compact, chip-integrated quantum hardware
operating at room temperature. Trapped ions are currently the leading platform
for quantum information processing, with coherence times exceeding tens of
minutes. They are also one of the few room-temperature sources of
indistinguishable single photons that can exhibit the two-photon interference
effects required for photon-mediated quantum interactions. The program will
utilize micro-fabricated ion-chip traps to assemble and manipulate atomic ion
chains on a silicon chip that serve as both efficient room-temperature single-
photon sources and long-lived quantum memories. Integrated photonic structures
will process photons originating from multiple ion traps to mediate long-
distance quantum interactions at unprecedented efficiencies and fidelities.
Integrated nonlinear photonic devices will furthermore convert photons emitted
by trapped ions to telecom wavelengths for long-distance fiber propagation. The
project will deploy and demonstrate compact quantum devices in a practical
optical network. This highly multi-disciplinary program ultimately aims to
demonstrate the fundamental operations of a quantum network, which can be used
for entanglement distribution, quantum error correction, and distribution of
quantum information and quantum keys.