* 1741656
* EFRI ACQUIRE: Deterministic photonic graph-state repeater networks from solid state emitters integrated in chiral photonic circuits
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Gurudev Dutt, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,212,686.00

This program will develop novel components and integrate them into a device that
will serve as the key building block of a secure communication network with
advanced capabilities based on the principles of quantum mechanics. It will
address the pressing need for secure communication at long distance scales while
employing minimal resources using novel theoretical schemes. The approach is
based on the development of new, high-quality light sources capable of producing
many quantum-correlated (entangled) photons at a high rate; these light sources
will be integrated into a device that is capable of directing the photons on a
microchip and reliably guiding them to optical fibers for long-distance
transmission. The entangled photons encode information that cannot be
intercepted without the sender or receiver becoming aware of this. Such a
capability will greatly impact society and national security and help maintain
U.S. leadership in information and communication technologies. Beyond
communications, the developed components and know-how will impact other highly
influential quantum technologies currently being pursued, including quantum
computing. In addition to fundamental science, technology and engineering
developments, the PIs are committed to recruiting and training the next
generation of scientists and engineers, with an emphasis on diversity and
interdisciplinary education through K-12 learning activities and summer
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program combines novel ideas in quantum
communications with cutting edge solid-state quantum technologies to achieve on-
chip integrated devices for the realization of a quantum communication network.
Transformative quantum repeater technologies will be developed based on
multiphoton entangled states. Central components include: (i) novel emitters
hosted in two-dimensional materials, which provide high-yield single-photon
emission with a level structure ideal for spin-photon and multiphoton
entanglement, (ii) defect centers in diamond that offer spin-photon interfaces,
room-temperature capability and a long-lived nuclear spin quantum memory, (iii)
chiral waveguides for efficient photon extraction and spin-spin entanglement on-
chip, and (iv) theoretical designs for novel quantum communication
implementations, including the deterministic generation of all-photonic quantum
repeaters using minimal resources. These components will be integrated together
to form quantum photonic circuits that offer significant novel capabilities in
communications. The pursuit of the proposed goals will lead to advances in key
device components for a broad range of quantum communication technologies as
well as offer a path to the near-future realization of secure quantum
communication at long distance scales.