* 1741751
* I-Corps: Nanomaterial-Enhanced Lithium Ion Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2017,11/30/2018
* Ryne Raffaelle, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 11/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is focused on
assessing and meeting the demand for a domestic source of high efficiency
lithium ion batteries for custom electronic applications. The project
investigates the commercialization potential of nanomaterial-enhanced high-
performance lithium ion batteries for such applications as small satellites,
remote sensing devices, and unmanned vehicle applications, where performance is
paramount. The desired use of these specific applications is often severely
limited by the mass or volumetric energy density of commercial-of-the-shelf
batteries. Providing a rechargeable battery with improved energy density would
enable longer missions, expanded sensing capability, and a larger communication
range in these applications, and presumably a host of other portable electronic
systems. An initial focus of the investigation with be within the U.S. defense
and intelligence communities, whose use of such technologies has expanded
dramatically over the past several years. Successful commercialization of these
batteries will provide the U.S. with improved protection and monitoring
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project exploits the use of
nanomaterials to enhance the performance of conventional lithium ion batteries.
The project further develops energy dense lithium ion battery electrodes through
the combination of carbon nanotubes (CNTs), high capacity active materials, and
high areal capacity loadings. This combination increases the relative mass of
active to inactive materials that can store lithium in the cell, thus increasing
its energy density. In addition, the technology offers ancillary improvements in
cycle life and suppression of the fading that occurs with increased
charge/discharge rates. This performance relies on the incorporation of CNTs as
a conductive additive at a lower weight loading than conventional carbons, like
carbon black and graphite, enabling improved mechanical properties and a more
effective means of providing electrical percolation. The use of CNTs additives
enables thicker electrodes, with more active material by volume, and a more
efficient use of the active materials.