* 1741045
* I-Corps: Learning Intervention for Introductory Computer Science
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2017,11/30/2019
* Jason Freeman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 11/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide
K-12 schools with a learning environment, curriculum, and teacher training to
expand and improve computer science education and to encourage a diverse student
population to pursue further studies in computing. Computer science has become a
core 21st century skill critical to careers both within and beyond the tech
industry, but K-12 education has yet to meet increasing demand from industry and
from parents to teach computing, and school districts still struggle to
adequately train teachers and to engage students in computer science. This
project provides a simple and easy-to-use solution that integrates music with
computer science to drive student engagement. Moreover, this approach
contributes to a diverse computer science pipeline by engaging female and
minority students through an emphasis on creativity and real-world applications.
Today there is a market for schools to train teachers, and to buy materials and
tools to teach computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
leverages an online learning environment, curriculum, and teacher training
designed for any introductory computing course from late elementary through to
the college level, along with a body of research assessing the effects of this
learning intervention on student content knowledge and engagement in computing.
The web-based learning platform includes a code editor, a multi-track audio
player, an audio loop library, an interactive textbook, and mechanisms for
students to share and collaborate, along with curricular, training, and grading
tools for teachers. Mixed-methods research has shown significant student gains
in both content knowledge and engagement across gender and demographic groups
when learning with this approach, with particularly large gains in engagement
for female students. Students ascribe their increased engagement in computing to
the creative, expressive, and real-world approach of the intervention through
its combination of popular music and music production techniques with
computational thinking and programming in industry-relevant coding languages.