* 1741250
* Wind-driven Rainfall Microphysics: Raindrop Shape - Fall Velocity - Size Distribution under Wind Shear and Turbulence
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Firat Testik, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 02/29/2024
* USD 466,057.00

Knowledge of the characteristics of raindrop size and shape is important for
weather radar estimates of rainfall. Rainfall droplets can change in shape and
speed as they fall to the ground, especially in situations where there are
collisions with other droplets. This project will enable researchers to collect
very high-resolution observations of raindrops and determine how they are
affected by wind. Improved estimates of rainfall from weather radars will
potentially impact flood forecasting and water resource management. The project
also involves training and mentoring of early-career scientists, ensuring a
diverse and highly capable future workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
team will conduct an observational and analysis-based study to uncover the
effect of wind on rainfall microstructure and whether microphysical quantities
under the influence of wind can be predicted. Data for the study will come from
a field site near UT-San Antonio, which includes the High-speed Optical
Disdrometer (HOD) and other meteorological instruments. The project will address
four main hypotheses: 1) Wind shear and turbulence induce flow/pressure field
alterations/fluctuations around raindrops, 2) These alterations/fluctuations
cause raindrop fall velocity deviations from predicted terminal values, 3)
Broadening of the raindrop fall velocity distributions increases the raindrop-
raindrop collision rates, and 4) Increased collision rates intensify drop size
distribution evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.