* 1741698
* 2017-2020 Provision of log data reduction and database services for scientific ocean drilling
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* David Goldberg, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* James Allan
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,314,133.00

Part 1:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the previous Integrated Ocean Drilling Program,
NSF supported operation of the U.S. drillship JOIDES Resolution (JR) through a
contract to the Consortium for Ocean Leadership (COL). COL, as prime contractor,
oversaw subcontracts to Texas A&amp;M University (as "Prime Contractor" for
operating the JR) and Columbia University (as "Logging Contractor"). The
Borehole Research Group (BRG), under PI Goldberg, provided downhole logging
services that included management of the logging subcontractor Schlumberger as
well as logging data reduction and quality control, and management of the IODP
logging database. These logging services are primarily geophysical measurements
done remotely in the drilled borehole, such as borehole wall rock or sediment
(formation) resistivity, geochemistry, seismic properties, or magnetic
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the current International Ocean Discovery
Program, a new NSF Cooperative Agreement to Texas A&amp;M University as JOIDES
Resolution Science Operator (JRSO) replaced the contract for FY2015. At the time
of this award, it was recognized that a need existed to maintain the IODP
logging database and the data reduction and quality control activities provided
under the previous logging subcontract, activities that the JRSO at award could
not easily or inexpensively provide. Thus, NSF made a 3 year award to the PI to
provide these services in FY 2015-2017 (OCE-1440495), an arrangement that has
worked very well, with no issues identified during review by two independent NSF
panels examining JR facility operations performance in FY2015 and 2016.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award represents a new award to the PI to continue to
provide these shipboard downhole logging data services, including data reduction
and quality control and support of a database containing these logging
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will provide
support for three years of the following services, also provided under a
previous NSF Award to the PI: &lt;br/&gt;1) Rapid data reduction and quality
control of logging data acquired aboard JOIDES Resolution drillship
International Ocean Discovery Program (IODP) Expeditions by the logging
subcontractor Schlumberger, with subsequent return of the reduced data in near
real-time to the Expedition Science Party aboard the drillship; &lt;br/&gt;2)
Archiving of raw and reduced logging data within the existing IODP logging
database LogDB housed at Columbia University; &lt;br/&gt;3) maintain and enhance
web services for automated query and retrieval of data from LogDB, including
development of new graphical tools; &lt;br/&gt;4) provide enhancements to LogDB,
including publishing Digital Object Identifiers (DOI's) for each well log
dataset and also providing interoperability between LogDB and other databases
&lt;br/&gt;5) Submit full sets of raw and processed data for deep archiving to
the National Centers for Environmental Information; and &lt;br/&gt;6) provide
support for LogDB users, especially neophytes.