* 1741090
* ECA-PGR: Under the Hood: The Genetic Components of Maize Transformation
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Frank White, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,398,613.00

Maize (corn) is a staple crop in the US and worldwide, and serves as an
important model for fundamental research. Maize production has experienced
dramatic yield increases over the last century but faces challenges for further
increases, particularly under highly variable climates and disease pressures.
Revolutionary genome engineering tools (genome editing) offer great
opportunities for improved understanding of the relationship between genetic
information and traits, and for modifying genetic features for trait
improvements. Unfortunately, most crop plants, including maize, are not readily
amenable to plant tissue culture, thereby limiting the benefit from direct
applications of genome editing tools. In this project, the genome of a maize
line amenable to culture will be sequenced to facilitate the identification of
the genetic elements that regulate culturability. Novel approaches will be
developed for genetic decoding on the complex maize genome. In particular, a
designable bacterial system specifically interacting with genes of interest in
the maize genome will be utilized to study gene function and manipulate cell
development. The project will also provide training for undergraduate, graduate
and postdoctoral students in both genetics and computation, with an emphasis on
large data education. In addition, the project will collaborate with the Kansas
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation to encourage involvement of
historically underrepresented students in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Maize is the highest agronomically valued crop in
the US. Genome engineering tools, including TALENs and CRISPRs, provide great
potential for the elucidation of maize gene functions and trait improvements.
However, current genetic and genomic resources as well as transformation
capacity in maize are insufficient for the full utilization of genome
engineering tools. This project provides public resources that include a high-
quality genome assembly of a highly transformation amenable maize inbred line,
A188, and 150 doubled haploid (DH) lines from a cross of A188 with B73, a
transformation recalcitrant inbred variety and the maize reference genome.
Bulked RNA sequencing based mapping will be used for genetic mapping of traits
related to embryogenesis and regeneration. Furthermore, the project will
generate time-series transcriptome profiles from callus cells that are
transiently expressing designer Transcription Activator-Like effectors (dTALes)
of a known regulator of embryogenesis and regeneration. These profiles will be
used to construct multilayered hierarchical gene regulatory networks to identify
high hierarchical regulators and hub genes that govern maize embryogenesis and
regeneration. Ectopic gene expression and CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing will be used
to validate select candidate genes. These genetic and genomic resources will
advance genome engineering in a major crop species and improve understanding of
the genetic basis of maize transformation and regeneration
ability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.