* 1741838
* Broadening Participation in Materials - 2017 MRS Spring Meeting
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* J. Ardie Butch Dillen, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 04/30/2018
* USD 46,515.00

This award supports the Materials Research Society(MRS)Broadening Participation
in Materials Underrepresented Student Mentoring Program at the 2017 MRS Spring
Meeting in Phoenix, AZ, April 17-19, 2017. The workshop pairs underrepresented
minority (URM) undergraduate students (mentees) with graduate student mentors
from MRS University Chapters to help them navigate the next steps in their
education and career. The program is structured to offer opportunities to
enhance students' skill in networking, research presentation, and communication.
The URM student mentees will participate in a poster competition. The top 3
posters will receive special recognition. The students will also be provided
with a one-on-one appointment with a professional career coach and have the
opportunity to participate in mock interviews, and resume critiques.
Applications are solicited through the MRS web site, outreach to universities,
nonprofits, and other organizations with underrepresented student populations.
MRS provides complimentary full MRS Spring Meeting registration for the selected
URM students, which will include a 1-year MRS student membership. The NSF funds
pay for travel grants to students who might not otherwise be able to attend. URM
students who have their own travel funding are invited to participate in the
program to expand the number of students served.