* 1741853
* Engineering Scholars Program (ESP)
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2023
* Dana Holland, Fort Lewis College
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, the Engineering
Scholars Program (ESP) is providing support to low-income students with
demonstrated financial need and academic promise to succeed in STEM disciplines
at Fort Lewis College (FLC) in Southwest Colorado. This S-STEM Track 2 project
is funding 60 annual scholarships of up to $10,000 per year for FLC students who
are pursuing bachelor's degrees in Physics and Engineering. The ESP scholars
will benefit from a rich ecosystem of support services at FLC. In addition,
these talented low-income students will receive direct financial support to
allow them to stop working and focus on their studies. The significance of this
award resides in the fact that FLC has the highest percentage of Native American
students enrolled in a non-tribal liberal arts institution in the nation and it
awards more STEM degrees to Native American students than any other
baccalaureate institution in the United States. These scholars will likely
represent a significant addition to the national pool of Native American
Engineering and Physics graduates, which is extremely
small.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This S-STEM Track 2 project has several distinctive
features which reflect its intellectual merit and potential for broader impacts.
Each ESP scholar will work with a faculty mentor to set goals, identify required
support measures and monitor progress. Scholar selection is based on an
innovative two-tiered system that has been successfully vetted during past
scholarship programs. The ESP allows students with GPAs less than 3.0, but who
demonstrate academic talent based on alternate criteria, a chance to prove
themselves. Student performance is closely monitored. In addition to traditional
academic support activities (such as near-peer tutoring, tutoring, et cetera)
the program focuses on extracurricular high-impact experiences like summer
research with faculty, internships, professional development and field trips.
Researchers will study the program's high impact experiences and the two-tiered
selection process, providing a valuable contribution to the STEM education
knowledge base about the various impacts of these interventions on degree
attainment by low-income, academically talented students at FLC. Results will be
disseminated not only by the principal investigators and their collaborators to
local and national STEM education communities but also to local communities
through presentations by scholars to their home towns.