* 1741855
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2017 ACM International Conference on Nanoscale Computing and Communication (ACM NanoCom)
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Josep Jornet, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 12/31/2017
* USD 10,000.00

The ACM NanoCom conference series aims at creating a trans-disciplinary forum to
foster and develop new communications and computing paradigms for nanoscale
machines. The conference has been held annually since 2014, and has become the
reference venue for fundamental advances in nanoscale computing and
communication networks. ACM NanoCom highlights research potentials, stimulates
novel and breakthrough ideas, and identifies their short- and medium-term
exploitation goals. The conference features an open call for papers as well as
keynote and plenary talks, tutorials on state-of-the-art topics, and poster
sessions. Both novel research results and implementation-based solutions are
welcome.

This award will support 10 students in the United States to attend ACM NanoCom
2017, which will be held in Washington DC, USA on September 27-29, 2017.
Attending such high-caliber technical venue is extremely valuable for future
researchers. This is a truly inter-disciplinary field, which requires close
interaction and frequent discussions with experts that span different areas. ACM
NanoCom 2017 is aimed at becoming the forum for such discussions to occur.
Students will not only be exposed to the state-of the-art in the field, but they
will also have the opportunity to interact with peers from institutions
worldwide, meet with leading researchers, and take part in discussions that are
likely to shape the future of the field. The travel grants will target graduate
students who will substantially benefit from attending this conference but have
limited travel funds. Priority will be given to underrepresented student groups
in STEM.