* 1741026
* BIGDATA: IA: Collaborative Research:  Detecting Financial Market Manipulation: An Integrated Data- and Model-Driven Approach
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* David Byrd, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 330,000.00

Financial stock market manipulators can profit illegally by misleading investors
about market conditions. For example, in several recent incidents, manipulators
successfully spoofed markets by inserting orders that deceived investors about
supply or demand for the security. This kind of behavior has increased with the
prevalence of algorithmic trading. It imposes substantial harm to the economy,
by reducing the efficiency of capital allocation, and more seriously,
threatening to compromise the integrity and stability of financial markets.
Spoofing is difficult to detect because the underlying actions have legitimate
purposes as well as nefarious ones. This project will apply innovative
approaches to improve detection and deterrence of market manipulation.

The project will integrate data-driven methods, including calibration of
detectors with normal background activity and extraction of manipulation
signatures from enhanced time series, with model-based techniques for
characterizing manipulation strategies based on strategic analysis of market
microstructure. The key idea is to use simulation and optimization to generate
successful manipulation strategies for trading models calibrated from available
market data streams. These strategies will then be injected into the trading
models, to produce enhanced data streams that include labeled manipulation
activity. Having labeled activity enables the application of machine learning
techniques to extract signatures of spoofing activity, which can be used to
construct surveillance and audit algorithms. Methods produced in this project in
conjunction with guidance on market design and regulation policy can contribute
to reducing the threat from increasingly capable market manipulators.