* 1741560
* Hybrid Nanoparticles for Kinetically Controlled Cancer Targeting Using Biomimetic Cell Rolling and Multivalent Binding
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Seungpyo Hong, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 09/30/2018
* USD 126,064.00

Non-Technical Part:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials Program
in the Division of Materials Research, and co-funded by the Thermal Transport
Processes Program (CBET/ENG) to the University of Illinois, Chicago, is to
create a class of novel dendrimer-polymer hybrid nano-particles that utilizes a
combination of biomimetic tumor targeting strategies of cell rolling and
multivalent binding. The present project will mimic naturally occurring
processess (cell rolling and multivalent binding) for enhanced tumor targeting,
integrated within a signle hybrid NP system. This "mothership" approach will
have major implications and potentially high reward in the emerging area of
biomimetic nanotechnology. Successful achievement of the proposed study will: i)
significantly advance the understanding of cancer targeting using multiple
targeting mechanisms in a kinetically controlled manner; ii) establish a
database describing the effects of spatial construction of targeting agents,
targeting kinetics, particle properties, polymer degradation rates, multivalent
effect, nanoparticle rolling, and tumor penetration on targeting efficacy; and
potentially iii) present a novel, transformative platform technology for
targeted cancer therapy. &lt;br/&gt;The PI will develop and expand education and
outreach activities involving, among others, high-school internship programs in
underserved areas, and research experiences for undergraduates and teachers.
Additionally, the research results and experimental techniques developed in this
program will be disseminated via publications and proceedings at international
conferences as well as via integration into classroom instruction, both at the
undergraduate and graduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Part: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although recent advances in nanotechnology have
culminated in a number of promising delivery platforms for tumor targeting,
successful clinical implementation of such technologies has been hindered
largely due to a lack of fundamental understanding on nano-bio interactions,
resulting in clinically unmet targeting efficacy. The multifaceted nature of
cancer has often caused ineffective targeting of nanocarriers that rely on one,
or less commonly two, of currently available targeting strategies, i.e., passive
and active targeting. This award is to support an effort to develop a new
nanocarrier system that integrates multiple targeting mechanisms within a single
delivery platform through hybridization of poly(amidoamine) (PAMAM) dendrimers
and polymeric nanoparticles (NPs). It is hypothesized that overall targeting
efficacy of the novel hybrid nanoparticles (NPs), or nanohybrids, will be
substantially enhanced using biomimetic targeting approaches in a kinetically
controlled manner. Through chemical, physical, and biological studies,
sequential utilization of three targeting mechanisms will be explored: i)
Recruiting of the hybrid NPs from bloodstream to angiogenic endothelia through
leukocyte-mimicking rolling; ii) Extravasation of the size-controlled hybrid NPs
(~100 nm in diameter) to tumors, facilitated by the dynamic rolling and the
enhanced permeability and retention effect; and iii) Multivalent targeting and
efficient tumor penetration of targeted dendrimers to individual tumor cells
upon release through diffusion from and degradation of the NP shell. The new
design of the nanocarriers will be validated through a series of physicochemical
and biological assays.