* 1741561
* Collaborative Research (HBCU-DCL EAGER): Broadening participation and strengthening capacity in interdisciplinary engineering model development
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Ekundayo Shittu, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 08/31/2020
* USD 199,906.00

It is important to understand how doctoral scholars of color are able to
integrate cultural identity and self-efficacy in contexts where stereotype
threat might be prevalent, such as higher education, STEM programs, and
intensive research labs. This project seeks to identify, understand, and
describe the interplay between the sense of identity, self-efficacy,
metacognition of modeling formalisms, and stereotype threat. Specifically, the
goal is to understand how thinking and narrative identity evolve over time and
how the process of coaching scholars of color in a supportive academic context
might strengthen the value proposition of entering the professoriate. The key
objectives of this project are: (1) to implement a collaborative approach to the
development of highly skilled and competitive graduate scholars; and (2) to
broaden participation among underrepresented minorities (URMs) in the
engineering professoriate, with a specific focus on African Americans. Success
of the project will be evident by an increased participation of these scholars
in high-impact activities such as scholarly publications, progress toward
degree, and applying to academic positions. Additionally, this research project
will help to strengthen institutional capacities, particularly of a Historically
Black College/University (HBCU). It will also link parallel efforts at NC
A&amp;T State University (a public HBCU) and George Washington University (a
private Predominantly White Institution/PWI). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a
quasi-experimental design, pre- and post-test control group design, the proposed
research project is a first attempt to integrate anticipatory cognition
development and stereotype threat reduction in full immersion of engineering
modeling that aligns with NSF's Research and Related Activities (R&amp;RA)
programs. The investigators will also create a proof-of-concept that evaluates
different adaptive learning formalisms to identify effective strategies to aid
students' capabilities to develop and apply mathematical models for problem
solving in engineering. The role of anticipatory cognition is to influence
students' reasoning about the problem content prior to the development and
application of the mathematics-based approach. A stereotype minimization
coaching model will be implemented and performance and social learning variables
(e.g., stereotype threats, identity, and engineering modeling self-efficacy)
will be compared across both institutions. There is an implicit hypothesis that
additional factors may emerge because of the differences between the
institutions. Such emerging factors as critical mass and social class may be
identified. The effectiveness of the coaching model will be assessed through a
quasi-experimental design, pre- and post-test control group design at the two
sites. In so doing, the proposed research project has two concomitant efforts -
one focused on an R&amp;RA program to develop subject matter expertise in
engineering model development, and the other a pilot study to compare an
intervention to optimize anticipatory cognition and minimize stereotype threat
among these same graduate students.