* 1741137
* BIGDATA: F: Testing High Dimensional Distributions without the Curse of Dimensionality
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2020
* Constantinos Daskalakis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 11/30/2020
* USD 900,000.00

Scientists develop descriptions of models that explain their observations. But
how many observations are needed to verify the validity of a model? When the
model is probabilistic, the resulting question is this: How many samples from a
distribution are needed to test whether it has a certain property? Arguably this
problem lies at the foundations of scientific thought, and recent years have
seen a tremendous body of work in the Computer Science literature trying to
close in on the precise sample and time complexity needed to test distribution
properties. Often data is high dimensional -- for example, medical records for
patients have many entries. However, high dimensional distribution data is
notoriously hard to deal with. This project will find new ways of overcoming the
difficulties of dealing with high dimensional data, by isolating properties of
data occurring in practice that aid in simplifying the distribution testing
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this project includes
advancing the interface of Computer Science, Statistics and Learning. Our
methods will be tested on a healthcare dataset, including over 3.7 million
patients, and will test the accuracy of common models used to improve healthcare
outcomes. Broader impact of this project also includes engagement in Computer
Science activities for elementary school children, MIT PRIMES mathematical
research with high school students, and participation in activities for
promoting women in research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current work on
distribution property testing has focused on properties of single-dimensional
distributions such as uniformity, monotonicity, log-concavity, and others, with
only a few results on testing properties of high-dimensional distributions.
Unfortunately, testing properties of high-dimensional distributions quickly runs
into exponential sample complexity lower bounds. The goal of the project is to
develop new analysis frameworks for overcoming these lower bounds. Typically the
lower bounds construct highly-complex distributions that do not possess a
property but are really hard to distinguish from those that do. Our thesis is
that such rich structure may not be present in many practical settings of
interest. The overarching question of our research then is this: &lt;br/&gt;are
there reasonable assumptions that one could make about the unknown distribution
under which high-dimensional testing problems are more tractable?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will (1) explore how the expressive language
of graphical models can be used to restrict the correlation structure of high-
dimensional distributions in ways that can be leveraged for faster testing; and
(2) develop analysis frameworks that allow testing generating models of
combinatorial structures, such as social networks, from a single or a constant
number of samples; this sounds like an oxymoron but it will be made possible
with adequate assumptions about the model generating the combinatorial
structure. (1) will reveal important connections to Bayesian networks and their
use in healthcare decision making, as well as to computational biology and
phylogenetics, while (2) will have connections to social network modeling.