* 1741462
* I-Corps: 3-Dimensional Data Output from Remote Sensing Algorithms
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2017,11/30/2018
* Kevin Czajkowski, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 11/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to develop a
3-dimensional view of agricultural fields using algorithms applied to remotely
sensed imagery to help farmers enhance soil fertility and crop production while
also protecting watersheds. From an economic perspective, farmers want to
minimize expenditures on nutrients. There is a need by farmers to increase below
ground drainage through installation of tiles, perforated plastic pipes, and
thus increase production. Tile placement and integrity, coupled with existing
data on soil type and characteristics, have a critical impact on the hydrology
and fertility of fields, affecting plant growth, the need for
fertilizer/nutrients, pesticide and other types of applications. Precise
knowledge of a three dimensional view of the land will enable farmers to make
appropriate decisions about the application of fertilizers, micro-nutrients,
pesticides, etc. to minimize cost, maximize revenue and do as little harm as
possible to the ecosystem in which the farm exists. Bringing together data
layers of agricultural fields along with information on tile drains will allow
the agricultural industry to optimize production through proper placement and
repair of tiles while controlling nutrient use and loss.

This I-Corps project uses remote sensing techniques with aerial imagery to
provide information precisely identifying the location of drain tiles buried
beneath farm fields. Farmers have expressed that knowledge of the location of
tile reduces their costs when tile fail and need repair and also helps when
additional tile are added to a field improving drainage. In previous work, it
was found that fertilizers applied to agricultural fields will pass through the
soil and exit a field through tile drains to the surface water system. This
I-Corps project uses remote sensing algorithms to detect tile drains below the
soil. The technique utilizes the reflectance of the soil as well as the linear
shape expressed on the soil surface that indicates tiles within fields. The
information generated through this project is unique and much needed by the
agricultural industry to better utilize land in crop production "precision
farming".