* 1741191
* BIGDATA: F: Statistical Foundation of Predictivity: A Novel Architecture for Big Data Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Shaw-Hwa Lo, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 900,000.00

Identifying variables that are good for prediction, especially in the context of
BIG DATA, is an important challenge. The scientific literature currently lacks
research that directly considers a variable set's potential ability to predict,
referred to as "predictivity", as a parameter to be estimated. This project sets
out to lay down statistical foundations for measures of predictivity, and
proposes a novel framework for maximizing predictivity in big data learning. The
research includes an application to big data in urban planning, addressing
prediction problems in New York City's Vision Zero project. In collaboration
with the NYC Department of Transportation, the PI and his team will identify
risk factors and their combinations that are associated with traffic accidents
and their outcomes, and improve accident prevention and victim outcome
prediction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel sample-based measure of predictivity,
the I-score, that is effective in differentiating between noisy and predictive
variables in big data is proposed. This measure can be related to a lower bound
for the correct prediction rate. Guided by this I-score, variable sets of high
potential predictivity can be identified. This high predictivity often resides
within complex interactions among the variables. To fully leverage the
predictivity in an identified variable set, powerful classifiers based on deep
architectures will be constructed. Novel strategies are proposed for scalable
computational implementation of the proposed framework. Systematic evaluation of
the proposed methods, comparing with current strategies, will be carried out
using simulations and benchmark real data sets.