* 1741950
* Biology and Environmental Science Training (BEST) Program
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Rhine Singleton, FRANKLIN PIERCE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 03/31/2024
* USD 649,931.00

With five years of funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, Franklin Pierce University (FPU)
will create the Biology and Environmental Science Training (BEST) Program. The
BEST program will provide scholarships to 14 low-income, high-achieving students
pursuing baccalaureate degrees in biology and environmental science. The program
aims to increase academic success, retention, graduation, and job or graduate
school placement of these students, thus contributing to regional and national
need for STEM graduates and employees. BEST scholars will participate in program
activities focused on using more than 1,000 acres of undeveloped land on FPU as
a living laboratory, where they will conduct research on the natural community,
environmental health, and conservation. The expectation is that these activities
will help students graduate and transition into meaningful careers in biology
and environmental science. BEST scholars will be part of a learning community
that shares academic interests, sections of courses, and shared residence.
Scholars will be matched to faculty mentors, have peer and professional
tutoring, and job shadowing opportunities. The program will share the materials
and resources it develops, as well as its research results, within the
university and nationally. These materials and results will inform FPU's biology
and environmental science curriculum. In addition, they have the potential to
deepen understanding about the role of enhanced curricular and co-curricular
opportunities for student success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BEST Program will
build upon existing and ongoing successful activities, as well as introduce new
ones, to achieve its goals of recruitment, retention, and career preparation of
students with financial need. BEST Program objectives include 1) increasing the
number of high achieving students in Franklin Pierce's biology and environmental
science major by 14 total students, using targeted recruitment practices; 2)
increasing academic success of S-STEM students, using evidence-based curricular
improvements; 3) improving first year retention and four-year graduation rates
of S-STEM scholars to 86%, by enhancing co-curricular support and services; and
4) contributing to the knowledge base of effective practices for enhancing
success of students with demonstrated financial need, by research on the impact
of undergraduate learning communities that use time spent outdoors as a
community building theme.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.