* 1741477
* I-Corps: Polyvalent Bacteriophages
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2017,11/30/2018
* Jacques Mathieu, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 11/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide an
effective and low-cost means for inhibiting the growth of pathogenic or
problematic bacteria in the environment. There is growing concern that the
widespread use of antibiotics and biocides has promoted the evolution of
resistant bacterial strains for which there exist few effective treatments. The
proposed technology is being developed as a safer and more environmentally
sustainable alternative to antibiotics and biocides, or may be used as part of a
combination treatment to enhance their effects. Additionally, the proposed
technology is selective, and can target specific bacteria within a population,
thus preserving the function of beneficial species. Successful implementation of
this project will lead to the development of a wide range of products useful for
controlling bacteria in both built and natural environments. Specific
applications are expected to include the control of agricultural pathogens,
mitigation of petroleum reservoir souring, optimization of wastewater treatment
processes, and microbiome engineering.

This I-Corps project is based on a novel technology platform for the isolation
and application of extremely wide host-range (polyvalent) bacteriophages
(viruses that only infect bacteria). The vast majority of bacteriophages
reported in scientific studies and developed for commercial use have had a
narrow host-range, likely due to the use of biased isolation techniques. In
contrast, the proposed technology preferentially isolates only very wide host-
range bacteriophages. Polyvalent bacteriophages have the potential to be
significantly more effective than narrow host-range bacteriophages at
controlling target bacteria in many natural and built environments, including
biofilms. They have been shown to be 10- to 100-fold more effective at
inhibiting the growth of their target bacteria, and have been successfully
utilized to eliminate 99.99% of an antibiotic resistance gene from a wastewater
sample. When used in combination with antibiotics or biocides, the technology is
expected to work synergistically, enabling long-term and more complete control
of problematic bacteria.