* 1741150
* Conference: Facilitating Science Teaching Skill Development of Graduate Students, Postdoctoral Fellows and Building Networks of Comm. College and 4-Year Institution Science Faculty
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Ellis Bell, University of Tampa
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 06/30/2020
* USD 31,625.00

This award to the University of Tampa will support the attendance of 25 graduate
students and/or postdoctoral fellows and 10 community college faculty at a four-
day conference. The conference is one of a series of education symposia
organized under the auspices of the American Society for Biochemistry &amp;
Molecular Biology (ASBMB) 2017 Special Symposia Series: Transforming Education.
It will be held at the University of Tampa on July 20-23, 2017. The conference
brings together experienced teachers from four-year and two-year colleges and
younger scientists who lack teaching experience. There are two major goals. The
first is to facilitate the development of the graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows as teachers through sessions at the conference and by matching them with
a dedicated mentor with whom they will continue to interact after the meeting.
The second is to highlight teaching approaches that will increase the retention
and success of students transferring from two-year to four-year colleges. A
report of the conference proceedings will be published in the ASBMB Today
journal, in print and online and submitted for publication to the Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology Education (BAMBED) Journal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conference is designed to address two issues in life sciences education. The
first is the lack of experience of young scientists in teaching and the second
is the lower graduation rates of students transferring from two to four-year
colleges. The first problem stems from the fact that most graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows, in biochemistry and molecular biology, are heavily focused
on their research and have little opportunity to gain knowledge about current
life sciences pedagogical approaches or develop their teaching skills. Exposing
these young scientists to modern approaches in the conference sessions and
providing them with long-term mentors will positively impact their professional
developmental and better prepare them for teaching. To address the differential
graduation rates of transfer students, the conference will include community
college faculty and faculty from four-year institutions. Together the faculty
will discuss pedagogical methods aimed at improving the success of students. The
following topics will form the core of these discussions: 1) High impact
teaching strategies; 2) Classroom undergraduate research experiences (CUREs); 3)
Molecular visualization in biochemistry &amp; molecular biology pedagogy; 4)
Teaching Sanger sequencing for conceptual understanding; 5) Scientific teaching
&amp; assessment; 6) Online assessment tools; 7) Community college into 4-year
college/university transitions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More information about the
conference is available by visiting
 http://www.asbmb.org/SpecialSymposia/2017/education/program/ or by contacting
the PI (Dr. Michael Carastro mcarastro@ut.edu).