* 1741345
* BIGDATA: IA: Collaborative Research: Domain Adaptation Approaches for Classifying Crisis Related Data on Social Media
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Doina Caragea, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

The project investigates the use of big-data analysis techniques for classifying
crisis-related data in social media with respect to situational awareness
categories, such as caution, advice, fatality, injury, and support, with the
goal of helping emergency response teams identify useful information. A major
challenge is the scale of the data, where millions of short messages are
continuously posted during a disaster, and need to be analyzed. The use of
current technologies based on automated machine learning is limited due to the
lack of labeled data for an emergent target disaster, and the fact that every
event is unique in terms of geography, culture, infrastructure, technology, and
the people involved. To tackle the above challenges, domain adaptation
techniques that make use of existing labeled data from prior disasters and
unlabeled data from a current disaster are designed. The resulting models are
continuously updated and improved based on feedback from crowdsourcing
volunteers. The research will provide real, usable solutions to emergency
response organizations and will enable these organizations to improve the speed,
quality and efficiency of their response. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
provides novel solutions based on domain adaptation and deep neural networks to
tackle the unique challenges in applying machine learning for crisis-related
data analysis, specifically the volume and velocity challenges of big crisis
data. Domain adaptation approaches enable the transfer of information from prior
source disasters to an emergenet target disaster. Deep learning approaches make
it possible to employ large amounts of labeled source data and unlabeled target
data, and to incrementally update the models as more labeled target data becomes
available. Large-scale analysis across combinations of source and target crises
will help identify patterns of transferable situational awareness knowledge. The
resulting technical and social solutions will be blended together for use in
data management and emergency response.