* 1741937
* STEM Scholars Engaging in Local Problems
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Stephen Cessna, Eastern Mennonite University
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 12/31/2023
* USD 649,998.00

The Eastern Mennonite University (EMU) STEM Scholars Engaging in Local Problems
(SSELP) program will provide 14 scholarships to academically talented, low-
income students who will pursue employment, service, or continued education in
high-need STEM fields regionally and nationwide. This program will use the local
community and the surrounding Shenandoah Valley as a rich resource to inspire
and teach students STEM concepts in a hands-on, problem-to-solution based
manner. Scholars will receive early and consistent exposure to inquiry- and
problem-based learning through mini-research projects that are embedded in their
courses and focused on real-world issues. In addition, EMU will offer a new
Science and Engineering Practicum course for first year scholars.  This
practicum will highlight the variety of STEM careers by providing interactions
between students and STEM professionals across different careers followed by
reflective writing on those experiences.  Scholarships, with several academic
interventions and supports including tutoring, mentoring, career skill-building,
encourage academically talented, low-income students to pursue and persist in
STEM majors. These interventions are designed to heighten student commitment to
serving as active, contributing citizens; build self-efficacy; engage them in
their STEM studies; and help them to envision multiple STEM career
pathways. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SSELP program will 1) recruit two cohorts of
seven academically talented, low-income students majoring in biology, chemistry,
biochemistry, engineering, computer science, mathematics, or environmental
science; 2) retain 93% (13/14) of SSELP scholars to Year 2; 3) graduate 14 SSELP
scholars in four years and place 93% of them (within one year of graduation) in
jobs, service programs, or graduate programs related to STEM; and 4) generate
undergraduate STEM education knowledge by exploring the extent to which a place-
based interdisciplinary project develops STEM students' level of motivation for
their major. Student motivation for STEM studies will be assessed using
validated surveys before and after their participation in the local-based,
interdisciplinary, collaborative project. These quantitative data will be
enhanced by qualitative information gathered from semi-structured interviews
with the SSELP scholars. While the impact of place-based learning has been shown
to improve engagement and motivation in primary and secondary students, there is
a gap in scholarly work on this for higher education settings. Thus, the SSELP
program will also contribute to the growing knowledge on student efficacy and
motivation.