* 1741693
* EFRI NewLAW: CMOS-Compatible Electrically Controlled Nonreciprocal Light Propagation with 2D Materials
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Mark Brongersma, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,097,563.00

The proposed work addresses the investigation of a group of photonic devices
exhibiting nonreciprocal light-propagating properties based on atomically thin
two-dimensional materials under electric bias. The realization of electrically
driven nonreciprocal light propagation in a broad wavelength range will be
transformative for many photonic technological areas such as optical imaging,
sensing and communications. Scientifically, this program will allow optics
community to deepen the fundamental understanding of electro-optical properties
and light-matter interaction in two dimensional and layered materials under
strong external stimuli. The proposed research may also lead to possible
commercialization of inventions through the collaboration with industry
partners. Moreover, the proposed program represents a cohesive effort which
integrates advanced research and educational and broadening participation
activities. The team members are actively involved in teaching of both
undergraduate and graduate students and they will incorporate the latest
research findings into their educational activities, thus providing advanced
training opportunities for future workforce in photonics and semiconductor
industries. Furthermore, they will leverage the research opportunities provided
by this program to enhance the participation of high school students especially
for those from underrepresented groups. The team will disseminate the results of
this proposed research in a timely manner to a broader society through journal
publications, conference presentations, or news release through the university
and general media to promote the public awareness of the importance of
scientific research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nonreciprocal photonic devices that
break the time-reversal symmetry can be used for critical applications such as
optical isolation and circulation for modern photonic systems. Thus, non-
reciprocity devices have the potential to transform a wide range of fields in
photonics, such as on-chip optical information processing, communication, and
imaging. The conventional approach to achieve nonreciprocity mainly relies on
bulky structures to realize substantial magneto-optic Faraday rotation, and the
devices usually occupy a large footprint, posing significant challenges in
integrated photonic systems. In this NewLAW project, the team proposes to
develop electrically driven nonreciprocal photonic devices operating in a broad
wavelength range from visible to mid-infrared by exploiting the widely tunable
light-matter interaction using electric bias in atomically thin two-dimensional
materials. The team consists of five principal investigators with a diverse
range of background including fundamental optical physics, photonic device
design, two-dimensional materials synthesis, and device realization and
characterizations. To realize nonreciprocity in such compact photonic devices,
the team will leverage the giant tunability of refractive index in two-
dimensional transitional metal dichalcogenides materials by electrical gating
and the plasmon Doppler Effect in high mobility graphene in the presence of in-
plane electrical current, guided by theoretical investigations and device
performance predictions. The non-reciprocal photonic devices proposed in this
program are fully compatible with the popular complementary metal-oxide-
semiconductor (CMOS) circuits, making them highly attractive in integrated
systems. The proposed research will not only significantly advance the
fundamental understanding of the light-matter interaction of two-dimensional
materials with the presence of external stimuli, but also address one of the
most challenging issues in modern photonic science: electrically driven optical
non-reciprocity at chip-scale.