* 1741756
* Learning Physics in a Synergistic Scaffolded Programming Environment
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Mary Urquhart, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 12/31/2021
* USD 1,053,929.00

As computing has become integral to the practice of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM), the STEM+Computing program seeks to address
emerging challenges in computational STEM areas through the applied integration
of computational thinking and computing activities within STEM teaching and
learning in early childhood education through high school (preK-12). This
project develops a Scaffolded Training Environment for Physics Programming
(STEPP) in which students learn physics and cultivate Computational Thinking
(CT) skills through state-based modeling by creating their own simulation tools.
Finite State Machines (FSMs) are a method for state-based modeling and have been
used to design algorithms and teach programming and engineering. The Unity game
engine with Playmaker plug-in will serve as the platform for STEPP because of
the low threshold for prior programming experience, the high ceiling for
learning potentials, and the transferability to other applications. The
project's hypothesis is that by constructing their own simulation tools,
students learning in a scaffolded synergistic environment will master physics
concepts and CT more successfully than students learning with pre-made
simulation tools. The proposed research will provide new insights on how the use
of dynamic modeling, implemented with cost-effective technology, can best help
students understand physics concepts, develop CT, and improve their computing
attitudes. By assessing improvements in understanding physics concepts, CT, and
computing attitudes, this project will obtain information about relationships
between these objectives which could indicate the advantage of synergistic
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will design and implement three
Scaffolded Training Environment for Physics Programming (STEPP) modules with
learning content that aligns with Texas's standards and the Next Generation of
Science Standards. A summer institute will be held for inservice and pre-service
teachers to learn and experience STEPP and incorporate it into their own
curricula and assessments. The STEPP modules will be tested at a minimum of two
high schools, with a minimum of 160 high school students and two physics
teachers participating. Students' gain in physics knowledge will be measured by
the Force Concept Inventory; their gain in CT, state-based modeling, and
programming concepts will be assessed by rubrics developed in collaboration with
high school teachers. Changes in students' attitudes towards computing will be
measured by the Computing Attitudes Survey.