* 1741821
* Miami Dade College InterAmerican Campus: STEM-Mia Project
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Willian Neris, Miami-Dade Community College/InterAmerican Campus
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 01/31/2024
* USD 965,817.00

Miami Dade College (MDC) InterAmerican Campus will implement the five-year STEM-
Mia (or "My STEM" in Spanish) project to promote increased success, retention,
and degree completion of 45 academically talented, low-income students. Students
will be recruited and supported in three cohorts of 15 students. Students
pursuing associates degrees in biology, physics, chemistry, mathematics,
computer science, and engineering will be supported while at MDC. Through
program activities, including mentoring, the students will be encouraged to
transfer to an upper-division baccalaureate program, and provided support for
that transition. STEM-Mia will support students with GPAs of at least 3.0 who
are enrolled full-time at MDC. In addition to scholarships, the program includes
the following high-impact practices: undergraduate research experiences;
advising and mentoring by STEM faculty; implementation of academic pathways and
early alert systems; year-round STEM colloquia; and extensive assistance in
transfer to four-year institutions. STEM-Mia will broaden the participation of
Hispanics and other underrepresented students, including first generation-in-
college students in STEM fields and careers. In addition, it will present a
model for other two-year Hispanic-Serving Institutions that are interested in
increasing student participation, retention, and success in STEM. More
importantly, the project will help address the critical STEM workforce crisis,
by graduating increasing numbers of well-trained and competent professionals in
these fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Leadership Team will conduct a curricular
redesign of two interdisciplinary courses focused on transferring to four-year
institutions and STEM content infused with social cognitive career theory
(SCCT)-based interventions. Employing SCCT as a framework, the project seeks to
advance the body of research on low-income, community college students in STEM
education by focusing on science support activities and psychological
interventions. STEM-Mia will generate knowledge about student success and degree
attainment in STEM and yield understanding of factors that will lead to improved
retention of students in STEM programs at a two-year Hispanic-serving
institution. The two primary research questions are (1) How does the provision
of financial assistance (scholarships and summer stipends) and curricular/co-
curricular supports to academically-talented students from low-income families
affect their (a) retention in STEM majors, (b) year-to-year retention in
college, and (c) on-time graduation, when compared to a similarly matched group
of students? and (2) How do psychosocial constructs such as math/science self-
efficacy, science identity, and leadership/teamwork capabilities of low-income,
academically-talented STEM students change over time when provided STEM-specific
academic supports and SCCT-based interventions? The STEM-Mia project will
examine the effectiveness of a model that scales and adapts integrated
approaches for promoting student engagement and success for a demographic that
has been historically underrepresented in STEM.