* 1741668
* 2017 National Workshop on Developing a Research Agenda for Connected Rural Communities (CRC17)
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* John Stankovic, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 89,869.00

Driven by the challenges as well as opportunities for high-impact research to
advance the quality of life in small, remote, and rural communities, the
University of Virginia will convene a workshop to explore challenges and
research opportunities, to facilitate collaborations, and ultimately, to define
a connected rural communities research agenda. Specifically, the research
exploration will be discussed through the lens of how technology,
communications, and networking can advance polycentric development. The two-day
workshop will bring together researchers, practitioners, nonprofit
organizations, industry partners, government representatives, and community
stakeholders in the domain of Smart and Connected Communities (S&amp;CC) with
representation from around the United States (U.S.).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful implementation of this workshop will result in
a connected rural communities research agenda detailing new opportunities for
research with long-term impact and near-term outcomes. Participants will engage
in discussions to characterize and design future S&amp;CC testbeds together with
communities themselves, to support the interative S&amp;CC research cycle
necessary for transformative innovations that benefit communities. The workshop
will explore a diversity of domains (e.g., mobility, economic development,
education, and public and telehealth) and their interconnectivity. In order to
assure representation of multiple perspectives, the workshop organizers will
prioritize participation of minority and underrepresented community members, and
those that can speak from experience on the relevant challenges and
opportunities in small, remote, and rural communities around the U.S. It is
anticipated that half of the participants will be from outside the academic
community. Participation of early-career researchers and practitioners are
especially emphasized to catalyze new partnerships and research communities in
this critical domain.