* 1741287
* BIGDATA: F: Collaborative Research: Acquisition, Collection and Computation of Dynamic Big Sensory Data in Smart Cities
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2018,10/31/2018
* Wei Cheng, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 10/31/2018
* USD 234,754.00

The ubiquity of information-sensing devices has opened up abundant sources for
Big Sensory Data (BSD), which span over Internet of Things, wireless sensor
networks, RFID, cyber physical systems, to name a few. Such diverse BSD-rich
systems are the building blocks for smart cities where smart devices are
deployed in every corner of a city. The analytical use of BSD is essential to
smart cities in managing a city's assets and monitoring air conditions,
pollution, climate change, traffic, security and safety, etc. The high demand
for smart cities and the pivotal role of sensing devices in smart cities
accelerate the explosion of BSD. Unfortunately, the size and dynamic nature of
BSD overwhelm current capability to capture, store, search, mine and visualize
BSD, and hence have become a major hindrance to the widespread development of
smart city applications. To tackle these challenges, this project will
investigate fundamental issues regarding acquisition, collection and computation
of BSD with principled quality control. The goal is to cost-effectively collect
and manage BSD for efficient utilization in smart city applications. A set of
foundational principles, algorithms and tools for BSD management will be
developed in response to the four challenging characteristics of BSD, which are
large scale, correlated dynamics, mode diversity and low quality. The outcomes
of this research will contribute to the vision of smart and resilient cities,
which broadly impact the nation's emerging smart city infrastructure and
citizens' mobile quality of life. This project also offers an opportunity to
collaborate with the Government of the District of Columbia on the Smarter DC
Initiative, and hence impacts not only the research community but also the
society at large. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at tackling major
challenges in task-cognizant BSD management at the critical phase of data
acquisition, collection and computation. The overarching goal is to alleviate
the high computational cost and improve the utilization efficiency of BSD in
smart city applications. First, approximate BSD acquisition methods will be
developed that automatically adjust the sensing frequency based on the changing
trend of the physical world. Such acquisition methods can effectively reduce the
data volume at an early stage during periodic and long-term monitoring of smart
cities. Second, approximate sampling algorithms, knowledge discovery methods,
and integration methods will be developed for task-specific multimodal BSD, in
order to reduce the transmission cost associated with delivering otherwise raw
and redundant BSD from sensing devices to end users. Finally, new metrics for
evaluating BSD quality will be investigated and then applied to properly assess
the tolerance of low-quality BSD and provide deep understanding of the
fundamental impact of data quality on various design aspects of BSD acquisition,
collection and computation. Besides theoretical analysis, simulation and
experimental studies will be carried out on real BSD, including experimentation
on real-world Smart City projects at Washington DC. The corresponding code,
datasets, and educational materials will be released via a dedicated project
website.