* 1741545
* Workshop: The Future of Modeling and Simulation for Internal Combustion Engines
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2017
* Sage Kokjohn, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 11/30/2017
* USD 6,519.00

1741545 Kokjohn

This award is to partially support the workshop entitled, The Future of Modeling
and Simulation for Internal Combustion Engines. The workshop will be hosted by
the Engine Research Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, June 14 to 15,
2017. Internal combustion engines will remain the primary power source for
transportation in the foreseeable future. It is critical to advance the
fundamental knowledge and capability to predict engine combustion performance.
The objective of this workshop is to identify the future research directions in
engine combustion modeling in order to help the industry meet future vehicle
efficiency targets with low emissions.

The transportation sector accounts for a significant portion of pollutant
emissions to the environment. Throughout the world, pollutant emissions from
engines are regulated by government agencies. These standards directly influence
the engine design process, engine cost, and technology investment. Engine
combustion is an extremely complex process, involving transient, multi-phase,
chemically reacting flows. The ability to predict engine combustion performance
is of great importance. This workshop will identify areas of deficiency in
current modeling and simulation approaches and enable targeted efforts to
address these deficiencies. The workshop will be attended by diverse
stakeholders, including the industry, software companies, and academia.