* 1741571
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Grammar of Space and Social Distance in Cushillococha Ticuna, an Endangered Language
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Lev Michael, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 03/31/2020
* USD 17,036.00

All languages have two categories of words: words that can be understood without
context, like 'frog' and 'sand,' and words that can only be understood in
context, like 'this,' 'that,' 'here,' and 'you.' There are many differences
between these context-dependent words, known in linguistics as indexicals, and
context-independent words. People use different cognitive processes to
understand context-dependent words. Context-dependent words differ more between
languages. Gestures, such as pointing, are also more important for understanding
context-dependent language. Moreover, because many linguistic theories focus on
context-independent aspects of language, the structure of context-dependent
language is poorly understood. Against this background, this study examines
context-dependent language in an endangered language that is an isolate, meaning
it has no linguistic relatives. Using perspectives from linguistics, psychology,
and anthropology, the researchers will study the meaning and use of this
isolate's words equivalent to 'this,' 'that,' 'here,' 'there,' 'he,' and 'she.'
This work will advance scientific understanding of context-dependent language
and its relationship to gesture, a topic with applications in natural language
processing, computer vision, and other areas of computational linguistics. The
documentation will form the core material analyzed in a doctoral dissertation
produced by the CoPI. Broader impacts include a publicly available deposit of
the recordings and transcriptions, as well as collaborative efforts with
community leaders to improve the literacy curriculum used in local indigenous
schools, promoting educational equity and economic development in the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CoPI, a doctoral student at the
University of California, Berkeley, will analyze the documentation of
Cushillococha Ticuna, an endangered indigenous language isolate spoken only in
Peru. This project will specifically focus on the grammar of two types of
context-dependent expressions in Ticuna: demonstratives -- words like this,
that, and there -- and third-person pronouns. Ticuna's demonstratives have more
complex meanings than those of other languages. While English 'this' and 'that'
are usually believed to convey an object's location in space, the equivalent
words in Ticuna convey both the location of the object and the tense of the
entire sentence. Similarly, third person pronouns are richer in meaning in
Ticuna than in English and other well-known languages. They encode both the
gender of the referent, like English 'he' and 'she,' and the speaker's level of
respect for the referent, as in the French pronouns 'tu' (you, informal) and
'vous' (you, formal). The researcher will study these two systems of context-
dependent expressions using perspectives from three disciplines: logical
semantics, neo-Gricean pragmatics, and Conversation Analysis. The
interdisciplinary research methods will incorporate psycholinguistic
experiments, interviews with native speakers, and recording of everyday
conversations. In the demonstratives component of the project, the researcher
will test recent attention-oriented theories of demonstratives by (a) applying
them to typologically novel data and (b) probing their claims about the role of
lexically specific heuristics in construal of demonstratives. In the honorifics
component of the project, the research will examine everyday conversation and
interview data to analyze both (a) the social meaning of honorifics and (b)
their formal semantic properties.