* 1741996
* 60th IEEE International Midwest Symposium on Circuits and Systems:  Support for Student Participation, August 6 - 9, 2017. Tufts University, Boston, MA
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2018
* Valencia Koomson, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2018
* USD 10,000.00

The proposed project will support junior researchers from the US to attend the
60th IEEE International Midwest Symposium on Circuits and Systems (MWSCAS) to be
held at Tufts University from August 6 - 9, 2017. The Symposium will provide a
platform for the exchange of research-driven ideas in all aspects of integrated
circuits and systems, including circuit theory, design and implementation. The
technical areas addressed include: Analog and Mixed-Signal Circuits and Systems,
Digital Circuits and Systems, Communications Circuits and Systems, RF and
Wireless Circuits and Systems, Sensor Circuits and Systems, Biomedical Circuits
and Systems, Converter Circuits and Systems, Signal and Image Processing, Power
Management, Power Harvesting and Power Electronics, Nano-electronics Technology,
and Hardware Security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A diverse group of academic and
industry professionals will be brought together on the occasion of the Symposium
and will have the opportunity to discuss a wide range of topics such as wireless
communications, radar systems, robotics, biosensors, cyber-physical systems, and
security. Emphasis will be given on participation of junior researchers from
under-represented groups. The Symposium announcements will be distributed to
student chapters of various organizations and will be announced to relevant
academic departments at minority-serving institutions.