* 1741667
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Domesticated Plants, Animals and the Emergence of Social Complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Bryan Hanks, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2019
* USD 24,885.00

Anthropological archaeology has focused intently on the early emergence of
sedentism and animal and plant domestication processes in many regions of the
world. Research focused on demographic changes connected with these trends has
frequently linked emerging population growth and resource exploitation to
greater levels of social conflict and warfare. These developments often led to
greater levels of regional centralization and organization and completely new
trajectories of social, economic and political development. This program of
research examines these dynamics in the development of early village life in
southeastern Europe during the 6th-5th millennia BCE. At this time, distinct
changes occurred in the use of domesticated plants and animals and new forms of
ceramic and metal craft production. These important shifts in technology and
social organization contributed to the subsequent emergence of complex societies
in the Balkans region and subsequent foundation of early European civilizations.
Archaeology is in a unique position to provide a deep chronological scale of
analysis and has the potential to produce specific forms of data that can be
used to evaluate and model such transitions. Such research not only identifies
when such changes occurred but also contributes to answering the question of why
early human societies changed from egalitarian hunter-gatherer groups to more
highly specialized and hierarchical organized communities. This program of
research will encourage international intellectual collaboration and
communication in the field of anthropological archaeology, will enhance regional
methodological approaches to settlement patterning and demographic analysis, and
will produce an important database that will contribute to future studies of
early village societies in a global context. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within this
broader context, and under the supervision of Dr. Bryan Hanks of the University
of Pittsburgh, doctoral candidate Miroslav Kocic will investigate the emergence
of large scale Neolithic village societies in central Serbia. This study will
produce new data on demographic growth, the emergence of scalar stress and
social inequality, and regional center-hinterland dynamics through time. In
particular, research questions will focus on examining: (i) the distribution of
identifiable sites within the survey zone and their relationship to each other
spatially and chronologically; (ii) estimated settlement sizes and possible rank
order patterns in terms of demography; (iii) relationship of settlements to
local topographical and environmental resources and related catchment zones; and
(iv) spatial patterning and density of artifacts within settlements and
variation between settlements and identification of craft production zones. In
order to address these questions, field research activities will focus on a 110
square kilometer region within the Grua River valley of the central Balkans.
Data will be produced through regional scale pedestrian survey, surface
collection of artifacts and statistical analysis, targeted test pit excavations,
and GIS analysis of survey data, topographical features and local environmental
resources. This will produce a robust diachonic, spatial dataset in which to
model transitions in village size, spatial organization and trends in craft
production. Collaboration with regional archaeologists and institutions in
central Serbia also will create an important educational opportunity and
training for students contribute to the long term knowledge and heritage of
these important archaeological sites.