* 1741038
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Underwater Remote Sensing of Walker Lake, Nevada
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Kelly Graf, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2019
* USD 19,917.00

Neil Puckett and Dr. Kelly Graf of Texas A&amp;M University will investigate how
prehistoric peoples used and adapted to lake environments in the Great Basin
during rapidly changing environmental conditions. Previous research in the
region indicates an early relationship between people and lakes, but as lakes
receded over the past 14,000 years, Great Basin inhabitants gradually shifted
away from lake and wetland environments as they responded to lake fluctuations.
Archaeological research is essential for understanding how humans adapted to
shifts in the environment. Unfortunately, except in caves and rockshelters,
erosion and minimal sediment accumulation in the Great Basin result in surface
archaeological sites with little information about their age or associated
environment. However, it is open air sites, not caves and rockshelters, that
have the greatest potential to inform on lake use and landscape adaptations.
Buried sites underneath lakes are ideal for answering questions about open air
environments, lake use, and chronology. How do people respond to changing
environments, and how quick are these responses? Similarly, how well preserved
and buried are sites in and around lakes that have undergone rapid
transformation? Sites surrounding dry lake basins across the Great Basin reflect
the importance of lakes to human populations and their value for understanding
how humans adapted to climate change. Similarly, humans have been subject to
rapid and dramatic climate change throughout their history, and water is an
essential resource that strongly reflects climactic events. Broad and thorough
research of such environments will provide useful data and analogies for
managing important natural resources in the United States today. The project
will also provide insight into a poorly known aspect of United States
prehistory. Assessing the state of underwater preservation will also help
government agencies properly manage historical resources during sudden water
level changes such as those observed before and after the droughts in Texas and
California over the last 10 years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mr. Puckett and Dr.
Graf will explore submerged, buried landscapes in the Great Basin to identify
preserved sites occupied during low lake levels. Research will be used to
understand past environments, human lake use, landscape adaptations, and
chronology by recovering sediment samples, preserved organic materials, and
archaeological artifacts. The project will be conducted in Walker Lake, NV, a
natural perennial lake located at the western margin of the Great Basin. The
lake has undergone repeated, rapid lake level rise and fall events, making it an
ideal location to investigate changing environments. Past lake low-stands allow
for the burial of archaeological sites underwater and increase chances for the
preservation of artifacts and datable organic materials. Underwater test
excavation locations will be placed based on data from sub-bottom sediment
surveys. Recovery of artifacts, sediment cores, and organic material will allow
for spatial, temporal, and environmental analyses, determining how prehistoric
peoples used the environment and adapted to extensive shifts in local water
resources during the last 14,000 years. These data will allow researchers to
better understand human responses to both past and modern environmental change.