* 1741845
* Start SMART - Self-Motivated, Academic, Reflective, Talented
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Richard Snyder, Lehigh Carbon Community College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,000,000.00

The Start SMART - Self-Motivated, Academic, Reflective, Talented project of
Lehigh Carbon Community College (LCCC) will provide scholarships for 90-100
academically talented and low-income students to increase their retention,
degree completion, and transfer to baccalaureate programs. Students majoring in
science, engineering, mathematics, computing, drafting, industrial automation,
electronics technology, electrical technology, mechanical technology, and
nanofabrication technology will participate as a cohort in structured activities
to motivate them to persist in their STEM programs. These activities will
include one-on-one mentoring with STEM faculty, orientation, monthly meetings
featuring integrated learning labs, mathematics support, student-facilitated
study groups, S-STEM buddies, presentations by professionals, workshops, field
trips, STEM Club, and job/transfer fairs. Students will be required to create
and maintain ePortfolios to record their goals, artifacts of coursework and
activities, and ongoing reflections of their personal and professional
development. The goal of the Start SMART program is to produce skilled graduates
prepared to enter the STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A research study
will determine the correlation between the project's evidence-based strategies
and the attributes of growth mindset, grit, goal orientation, self-regulation,
and STEM momentum predicted to lead to academic success for community college
students in STEM programs. The use of ePortfolios will serve a three-fold
purpose: (1) enhancing student learning by helping them make connections across
courses and activities; (2) enabling students to share their experiences and
connect with each other and faculty; and (3) measuring STEM momentum through an
analysis of students' artifacts and reflections. Integrative learning
experiences will expand students' knowledge of other disciplines and instill
professional skills necessary for the workplace. Research questions are: 1) To
what extent do the non-cognitive variables of growth mindset, grit, goal
orientation, and self-regulation change over the duration of the program? 2) Is
there a correlation between the project activities and the non-cognitive
variables that are predictive of student outcomes? 3) Is successful completion
of the first mathematics course in the first year associated with STEM momentum?
4) To what extent does the ePortfolio demonstrate STEM momentum? Findings from
the research study will expand on the concept of STEM momentum as it relates to
community college students.