* 1741634
* CAREER: Mining and Exploring Heterogeneous Information Networks with Social Factors
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,04/30/2021
* Yizhou Sun, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 04/30/2021
* USD 376,536.00

Heterogeneous social information networks, such as online social networks,
online forums, and digital government, are valuable sources for data analysis.
However, most of the current information network studies ignore the social
factors involved and treat people and their interactions simply as nodes and
links in graphs. This project provides a systematic approach for analyzing such
networks that addresses human factor-related questions, recognizing that
different types of links have different relevance to a particular question. For
example, a "mentor" link might be much more relevant to recommending someone to
apply for a particular job rather than see a certain movie. This project
identifies five fundamental research problems and provides solutions to these
problems in heterogeneous social information networks: (1) predicting missing
user and link characteristics, (2) identifying personality traits, (3) role
detection, (4) prediction of social activities, and (5) recommender systems.
Together these provide a way to include social understanding in analysis of
networks.

The basic approach is to provide probabilistic models that can (1) incorporate
guidance in terms of either limited labels or heuristics from domain experts,
and (2) automatically select the most critical information in complicated
heterogeneous information networks for the target problem. For example, for the
user profiling problem of age group prediction, a probabilistic model is
designed via defining the probability of a possible label configuration given
the network structure and strengths on different types of links. The derived
learning algorithm will propagate the labels from only a few users via different
types of links, and the strength of each link type will be learned according to
the configuration probability of labels on that link type. The intuition is that
if the "classmates" link type brings two users with similar age together, the
algorithm needs to assign the same age group label to the two connected users
that are classmates and assigns a higher strength weight to the "classmates"
link type. The project will develop an integrated network mining system based on
Spark and GraphX, to support the proposed algorithms on large-scale networks.
This system will be used as a research vehicle for exploring efficient
approximations with quality guarantees for the proposed algorithms.