* 1741540
* BUILDING INCLUSIVE MAKER COMMUNITIES FOR ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGY STUDENTS
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Jill Davishahl, Bellingham Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 02/29/2024
* USD 649,482.00

The Bellingham Technical College "Building Inclusive Maker Communities for
Engineering Technology Students" (MakerCETS) project will increase the number of
low-income, academically talented STEM students who persist, graduate, and
transfer to a four-year program or enter the STEM workforce. The program will
provide scholarships, student support services, and help students develop
positive identities and technical skills through the development of inclusive,
maker-based learning (MBL) communities. Students, faculty and their industry and
community partners will collaboratively design maker-based project sequences
that integrate technology, innovation, and industry-based research projects into
the student experience. Maker-based learning experiences are similar to
traditional project-based learning experiences, but extend beyond the classroom
through long-term project involvement and direct community connections. The
MakerCETS project will provide scholarships for three cohorts of 12 low-income,
academically talented students over the course of five years and will focus on
connecting these 36 students to their peers and regional engineering technology
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MakerCETS project will increase student
access to STEM programs by providing financial assistance and academic support
for Engineering Technology program students with the goals of increasing
retention, graduation, and transfer rates and improving student workforce
placement opportunities. This project will broaden participation in STEM through
the development of student support and networking structures and the inclusion
of maker-based work that has been shown to increase diversity and is especially
attractive to women. Participants will engage in an MBL sequence, create
individualized educational and career plans, build strong academic communities
and workforce networks, have access to robust placement support services, and
benefit from seamless transfer opportunities to BTC's new Baccalaureate of
Applied Science in Engineering Technology and Western Washington University's
College of Science &amp; Engineering. Project staff will investigate the impact
this maker-inspired, community building approach has on success rates and
perceived self-efficacy for STEM students and use results to inform and
disseminate the creation of an adaptable, replicable student engagement and
support model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.