* 1741585
* NSFDEB-NERC: Addressing the plant growth source-sink debate through observations, experiments, and modelling
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Andrew Richardson, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2021
* USD 533,254.00

Fossil fuel burning is causing atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide
(CO2) to rise. However, the rate of CO2 rise is much slower than emissions
suggest it should be. It appears that the land surface and oceans are together
absorbing about 50% of annual CO2 emissions. A plausible explanation is that the
land uptake is occurring because higher levels of CO2 increase plant
photosynthesis, meaning more plants have carbon available to support growth.
However, a competing explanation proposes that tree growth is not limited by the
rate of photosynthesis itself, but is instead controlled by other factors such
as rates of cell division, nutrients, or water supply. The extent to which trees
are carbon-limited, and under which circumstances, is fundamental to
understanding how they will respond to rising levels of atmospheric CO2. This
project will improve our understanding of this timely issue. Each week during
the growing season, the researchers will quantify rates of wood growth and
cellular development at the microscopic level. Samples will be collected from
the dominant tree species at Harvard Forest, Massachusetts. This will be done
for three years, to examine how year-to-year variation in weather influences the
timing and amount of wood growth, and how this differs among species. The
researchers will also conduct a novel experiment to manipulate the flow of
carbon within the tree, and thus investigate the relationships between local
carbon supply and wood growth. This project will thus directly address the
question of whether or not tree growth is carbon-limited. The research has the
potential to revolutionize our understanding of the role of vegetation in the
global carbon cycle, the impacts of environmental change on plants, and our
interpretations of past climates as recorded in tree growth rings. This project
will support the advanced research training of a postdoctoral scholar, and
involves a collaboration with UK scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using field
observations, experiments, and modeling, this project will investigate the
potential for tree growth to respond to increasing atmospheric CO2. Research
will focus on the contentious issue of whether tree growth is controlled by the
supply of carbon (i.e. from photosynthesis and/or non-structural carbon stores
in wood, hence "source-limited") or the growth processes themselves (i.e. "sink-
limited"). The researchers will tease apart the controls on wood growth at the
whole-tree scale for the first time through careful measurements of the internal
dynamics of carbon within mature trees of three widely-distributed temperate
species (i.e. white pine, red oak, and red maple) growing in Harvard Forest,
Massachusetts. In an observational study, the researchers will measure non-
structural carbon storage dynamics and details of wood growth at the cellular
level. In an experimental study, the researchers will manipulate the transport
of new photosynthetic products to growing regions using cold-block phloem
chilling collars, and will thus be able to draw novel inferences concerning key
relationships between wood growth and carbon supply. Subsequently, a model
developed using the collected data and derived knowledge will be used to examine
the implications of these results for the historical and future terrestrial
carbon sink.