* 1741841
* The Arctic ocean control of the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation on multi-decadal and longer timescales
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Alexey Fedorov, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 12/31/2021
* USD 479,930.00

A major goal of this study is to understand the impacts of Arctic climate change
and their effects on the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation (AMOC).
This is of significant practical value because the AMOC can affect the climate
of different regions of the globe, ranging from North America, Europe and
Greenland to the Sahel and the Indian Ocean. Drs. Fedorov and Liu will conduct
outreach activities through the Peabody Museum of Natural History. This includes
giving public lectures and symposia, leading Teacher development workshops, and
communicating the importance of the results to mass
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a modeling proposal to study the effect of
declining Arctic sea ice on the strength and other characteristics of the AMOC -
a major element of ocean dynamics and climate. Sea ice decline exposes the
Arctic ocean to anomalous solar radiation and freshwater fluxes, generating
positive buoyancy anomalies in the upper ocean. The hypothesis being tested is
that, when spreading to the North Atlantic these buoyancy anomalies effectively
weaken ocean deep convection, leading to a slow-down of the AMOC on multi-
decadal timescales. This hypothesis will be tested with a variety of methods
ranging from adjoint ocean modeling to experiments with climate models.