* 1741706
* Support for Doctoral Students from U.S. Universities to Attend AIED 2017 and/or  EDM 2017
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Erin Walker, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 11/30/2018
* USD 20,000.00

The United States has historically been the global leader in the field of
artificial intelligence in education (AIED), or ways to use computerized
artificial intelligence to enhance teaching and learning in contexts ranging
from children learning math in school, to soldiers learning highly technical
jobs in the US military. The preeminent conference in this field is the AIED
conference; at this conference the latest research is presented and
practitioners learn the state of the art techniques that allow creation of these
important educational technologies. A related conference that is equally
significant is the Educational Data Mining (EDM) conference, which focuses on
research on big data and analytics for education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal would provide partial travel support for 20 Ph.D. students, selected
through a competitive process, to attend either or both of the AIED or EDM
conference, present their work, and receive additional mentoring outside of
their dissertation committees as part of a doctoral consortium. The intellectual
merit of the work rests on the studies the graduate students submit to be
considered for participation in the early career track of the conference; this
work is then enhanced by guidance from world-class mentors who meet with the
students in a structured format to improve their research. The broader impact
includes the career impact on the twenty selected students, especially since
promising graduate students whose advisors may not have funding to send them to
the conference can still be included, and their work can be showcased and
improved. Possible long-term broader impacts include building the field of
artificial intelligence in education and data analytics researchers and thus
eventually, improving the quality of education.