* 1741778
* Applying Psychological Constructs and Student Supports to Improve the Education of Students in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Jun Tsuji, Siena Heights University
* Standard Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 03/31/2023
* USD 641,751.00

This NSF Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) program
award to Siena Heights University will support the success of high-achieving,
low-income STEM students with demonstrated financial need. Over the five years
of the award, the Siena Heights: Applying Psychological Constructs and Student
Supports to Improve the Education of Students in STEM (SHAPE STEM) project will
fund 80 annual scholarships to 20 students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees
in biology, chemistry, or environmental science. The program aims to prepare
these graduates for entry into the workforce in southeastern Michigan or further
STEM education. In addition, the program focuses on education that prepares
students to tackle environmental challenges related to sustainable food
production, clean water, soil chemistry, air quality, chemical recycling, and
biodiversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enroll 20 scholars, with
goals of retaining 90% of the scholars until their sophomore year, graduating
100% of the scholars who are retained, and placing 90% of the scholars in STEM-
related careers or graduate school. SHAPE STEM will provide students with
motivational supports based on the Unified Learning Model (ULM), which includes
data-informed goal setting, extensive faculty mentoring, participation in a
living and learning community, and research and internship opportunities within
professions related to the environmental challenges faced by southeastern
Michigan. SHAPE STEM plans to do the following: (1) recruit low-income high
school students from relevant career technical education programs; (2) provide
scholarship support to address financial need; (3) develop a living-learning
community; (4) develop group research projects; (5) create a SHAPE STEM seminar
to build academic and professional skill development; (6) provide students with
psychological supports to foster social belonging, values affirmation, growing
intelligence, and (7) support students via faculty mentoring. SHAPE STEM has the
potential to generate evidence that can be used to improve motivation and
learning in other Siena Heights University students. This support structure
could also be adapted and used by other higher educational institutions
nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.