* 1741814
* Molding Identity &amp; Raising Retention through Opportunities for Reflection in STEM (MIRRORS)
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2024
* Michael Martin, John Carroll University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 01/31/2024
* USD 637,069.00

With five years of funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships
in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, John
Carroll University (JCU) will provide scholarships to 32 students with
demonstrated financial need and academic promise. The scholarships will be
awarded to first-year and transfer students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees
in STEM in Biology, Chemistry, Mathematics, Computer Science and Physics. The
Scholars in the program will receive academic support that includes a STEM-
specific orientation, a summer bridge program, cohort advising, and curricula
introducing scientific thinking and research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
goals are to improve one-year retention and four-year graduation rates, and to
train and graduate scholars who will meet local, regional, and national demands
for a STEM-educated workforce. This project will provide evidence-based academic
and student support services designed to support the transition and success of
JCU transfer student cohorts. These services include a STEM living-learning
community (LLC), peer-led team learning, career development, summer research
fellowships, and travel to scientific meetings. This project will contribute to
education research by investigating the role of reflection (i.e., conscientious
evaluation of new knowledge or experiences) in the development of student-
scientists, and the influence of STEM LLCs on student persistence and sense of
well-being. The ongoing process of reflection is critical for academic success,
social well-being, and vocational self-efficacy. However, the importance of
reflection as a tool for success in STEM disciplines is unknown. This project
will assess reflection as a tool to increase retention and performance in STEM
experimentally, by monitoring performance indicators for S-STEM Scholars
compared to the pool of S-STEM-eligible students who were not selected for a
scholarship and therefore did not participate in the program's reflection
activities. Finally, this project will help provide S-STEM students the
opportunity to be successful in high-demand STEM disciplines.