* 1741575
* Integrating Computation in Science Across Michigan
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Paul Irving, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,362,829.00

This project is supported by the STEM+Computing (STEM+C) program, which advances
applied research integrating computational thinking and computing activities
within disciplinary science, technology, engineering, and mathematics teaching
and learning in early childhood education through high school (preK-12). This
project integrates computation into high school physics courses. The proposed
work aims to rectify the mismatch between what is needed to engage students in
21st century physics and what is taught presently in high school physics
classrooms. By working with and supporting physics teachers to integrate
computation into their classrooms in authentic and equitable ways, this project
aims to address this challenge. A detailed research plan that uses several
lenses to investigate student learning and participation as well as how teachers
design and adapt their instruction in computation will build on the collective
understanding of the importance of, and methods for, integrating computation
into the high school physics curriculum. A central aspect of this work is
broadening participation in computation to students from historically
marginalized groups, and studying how teaching practices can lead to more
equitable participation in computation. The results of this research will be
transferable to other institutions and could catalyze wider-spread adoption of
computational instruction, including evidence-based activities and teaching
practices, in high schools across Michigan and the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is a research-practice partnership between university researchers in
science education, curriculum developers and researchers in physics, and high
school physics teachers in Michigan. The researchers are committed to
integrating computation in high school physics and studying its effects in
classrooms on learning, practice, and equity. The research plan involves two
components: (1) a professional development program that equips high school
physics faculty to engage their students in computation and (2) a comprehensive
research effort that studies the effects of integrating computation in these
classrooms using three mutually-enhancing strands: (1) Student Understanding,
(2) Instructional Practice, and (3) Equitable Participation. The professional
development program for participating teachers consists of two components: (1)
an immersive, hands-on summer workshop and (2) sustained post-workshop support.
In the summer prior to the new school year, teams of teachers from participating
schools will be invited to a 5-day workshop in which they work together on
computational physics projects that they will implement in the classrooms while
learning to use a set of high-leverage instructional practices that enables
students to participate in authentic ways. During the subsequent school year,
teachers will be invited back for monthly, one-day mini-workshops to reflect on
their computational physics instructional experiences, to ask questions and
inquire about additional support, to bring problems of practice in for
discussion, and to perform additional development with the support of the
research team. Through this professional development program, teachers will 1)
develop expertise in the use of computational physics to model physical systems
that are appropriate for the high school level; 2) engage in high leverage
practices that encourage students' authentic engagement in the computational
enterprise; and 3) analyze issues of equity integral to their computational
teaching practice. Through this professional development program, the project
will support at least 36 teachers in the mid-Michigan area to integrate
computation into their physics courses, thus, impacting over 1000 students.