* 1741831
* Principles And Resources For Integrating Computational Thinking Into High School Science Courses
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Daniel Heck, Horizon Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 03/31/2022
* USD 1,249,632.00

As computing has become integral to the practice of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM), the STEM+Computing program seeks to address
emerging challenges in computational STEM areas through the applied integration
of computational thinking and computing activities within STEM teaching and
learning in early childhood education through high school (preK-12). This
project will integrate computational thinking with biology and chemistry in high
school science courses, and conduct research to generate knowledge about: (1)
How to create instructional experiences for all high school students that engage
them in computational thinking (CT) in their learning of science; (2) What
teachers require to effectively provide these experiences as a regular part of
their science program; and (3) How to measure student engagement in and learning
of CT in the context of science. The general aim of this project is to expand
understandings of how CT can be infused into all high school science courses by
examining the needs teachers who want to implement computational science
curriculum modules, and researchers who want to measure outcomes of student
learning experiences in computational science curriculum modules.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This exploratory integration research project will be
implemented in three phases (development, pilot, and field trial) and will
conduct mixed-methods studies of curriculum adaptation, teacher preparation and
support, and measurement of student instructional experiences and outcomes.
Three research questions guide the activities of this project: (1) How can
computational thinking be operationalized in high school science courses? (2)
What do high school teachers need to understand and believe to promote
computational thinking in their science courses and to teach science using
computational thinking? And (3) How can computational thinking integrated into
science instruction be rigorously measured? The development phase will span the
first two years of the project, and will result in: (1) Development of four CT
curriculum modules: two for high school biology courses and two for high school
chemistry courses; and (2) Development of prototype instruments for measuring
CT. The Pilot phase, taking place in year two of the project, will involve four
selected teachers who teach science (two biology teachers and two chemistry
teachers) and the students in two of their classes each (approximately 200
students total). The Field Trial phase in year three of the project will include
a residential institute for 12 participating teachers (six biology teachers and
six chemistry teachers). The institute will prepare them to teach the modules.
During the year, each participating teacher will enact the modules in two of
their science classes, involving their students also as participants in the
research (approximately 600). During implementation, project team members will
provide guidance to teachers through webinars, user community interactions, and
just-in-time support.