* 1741552
* NRI: Small: Collaborative Research: Learning from Demonstration for Cloud Robotics
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Sonia Chernova, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 09/30/2018
* USD 226,480.00

The proposed work seeks to leverage cloud computing to enable robots to
efficiently learn from remote human domain experts - "Cloud Learning from
Demonstration." Building on RobotsFor.Me, a remote robotics research lab, this
research will unite Learning from Demonstration (LfD) and Cloud Robotics to
enable anyone with Internet access to teach a robot household tasks. The value
of this work stems from three aspects. First is the remote system that can learn
task models from a series of remote demonstrations from a single user, focusing
on learning high-level tasks as opposed to low-level motor skills. The second is
the extension of learning from demonstration to multiple teachers. This
represents an important relaxation of a limiting assumption to focus on
evaluating teacher strengths and effectively handling distinct task solutions.
Finally, transparency mechanisms to allow a remote user to develop a correct
mental model about the robot?s learning process.

The long term goal of this research is to one day make personal robots
accessible to everyday people. The interactive learning framework based on
RobotsFor.Me provides unique opportunities for education and outreach. Thomaz
and Chernova will outreach to K-12 teachers and students by creating an
education portal surrounding RobotsFor.Me containing hands-on workshop
curricula. This material will be integrated with the WPI Frontiers program for
middle school students, and the GT ePDN professional education network for
teachers. A key impact on students at GT and WPI will be direct involvement in
this research agenda, and integration with AI, robotics and HRI courses.
Chernova is the Diversity Coordinator in the Robotics Engineering Program, and
faculty advisor for Women In Robotics Engineering and Women in Technology
student groups which will enable braod exposure. Thomaz mentors the RoboWomen
graduate women?s group. Software components will also be made available as open
source and the PIs have a collaboration plan in place with researchers at Willow
Garage, and through student internships will transfer technology to their labs.