* 1741595
* Achieving Change in our Communities for Equity and Student Success (ACCESS) in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Emily Cilli-Turner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 03/31/2024
* USD 779,805.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (S-STEM) Track 1 program, the Achieving Change in our Communities
for Equity and Student Success (ACCESS) in STEM program will recruit high-
achieving, low-income students to become STEM majors at the University of
Washington at Tacoma. The program will support the retention and academic
success of 36 students by providing focused mentoring, a living-learning
community, course-based undergraduate research experiences, and two years of
targeted scholarship support. Mentoring activities will include group and one-
on-one faculty mentoring in three 12-person cohorts, skills workshops, and a
focus group on equity and inclusion in STEM to help develop a sense of
community, identity, and empowerment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Taken together, this
ACCESS program will provide supports and experiences that enable more low-
income, academically high achieving students to graduate with STEM degrees,
bringing a pipeline of talented and skilled professionals into the workforce. In
addition, using their increased cultural competencies, the ACCESS research
experience will engage students in an interdisciplinary, community-use inspired
study of environmental pollution that affects a local Native American tribe. The
aim is to prepare ACCESS scholars to help transform the STEM workplace into a
more inclusive and welcoming environment. The program team will quantitatively
and qualitatively assess the effectiveness of equity- and inclusivity-focused
mentoring, that is coupled with community-engaged, socially relevant, early
research experiences. The results of this research may inform other institutions
seeking to support the success of low-income students in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.