* 1741833
* The Stability of the Greenland Ice Sheet
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2017,10/31/2018
* Jason Briner, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 10/31/2018
* USD 49,777.00

The stability of the Greenland Ice Sheet has important implications for possible
future sea level rise. Recent observational data suggest an acceleration of mass
loss, and consequent global sea level rise, from Greenland. There is, though, no
consensus on what future trends may be. Thus, there is urgency in defining
priorities for addressing the Greenland Ice Sheet stability problem. Funds are
provided for a workshop on the stability of the Greenland Ice Sheet. A community
of experts will be assembled to assess the current state of knowledge of
Greenland Ice Sheet history and sensitivity to climate forcing. The group also
will suggest key research priorities that would promote traction on the problem
of Greenland Ice Sheet stability. Improved understanding of Greenland Ice Sheet
history, the associated processes, and its possible future will significantly
impact our ability to predict and mitigate sea level rise. The workshop will
guarantee gender and age diversity, thus ensuring the introduction of new
members to the national and international community represented at the workshop.
Understanding ice sheet stability is important for understanding and projecting
sea level rise. However, we do not currently have data or models that allow for
a definitive consensus view of ice sheet variability during the past, much less
the future. Recent measurements of cosmogenic isotopes demand the absence of ice
at the GISP2 summit drill site for significant portions of the Pleistocene. On
the other hand, new and published data from other ice cores in central Greenland
and from offshore sediment records have been interpreted to suggest persistence
of the ice sheet through the Plio-Pleistocene. While numerical ice sheet
simulations reveal a smaller, but relatively intact Greenland Ice Sheet during
the Last Interglaciation, new discoveries from the glacial dynamics community
reveal processes that could lead to the collapse of continental ice in
Greenland. Thus, the workshop will focus on assessing and reconciling the state
of knowledge and understanding of four important sub-disciplines - ice coring,
stratigraphic records, ice sheet modeling, and ice sheet processes.