* 1741148
* Integrating Computer Science in the High School Biology, Chemistry, Earth and Energy Sciences Curriculum
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Bradley Kjell, Education Connection
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie Teasley
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,249,991.00

The project is funded by the STEM+Computing program, which seeks to address
emerging challenges in computational STEM areas through the applied integration
of computational thinking and computing activities within disciplinary STEM
teaching and learning in early childhood education through high school
(preK-12). Computing and computational thinking are a central component of all
STEM disciplines and a core 21st Century skill necessary for students' success
in our global economy. The critical need for more robust and equitable pathways
into high employability STEM and Computer Science (CS) fields is well-
documented. This project expands and diversifies the college and career pipeline
for high school students, particularly underrepresented students, by expanding
access to the essential STEM and computing knowledge and skills demanded by the
workforce. Building on an evidence-based digital learning model, EdAdvance and
interdisciplinary partners in secondary education, higher education, and
industry, will design, pilot test, and evaluate a series of CS courses that
concurrently develop students' STEM and CS competencies. Newly developed digital
CS learning modules will be integrated into a sequence of core required high
school science coursework (Biology21, Chemistry21, and Earth &amp; Energy
Essentials). This approach maximizes student engagement in rigorous
computational learning across a concentrated course of STEM studies and
facilitates national replication and scaling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aligned with
the new coursework, over 1,200 students in 12 diverse school settings (urban,
rural, and suburban) will collaborate in student-led teams to develop innovation
challenge projects (ICPs) that present solutions to real world STEM and CS
challenges. Students form product or service development teams and
collaboratively establish their business or non-profit structure for ICP
development. Student teams will present their ICPs at the nationally-acclaimed
Student Innovation Expo, competitively judged by a panel of STEM and CS industry
and higher education experts. For instructors, a comprehensive professional
development model, including a Summer Institute, instructional coaching, and
professional learning communities, prepares educators to implement the curricula
with fidelity and advance their STEM and CS content knowledge and pedagogy
skills. Resources developed over the three-year project period will be published
under an Open Education Resources license and disseminated statewide with the
support of the Connecticut State Department of Education, the Connecticut
Regional Educational Service Center Alliance, and the Connecticut Association of
Public School Superintendents, and nationally through partner networks.
Researchers will examine the impact of this coursework on students': 1) STEM and
computing self-efficacy; 2) STEM and CS career and education interest; 3)
computing skills; and 4) 21st century inquiry skills. Formative assessment
results and yearly analyses of the outcomes and fidelity of implementation will
be used to design, develop, and test the coursework iteratively. Results of this
research will inform the approaches and conditions that support the integration
of computing skills into core high school science content, and will contribute
to research on effective pedagogy and pedagogical environments to achieve
equitable STEM and CS learning for all students.