* 1741174
* BIGDATA: IA: Collaborative Research: From Bytes to Watts - A Data Science Solution to Improve Wind Energy Reliability and Operation
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Jiong Tang, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2022
* USD 274,999.00

The collective efforts in aerospace, civil, electrical, and mechanical
engineering areas have led to remarkable progresses in wind energy. Larger
turbines are designed and installed, and wind farms are nowadays built at
locations where wind is even more intermittent and maintenance equipment is less
accessible. This adds new challenges to ensuring operational reliability. To
cope with these challenges, along with the rapid advancement in
microelectronics, modern wind farms are equipped with a large number and variety
of sensors, including, at the turbine level, anemometers, tachometers,
accelerometers, thermometers, strain sensors, and power meters, and at the farm
level, anemometers, vanes, sonars, thermometers, humidity meters, pressure
meters, among others. It is worth noting that all these data are currently
analyzed/utilized only in their respective domains. The big data challenges in
this project include how to best use spatio-temporal data for wind forecast, how
to use data of different nature (wind, power, load etc.) and data of different
sources (physical data versus computer simulation data) for power production
assessment in a computationally efficient manner, and finally how to integrate
these three sets of solutions into a reliable and efficient computational
platform. The proposed research and education activities will make a paradigm
shift in the wind industry by demonstrating how dramatically data science
innovations can benefit the industry. The PIs will disseminate the research
findings through classroom teaching, journal/conference publications, industry
workshops, and data/software sharing. The summer internship opportunities and
undergraduate research help train the next generation workforce to be better
versed with data science methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The critical
barrier to cost effective wind power and its general adoption is partly rooted
in wind stochasticity, severely complicating wind power production optimization
and cost reduction. The long-term viability of wind energy hinges upon a good
understanding of its production reliability, which is affected in turn by the
predictability of wind and power productivity of wind turbines. Furthermore, the
productivity of a wind turbine comprises two aspects: its ability of converting
wind into power during its operation and the availability of wind turbines.
Three inter-related research efforts will enhance wind energy reliability and
productivity): (1) spatio-temporal analysis (for wind forecast) (2) conditional
density estimation (for wind-to-power conversion assessment); and (3) importance
sampling (for turbine reliability assessment and improvement). Significant data
resourced provided by industry partners in the research, coupled with models and
computational resources, will enable better prediction of wind profiles and
utilization. In addition, the team will develop dedicated reconfigurable field
programmable gate array (FPGA) processors that will be 50 to 500 times faster
than general-purpose CPUs for both on-site and central control processing and
have small form-factor, low cost and energy efficient to enable agile
development under severe outdoor conditions at wind farms.