* 1741048
* Developing a new proxy for silicate weathering: an investigation of Potassium isotope fractionation during clay formation
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Clark Johnson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 07/31/2022
* USD 345,355.00

New analytical methods have allowed the investigators to demonstrate that the
potassium (K) isotope composition of the continents and the oceans are
different. Because the ultimate source of K delivered to the oceans is the
weathering of continental rocks, there must be significant K isotope
fractionation during chemical weathering and/or the cycling of K in the oceans
by formation of K bearing minerals during the interaction of seawater with
marine sediments/rocks. Researchers propose to study and quantify the exchange
kinetics and fractionations of K isotopes during cation exchange and clay
formation processes through a series of laboratory experiments and new high
precision analyses of geologic samples. This work will provide an essential
first step toward a wide range of potential applications of stable K isotopes in
surficial environments, particularly, as a new silicate weathering proxy. Such
studies are critical for understanding the interplay between silicate
weathering, atmospheric carbon dioxide levels, and past climatic changes. To
highlight this contribution to young K-12 students, investigators will partner
with the University of Wisconsin Geology Museum (UWGM; www.geologymuseum.org),
the most popular science-outreach venue on campus, to educate and communicate
about continental weathering and the carbon cycle. UWGM Assistant Director
Brooke Norsted will spearhead the Museum's involvement by creating the content
and deliverables as well as overseeing their implementation. Second, K is an
essential nutrient for plant growth, and K isotopes in plants can be highly
fractionated. The investigators will explore K nutrition in plant growth by
conducting an undergraduate research class project by partnering with the UW
Soil Science Department and students that take Soil Science 326, Plant Nutrition
Management. In this class students grow plants under K deficient and sufficient
conditions to identify how K availability effects plant growth; the goal will be
to evaluate if these nutrient conditions cause K isotopic fractionation and to
demonstrate to the class the advantages of isotope analyses to tracing nutrient
utilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is to develop the stable
K isotope system as a new silicate weathering proxy. Potassium as a major
element participates widely in low temperature biogeochemical processes. Recent
analytical advances have allowed the investigators to identify small but
significant variations of delta 41/39K in terrestrial samples for the first
time. The proposed work is motivated by existing data that show river waters and
seawater have higher delta41K values as compared to a relatively homogeneous
delta41K value of the bulk silicate earth. Available delta41K results indicate
that cation-exchange and clay formation are the most likely mechanisms
responsible for stable K isotope fractionations on the continents and in the
ocean. The proposed experimental work centers on quantifying the exchange
kinetics and fractionation of K isotopes during cation exchange and clay
formation processes through a series of laboratory experiments, combined with
new analyses of natural samples. These data will provide an interpretive
framework for low-temperature K isotope fractionations due to clays.
Furthermore, this NSF-sponsored research will be integrated with NASA-funded
experimental studies on Fe, Si, and Mg isotope fractionations associated with
clays, paving the way for a multi-isotope approach for weathering
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.