* 1741712
* Construction of Mobile C-band, Narrow-Beam, Dual-Frequency, Dual-Polarization, High-Power Radar
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Joshua Wurman, The Center for Severe Weather Research
* Standard Grant
* Subhashree Mishra
* 08/31/2019
* USD 367,764.00

The Center for Severe Weather Research will construct a new quickly deployable,
dual-polarization, dual-frequency C-band Radar On Wheels (CROW). CROW has an
innovative design that will allow rapid deployment, has a small footprint and
conveys the ability to peer deeply into intense precipitation. This radar system
will provide a capability that is lacking in NSF's requestable user facilities
and will open new avenues of investigation in the areas of severe weather
research, including measurement of convective systems, tropical and winter
storms, as well as atmospheric boundary layer studies. C-band (5 cm wavelength)
radar is more capable of observing through intense precipitation than the X-band
(3 cm wavelength) radar that is typical of mobile facilities, including the
Doppler on Wheels (DOWs) that are currently part of the NSF Lower Atmosphere
Observing Facilities. CROW, requiring no advance site preparation, will also be
deployable for educational projects, permitting students to use a longer-
wavelength, fine-beamwidth radar to observe phenomena containing intense
precipitation. It will be designed to be operable by students with little prior
experience, to promote hands-on learning opportunities. CROW will be a high-
impact outreach and exhibition tool, easily, quickly, and inexpensively deployed
not only to university/college educational missions, but also festivals,
museums, and related venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CROW mobile radar employs
an innovative design to circumvent compromises between resolution and size that
are inherent in existing radars. CROW will have a 1-degree beamwidth and quick
scanning, independent dual frequencies to allow for high spatial and temporal
resolution. Dual-polarization capability, coupled with the independent
frequencies, will permit accurate measurements of differential reflectivity
(ZDR), from which droplet type is identified, at twice the scanning speed of
single frequency radars. CROW will be outfitted with two 1-megawatt transmitters
to permit higher sensitivity to clear-air and weak distant signals than any
existing mobile C-band radar and comparable to that of research quality S-band
(10 cm wavelength) systems typically used for meteorological applications. CROW
will be built on a custom-designed trailer that includes a small crane for
assembling the radar antenna on-site, thereby enabling transport of a twelve-
foot diameter antenna necessary for C-band operations. Set-up and assembly of
the radar antenna and associated structures is estimated to take about two
hours, making the system suitable for observation of predictable events, but not
for targeting of rapidly evolving phenomena, such as tornadoes.