* 1741971
* Geo-Engineering Innovations through Undergraduate Scholarship
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2023
* Sheldon Turner, Triton College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 01/31/2023
* USD 650,000.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, the Geo-Engineering
Innovations through Undergraduate Scholarship (GENIUS) project at Triton College
is designed to address the regional need for more and better prepared geoscience
and engineering technology graduates. The 10-year projected growth rate in
Illinois for geo-engineering occupations is between 15% and 20%, two to three
times the national average for all occupations. To serve the needs of local
employers, the project will collaborate with local high schools, four-year
institutions, and environmental and industry groups to involve students in
authentic research projects to (a) demonstrate the relevance of geo-engineering
careers, (b) engage them in interdisciplinary projects, and (c) impact the local
area through a partnership with the Cook County Forest Preserve District. The
geo-engineering solutions developed and designed by the scholars have the
potential to impact the environment for over one million people living in the
Des Plaines River Watershed. Key cohort activities include: (1) a Summer
Enrichment program that introduces students to the campus support network,
provides hands-on authentic research in the community, and peer mentoring; (2) a
Seminar Course designed to build networks between students and support services,
continue student-led research, and provide academic and career guidance specific
to geoscience and engineering; and (3) small group mentoring each month with
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) faculty trained to
recognize and share their social capital. The project will test several
theoretical ideas for ways to improve retention for all scholarship recipients.
It will add to the social capital literature by assessing not only traditional
success rates, but evaluating the student perceptions of loneliness and
belonging each semester as they move through the program activities,
specifically targeting those barriers to success. The project will evaluate the
success of STEM faculty training and mentoring, providing insights to the
benefits this has on faculty, and the challenges they face in working with
students, including underrepresented minorities scholars. This project will also
contribute to the research on institutional change by evaluating the efficacy of
the campus support network in providing role models and building trust at each
level of the institutional hierarchy. Using innovative recruiting strategies,
the project will increase opportunities in STEM for a wide diversity of scholars
including women and racial minorities, low income, and first-generation college
students enrolled in an engineering or geoscience programs at the college. As a
community college that is both a Hispanic Serving Institution and a Minority
Serving Institution, the training model, institutional practices, methods for
assessing diverse and student populations and the efficacy of a framework
designed to build capital social in students at Triton College has the potential
to impact similar institutions across the nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
GENIUS project will provide 40 scholarships to low-income and academically
talented students. Recruitment will be targeted toward in-district high school
seniors and first year college students who demonstrate high academic potential
and an interest in pursuing geo-engineering careers. Potential will be assessed
and participants selected through a combination of multiple measures including
ACT/SAT score and GPA, essay, recommendations, and Success Navigator score.
Through an intensive collaborative model that includes cohort building between
scholars, building close ties with STEM faculty, and building networks between
the multitudes of support resources on campus, scholars will demonstrate
improvements in their perceived sense of loneliness, their ability to identify
appropriate role models, and their trust in the institution. To ensure the
successful retention and graduation of students, the program will develop
targeted activities based on a social capital framework as well as utilize a
network of existing programs that will dedicate efforts specifically to the
participants including Counseling, Financial Aid, the Academic Success Center,
Student Life, and Career Services. The project anticipates retaining a minimum
of 85% of participants with at least 65% of scholars completing their degree and
transferring to a baccalaureate programs at a partnering university and/or
direct placement into the workforce within three years. In addition to the
students directly impacted through scholarships, the program will include the
explicit training of 8 STEM faculty mentors in becoming role models for
students. The success of this training will be shared and replicated with all
STEM faculty on campus. The number of services involved in this project will
include nearly every office on campus working toward a singular goal, creating a
more effective communication and student support network throughout the
institution.