* 1741100
* EAGER: Laser Condensation of Graphene/Silicon Nanocomposites for Enhanced Electrochemical Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Kejie Zhao, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 05/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

Graphene-based composites (combinations of graphene and nanoparticles) are being
adopted for versatile applications in field-effect transistors, sensors,
supercapacitors, solar cells, Li-ion batteries, photocatalysts, and
photoconductors. However, the performance of graphene composites is often
plagued by the highly disordered microstructure, aggregation of nanoparticles,
and loosely connected interfaces between graphene and nanoparticles. This EArly-
concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project seeks to elucidate the
underlying mechanisms of enhanced electrochemical properties of graphene/silicon
nanocomposites in their battery application through controlled laser processing.
The laser assisted synthetic study will be complemented by theoretical modeling
that seeks to predict the observed behavior. The educational activities
associated with this project focus on hands-on outreach activities for middle
school students on battery technology, coordinated through the Women in
Engineering program at Purdue University.

The overall goal of this research is to manufacture graphene/silicon
nanocomposites by laser processing and understand the electrochemical behavior
through atomistic modeling and electrochemical tests. Laser processed
graphene/silicon nanoparticles display advantages in mechanical stability,
material uniformity, and low contact resistance at graphene/nanoparticle
interfaces. To develop a fundamental understanding of laser processing and the
resulting properties, the research plan has two major objectives. The first
objective is to study the interfacial engineering of laser processed
nanocomposites through experiments and modeling. The second objective is to
understand the electrochemical behaviors of graphene/silicon nanocomposites by
performance tests, such as charging/discharging cycle stability and rate
performance. The research will determine the optimum processing conditions for
the enhanced electrochemical performance of graphene/silicon nanocomposite. The
knowledge gained from this work will facilitate the manufacture of graphene
based nanocomposites and contribute to the development of energy-storage
materials.