* 1741677
* GOALI: EFRI NewLaw: Non-reciprocal effects and Anderson localization of acoustic and elastic waves in periodic structures with broken P-symmetry of the unit cell
* ENG,EFMA
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2024
* Arup Neogi, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 10/31/2024
* USD 2,477,221.00

This award will investigate non-reciprocal metamaterials that arise in periodic
media due to viscosity and engineer acoustic wave propagation through it. For
light and sound waves, nature ideally follows the reciprocity rule that
reversing a wave propagation will return that wave to its original state. This
phenomenon is similar to the "undo" action on a computer or device, and is
fundamental to the behavior of waves used in conventional communication and our
general perception of reality. However, there is a select class of specially
designed materials that violate these behaviors called non-reciprocal
metamaterials that break reciprocity symmetry. In these materials, the "undo" or
reverse action does not ideally return the wave to its initial state. Deeper
understanding of non-reciprocity will enhance our knowledge of general acoustics
and impact applications like architecture, secure communications, vibration
isolation, medical diagnostics and therapeutics. Active phononic structures
including tunable lens, filters and acoustic diodes will be designed. Additive
manufacturing and micro-electro-mechanical techniques will be utilized to
realize active phononic structures. Local high school students, graduates, post-
docs, and undergraduates from physics, mechanical and electrical engineering,
and material science will be involved in this project. Research experience and
mentoring (EFRI-REM) will be offered through this research project to the
students from Texas Academy of Math and Sciences. This project also includes
close collaboration with the industry for student training and commercialization
of the outcome of the research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Propagation of
waves through a system of scatterers follows the reciprocity theorem which
states that the transmission of a wave remains identical if the positions of the
emitter and receiver are interchanged. The reciprocity follows from the
fundamental property of the wave equation - time reversal symmetry. This project
investigates a new mechanism of non-reciprocal or unidirectional propagation of
sound in viscous medium. A common viewpoint is that while dissipation breaks
time-reversibility, this is not sufficient to induce different transmission
along two opposite directions. However, this is not valid in case of a viscous
fluid. It will be shown that sound propagating in viscous medium through a
phononic crystal with broken P-symmetry does not follow the reciprocity theorem.
More specifically, we investigate how differential dissipation arising in the
Navier-Stokes equation leads to significant non-reciprocal effects without the
requirement of dynamic energy input, and expand that to new classes of non-
reciprocal structures including non-reciprocal hyperbolic metamaterials. The
transmission through a 2D disordered phononic crystal with non-reciprocity will
also be studied. The presence of disorder in an individual scatterer results in
localization of sound waves - an effect termed Anderson localization. This
effect will be utilized to achieve encryption, which can be used to develop
secure communication of acoustic signal both in air and water.