* 1741792
* Think Math + C: Integrating Programming Into a Comprehensive K-5 Mathematics Curriculum
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* June Mark, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie Teasley
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,249,972.00

As computing has become integral to the practice of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM), the STEM + Computing Program seeks to study
and advance the applied integration of computational thinking and computing
activities within disciplinary STEM teaching and learning in early childhood
education through high school (preK-12). The Education Development Center's
exploratory project, Think Math+C: Integrating Programming into a Comprehensive
K-5 Mathematics Curriculum, will investigate how integrating programming into a
comprehensive elementary mathematics curriculum can support students'
mathematical understanding and computational thinking. Programming is a
computational language through which students can express their mathematical
ideas and computational thinking precisely. Where mathematical notation on paper
just sits there, programming is active and students can engage in it and judge
the correctness of a problem by processing it. This can potentially be
transformative in a mathematics classroom, making mental acts, such as
decomposing problems, hiding irrelevant detail, and generalizing from specific
instances visible to students and their teachers in ways that other media do not
accomplish as well, and allowing students to examine and debug their own
thinking. The three-year project will build a coherent progression of
programming ideas and skills naturally into a mathematics curriculum across the
elementary grades, allowing computational thinking and mathematical reasoning to
grow in developmentally appropriate ways that complement each other. High-
quality instructional materials developed in this project will support teachers
and students in programming activities that can strengthen both mathematical and
computational thinking, giving a much wider range of students a greater
opportunity learning and academic advancement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Think
Math+C three-year project will work closely with elementary teachers and
students to develop a scope and sequence for a K-5 mathematics curriculum that
fully integrates programming, and to design and implement instructional
activities with grade 2 teachers and students. To build this fully integrated
elementary mathematics and programming curriculum, the project team will use as
a base, Think Math, an existing comprehensive and coherent K-5 mathematics
curriculum developed at the Education Development Center with prior support from
NSF. The project team will also examine the impact of those activities on
instruction and student thinking, comparing Think Math+C to business-as-usual
Think Math classrooms using classroom observations and cognitive interviews. The
project will also pilot and refine measures that capture evidence of students'
mathematical and computational thinking, which will advance the field with new
evidence for the effects of integrated STEM + computing teaching and learning.