* 1742071
* Built Environment Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Carol Lugg, Pennsylvania College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,000,000.00

This NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
Program (S-STEM) project at the Pennsylvania College of Technology (PCT) will
support forty (40) low-income students with high ability through the Built
Environment Scholars Program (BE Scholars Program). There is an established need
in the United States to increase the number of STEM technology specialists in
the workforce, and this project will help address that need. The BE Scholars
project will implement new strategies for increasing recruitment and retention
of engineering technology majors and will provide innovative support for them to
graduation. The student Scholars will pursue an Associates of Applied Sciences
(AAS) Degree within PCT's School of Construction &amp; Design Technologies.
Their engineering technology majors will include Architectural Technology, Civil
Engineering Technology, Surveying Technology, Building Construction Technology,
and a new major to be launched in Fall 2018 - Concrete Science. Starting with a
first-semester First Year Experience course and continuing through the first
four semesters of the associate degree program, students will be informed about
career pathways in these STEM fields. These efforts will increase employment
opportunities and raise the overall enrollment in these areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will generate new knowledge built around how
to improve success for technology students, and especially for rural students
enrolled in two year programs. Project research questions to be investigated
include: (1) How does exposure to industry site visits and job shadowing in
First Year Experience seminars increase the retention and graduation of rural,
AAS degree seeking students? (2) How does the incorporation of career seminars,
site visits, industry-led workshops, and career readiness sessions into AAS
curricula promote student success for these students? (3) What factors influence
the decision of the BE Scholars to enter the workforce or continue to pursue a
baccalaureate degree? The project team will use a mixed methods approach to
collect and analyze data. A variety of response formats will be used to collect
this data, including dichotomous, nominal, and interval-level response. The
research approach will allow the investigators to measure the success of their
career-focused strategies, especially for low-income technical AAS students.
Formative and summative evaluation will be implemented to help investigate both
academic and non-cognitive project components that contribute to recruiting,
retention, and AAS degree completion. Challenging and feasible benchmarks are in
place and are aimed at significant improvements in retention and graduation
rates for engineering technology majors at PCT. The successful activities and
components will be sustained and institutionalized at PCT, and the research and
evaluation will generate evidence that can be used to guide and inform
transferability and sustainability, especially to other two year programs.