* 1742127
* Designing Biomimetic Robots:  Researching the impact of an interdisciplinary bio-engineering-computational design curriculum on middle school engineering and science education
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Gillian Puttick, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,198,780.00

The project is funded by the STEM+Computing program, which seeks to advance
applied research on the integration of computational thinking and computing
activities within the disciplines of science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) in early childhood education through high school (preK-12).
In most middle schools, learning is segregated by discipline - science is taught
in one class, and engineering or computing are taught in another, if at all. Yet
today discovery and innovation are interdisciplinary and students need to use
skills and practices from multiple subject areas to solve problems. The
Designing Biomimetic Robots project will develop and study an education program
that integrates science, engineering, and computing by engaging students in
biomimicry design challenges to support students in developing computational
thinking and scientific reasoning, as well as engineering design practices,
while practicing interdisciplinary problem solving skills. Students will study
the natural world to learn how animals and plants accomplish different tasks and
then engineer a robot that is inspired by what they learned. For example, they
may use what they learn about how different animals pick up objects to design a
robot that can assist wheelchair-bound people in picking up dropped items. In
addition, the project will demonstrate how teachers can foster interdisciplinary
learning, and can broaden participation in science, engineering and computing
among middle school students in diverse settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will develop an innovative intervention to support the development of
interdisciplinary STEM knowledge and practices through a series of biomimetic
design challenges. The program will include: a) a 4-week modular and flexible
curriculum that integrates bio-inspired engineering design, robotics, and
computer programming content and practices into middle school STEM classrooms,
b) a teacher professional development program, and c) web resources to support
integration of biomimetic robotics into middle schools. The goal is for all
participating students to develop knowledge, practices, and skills consistent
with engineering and science standards, and computational thinking principles,
and demonstrate an understanding that computing enhances STEM practice and
knowledge development. Participating teachers will learn how to enact
interdisciplinary instruction through integrating STEM and computing, and how to
create task structures and discursive practices that support the participation
of all students. The project will contribute to theory about interdisciplinary
and participatory learning environments that can foster students' learning about
the intersections of computation, engineering, and biomimicry. The project will
work with 24 middle school teachers and approximately 3,200 students in urban,
suburban, and rural districts in Massachusetts, Maryland, and Maine that have
diverse student demographics.