* 1742407
* SUCCESS-LEADERS: Leading Educational and Academic Directions to Enhance Retention in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Joanne Kehlbeck, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 02/29/2024
* USD 996,038.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, SUCCESS-LEADERS is
providing support to low-income students with demonstrated financial need and
academic promise to succeed in STEM disciplines at Union College. This S-STEM
Track 2 project is funding a total of 20 students over five years who are
pursing a bachelor's degree in Mathematics, Science, Engineering, or Computer
Science. The project will recruit from rural areas and provide scholarships for
academically-talented students from under-resourced, rural high schools. The
project will increase the number of Union College's STEM majors coming into the
school and increase significantly the retention of these students; thus many
more will graduate and enter the STEM workforce. SUCCESS-LEADERS scholars will
be supported in several different ways, including access to experiences in
industry, working on research in STEM areas, and belonging to a community to
support them during their college years. The principal investigators will use
evidence from a retrospective longitudinal study to assess the long range impact
of Union College's prior and current NSF S-STEM-funded initiatives designed to
retain at-risk populations in science and engineering
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SUCCESS-LEADERS project will further
strengthen Union College's curricular offerings and co-curricular enrichment
programs in science and engineering by developing, refining and implementing
learner-centered practices that advance understanding of the factors affecting
retention and career pathways of low-income, at-risk populations. SUCCESS-
LEADERS scholars will be provided four-years of scholarship aid and
individualized support to help achieve success by meeting the educational and
financial needs unique to their situation and background. The overall goals of
the project are to: 1) increase the number of applications and admissions from
academically-talented students with demonstrated financial need, drawing
primarily from under-resourced, rural high schools; 2) improve retention and
success of these students in STEM fields at Union by specifically addressing the
challenges faced by students with limited academic opportunities; 3) increase
the number of women in engineering, physics, mathematics and computer science,
and underrepresented groups in all disciplines; 4) provide students with
opportunities to enhance their education through early introduction to research
opportunities, connections to industry and internships through the College's
Industry Mentoring Program, study abroad, and leadership training; and 5)
improve undergraduate educational experiences and promote professional
advancement by facilitating fruitful mentoring relationships in order to address
and overcome typical areas of attrition in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.