* 1742255
* Collaborative Research: Designing and Exploring a Model for Data Science Learning for Middle School Youth
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Andee Rubin, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 09/30/2022
* USD 672,046.00

Data science is becoming increasingly relevant in the workplace and everyday
life; therefore, there is a need for students to have opportunities to work with
data and view data science as inviting and feasible. This project will focus on
the integration of computer science and mathematics through data science in
after-school data-science clubs and camps in rural and urban settings with
middle school youth. The project will create modules for teaching and learning
data science that can be shared with educators in informal and formal settings.
The modules will engage youth in conducting their own data investigations using
computer tools for engaging with large and small data sets. Data science
education is a new field and the project will contribute to developing knowledge
about how to best teach data science and how to create effective learning
environments for students. The project is funded by the STEM+Computing program,
which seeks to address emerging challenges in computational STEM areas through
the applied integration of computational thinking and computing activities
within disciplinary STEM teaching and learning in early childhood education
through high school (preK-12).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use a
design-based research framework to develop, test, and revise the learning
modules in urban and rural settings. The data science concepts include
variability in data, organizing data, data structure, data representations, and
statistical reasoning. These concepts are connected to both mathematics and
computer science concepts. The project seeks to develop knowledge about how to
design learning environments for students to learn data science using
computational tools. The research questions include examining the design of the
units and students' learning about data science concepts. The data to be
collected include interviews with students, observations from the after-school
clubs and camps, and students' work from the modules. Educators who lead the
learning experiences will also provide feedback to inform revision and
implementation.