* 1742486
* Achieving Engagement and Success for Commuter Students in Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2024
* Jeffrey Potoff, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 01/31/2024
* USD 998,732.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, the ACCESS: Achieving
Commuter Engagement and Success program is providing support to low-income
students with demonstrated financial need and academic promise to succeed in
STEM disciplines at Wayne State University. The project is funding 84
scholarships over 5 years for students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in
Engineering. The ACCESS program will focus on addressing the unique needs of
students who commute, and seeks to generate knowledge on the factors that affect
the engagement of commuters with the campus community. Program elements such as
a summer engineering boot camp, peer and faculty mentoring, experiential
learning through internships and co-ops will be implemented to support student
success. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the ACCESS program are to increase
the retention and six year graduation rates of commuter students with low-income
socioeconomic status. Wayne State University (WSU) is located in downtown
Detroit, Michigan, and serves a population of low-income students who commute to
campus. These commuters are at great risk for withdrawal and poor academic
progress due to their need to balance academics with many off-campus
commitments, most notably work. Through combined research and educational
activities, this work will address the following questions: 1) what are the
barriers to commuter student participation in engagement and academic support
activities, 2) how well do virtual activities promote the engagement and student
success compared to in-person activities, 3) are there barriers to participation
in virtual activities for students of low socioeconomic status, and 4) are these
barriers to participation different among different ethnic groups? The project
will be evaluated through surveys, academic performance in success marker
courses, retention rates, and four- and six-year graduation rates. The results
of this work will be disseminated to the campus community and to the wider
global audience through peer reviewed publications and oral presentations at
national meetings. The results of this work will be used to inform the
development of new programs with increased effectiveness in promoting the
engagement and academic success of students who commute.