* 1742542
* Reducing Transfer Shock: Developing Community and Collaborations to Support Urban STEM Transfer Students
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Gwendolyn Shusterman, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 02/29/2024
* USD 996,208.00

The National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) program will fund the Reducing Transfer
Shock: Developing Community and Collaborations to Support Urban STEM Transfer
Students project. This project will support low-income students with
demonstrated financial need and academic promise to succeed in STEM disciplines
at Portland State University (PSU) project. Over five years, this project plans
to provide scholarships to 36 students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in
STEM. The specific aim is to improve successful transfer of urban STEM students
from two-year institutions to baccalaureate STEM programs at PSU. To accomplish
this goal, the program will implement: (1) A summer S-STEM bridge program; (2) A
course-based undergraduate research experience for students during their first
year; and (3) Direct placement of S-STEM Scholars in internships and/or
independent research experiences in their second year. The project will provide
students with financial support, training in professional skills (communication
skills, teamwork, ethics, etc.), and research opportunities necessary for
success in STEM. In addition, the project will cultivate a sense of belonging
among the Scholars to support students as they transition into a university
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goal is to increase the number of
low-income, urban STEM students who transfer from a community college, graduate
with a STEM bachelor's degree, and pursue graduate degrees and/or gain
employment in STEM careers. The project will: (1) Improve the processes for
recruiting and successfully transitioning urban transfer students from two- to
four-year STEM programs; (2) Provide financial, academic, and social support to
STEM transfer students; (3) Evaluate project activities that lead to STEM
transfer success; and (4) Disseminate project outcomes. To evaluate if students
successfully transition and reach their highest potential, the project will use
mixed-methods, quantitative and qualitative approaches to assess program
outcomes, including monitoring academic progress, administering pre/post
surveys, and conducting focus groups. Students? sense of belonging will be
measured to determine how participation in the program results in changes to
this important affective attribute. If so, the investigators will explore the
relationship of this change to mitigating transfer-shock, which can constrain
transfer students from persisting to graduation. A survey will measure three
constructs known to be associated with success: attitude toward STEM, career
goals in STEM, and sense of belonging. Furthermore, focus groups will contribute
to an in-depth understanding of the student experience. The project will measure
perceptions and success within three groups of students: Scholars, non-Scholar
STEM transfer students, and four-year STEM students. Comparisons among these
groups will support understanding the efficacy of the project's activities to
help students achieve academic goals (e.g., timely graduation), mitigate
transfer-shock (provide scaffolding for building a sense of belonging in STEM),
and give Scholars tools for success (i.e., strong letters of recommendation,
internships). Evaluation data will inform education research about what does and
does not work to mitigate transfer-shock and facilitate success in baccalaureate
STEM. The project has the potential to produce a sustainable institutional road-
map for mitigating transfer shock, and improving overall persistence,
graduation, and success for underserved STEM students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.