* 1742928
* Quantum soliton hydrodynamics in magnetic insulators
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Yaroslav Tserkovnyak, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* David Rabson
* 12/31/2020
* USD 375,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education on developing a methodology for the description of spin
transport in magnetic materials in analogy to hydrodynamics. Apart from carrying
electric charge, electrons moving through materials carry with them a tiny
magnetic moment called spin. Manipulation of those magnetic moments enables new
kinds of electronic devices that utilize spin in addition to charge. There are
circumstances under which the description of the transport of spins and of the
magnetic arrangements (textures) that many spins collectively create can be
achieved by analogy to the description of a fluid. The PI will develop a
theoretical framework for describing how spin textures interact and flow through
magnetic materials. The PI's research and collaboration with materials
scientists and engineers at UCLA will help develop and support concepts for
memory, logic, and communications devices that are based on materials that
harness spin textures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to research, the PI will
continue and build upon his involvement with a successful outreach program run
under the auspices of the UCLA California Nanosystems Institute, which brings
nanoscience and nanotechnology experiments, along with theoretical explanations
and presentations, to high-school students from public schools in the Los
Angeles unified school district. The PI will also develop a condensed-matter-
theory-centered component for UCLA's Research Experience for Undergraduates
program, in which undergraduate students work with a faculty mentor, as well as
other professors, researchers, and graduate students, on a summer research
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education towards developing the theory of real-space topological hydrodynamics
in relation to fluctuations and flows of topological solitons in magnetic
insulators. The interplay of heat flows and spin dynamics in magnetic systems
shifted much of the interest in the field of spintronics onto collective forms
of spin transport. Important examples are topological spin textures, such as
chiral domain walls and skyrmions, which have been realized and studied in a
number of magnetic materials. Dynamic coupling effects between such textures and
itinerant flows of quasiparticles has garnered attention in broad studies of
nonequilibrium phenomena and transport in magnetism. Momentum-space topology,
for quasiparticle bands in metals and insulators, has revitalized materials
science research in classes of semiconductors, semimetals, superconductors, as
well as magnetic insulators, with an eye on unusual forms of quantized response
and gapless transport at the boundaries between distinct topological
phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing on these developments, the PI will address
the main problems along the following directions: long-range transport through
ordered and frustrated quantum magnets, utilizing conservation laws based on
spatially-delocalized topological invariants; exotic hydrodynamics and
elasticity of emergent solitonic fluids and crystals; and developing a circuit-
theory formalism for topological entanglement production with feasible
spintronic and spin-caloritronic means. Spintronic structures and devices
explored in this research will offer an alternative to superconducting quantum
circuits as a versatile and scalable platform for quantum information processing
and computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to research, the PI will
continue and build upon his involvement with a successful outreach program run
under the auspices of the UCLA California Nanosystems Institute, which brings
nanoscience and nanotechnology experiments, along with theoretical explanations
and presentations, to high-school students from public schools in the Los
Angeles unified school district. The PI will also develop a condensed-matter-
theory-centered component for UCLA's Research Experience for Undergraduates
program, in which undergraduate students work with a faculty mentor, as well as
other professors, researchers, and graduate students, on a summer research
project.