* 1742493
* Research Immersive Scholastic Experience in Biology: A Scholarship and Support Program
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2023
* Allison Land, Minnesota State University, Mankato
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 12/31/2023
* USD 999,964.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, the Research Immersive
Scholastic Experience in Biology (RISEbio) program is providing support to low-
income students with demonstrated financial need and academic promise to succeed
in STEM disciplines at Minnesota State University, Mankato (MSUM). The project
is funding 80 scholarships over five years for students who are pursuing
bachelor's degrees in biological sciences. Participating in research is one of
the crucial factors in retaining students in STEM fields. However, research
opportunities are often hard to find for students in the first two years of
undergraduate education, especially at comprehensive institutions without a
large research community. To address this need, the Department of Biological
Sciences at MSUM will develop and implement a scholarship and support program
targeting incoming freshmen. Eighty students, in four cohorts of 20, will enter
the program in their freshman year and will take one research methods course,
followed by two semesters of research in Brain and Behavior or Immunity and
Cancer. RISEbio will award freshmen with financial need and academic potential a
scholarship that is renewable over three semesters while they take part in the
program. The overall goal of RISEbio is to increase student academic success as
measured by first-time pass rates for core courses, discipline retention, and 4-
and 5-year graduation rates. In addition to participating in research, RISEbio
students will join learning communities and will be guided by faculty and peer
mentors. The research component of RISEbio is designed to provide scholars with
an authentic real-world research experience similar to that experienced by
students at research-intensive universities, but tailored to fit within the
available infrastructure at a primarily undergraduate comprehensive institution
such as MSUM. RISEbio will provide a platform to test how the proposed
objectives translate to student persistence and academic success. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through evaluative and summative assessment, the RISEbio
project will enhance our knowledge of how student success in the biological
sciences is impacted through first- and second-year scholastic experiences that
bridge social integration, mentorship, and technical and professional skill
building with an immersive research experience. Moreover, RISEbio will provide
insight on how student academic success is impacted when financial burdens are
reduced through a scholarship which supports students during a critical window
of adjustment to college. Lastly, the RISEbio program is modifying existing
freshman research programs utilized by research-intensive universities to fit
within the available infrastructure of a primarily undergraduate comprehensive
institution. This adaptation provides a foundation for understanding how
immersive freshman research experiences in biology impact comprehensive
university student outcomes. By developing and implementing RISEbio initiatives,
RISEbio will enhance first-time pass rates for core courses, improve retention,
and increase 4- and 5-year graduation rates for low-income, academically
motivated students. The overlapping and integrated nature of the RISEbio
objectives provide a catalyst for developing a workforce with professional and
technical skills that will ultimately improve student marketability for both
post-baccalaureate employment and graduate school.