* 1742980
* Life Discovery - Doing Science biology education conference (LDC) on the theme:  Data: Discover, Investigate, Inform.
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Teresa Mourad, Ecological Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 05/31/2020
* USD 48,279.00

Biology has undergone a major data revolution with the exponential explosion of
data information and the technological leaps in computing power that make these
data widely available. Numerous reports have indicated that data-enriched
undergraduate classrooms have significant benefits for improving students'
understanding of science concepts, scientific reasoning, and the scientific
process. Developing data skills allows students to participate as scientists,
succeed in increasingly data-focused careers, and become well-informed citizens
and consumers. With recent efforts to curate, archive and disseminate research
data and the development of new tools that make data more accessible to the
education community, it is now demonstrable that faculty can successfully bring
data and authentic research into the classroom and achieve their learning
objectives. The time is right to accelerate this effort and to contribute to the
national dialogue on what it means and what it takes to implement data in the
classroom. The professional societies leading this effort are well-positioned to
expand and enhance awareness of available resources and foster collaborations
and opportunities among their members and networks. The conference will elevate
attention of the conference theme in undergraduate biology
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ecological Society of America, Botanical
Society of America, Society for the Study of Evolution and Society for Economic
Botany, collectively known as the Life Discovery Partners, are organizing the
4th Life Discovery - Doing Science biology education conference (LDC) on the
theme: Â Data: Discover, Investigate, Inform. The conference will facilitate
discovery of multiple types of data including environmental, geospatial,
specimens, genomic, visual, audio, and other numeric data. To investigate data,
strategies and approaches to scaffold student experiences and explore innovative
data visualizations will be highlighted in order to unfold the stories of life
on earth at various temporal and spatial scales. The LDC will offer
presentations and discussions around the type, quantity, and quality of data
needed to inform decision-making and the data skills to be introduced at various
stages of learning. This proposal will support travel and participation of
faculty from community colleges, minority serving institutions, primarily
undergraduate institutions, and high school teachers to ensure that they will be
informed and have access to such data resources for teaching.