* 1742046
* Collaborative Research: Using a School-Based Sensing Platform and Targeted Teacher Professional Development to Support Computational Thinking Integration and Student Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Mimi Recker, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 06/30/2022
* USD 209,587.00

As computing has become integral to the practice of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM), the STEM + Computing Partnerships program
seeks to address emerging challenges in computational STEM areas through the
applied integration of computational thinking (CT) and computing activities
within STEM teaching and learning in early childhood education through high
school. This project is a Design and Development collaborative effort between
the University of Colorado at Boulder and Utah State University aimed at
investigating the impact of the SparkFun Smart School platform, a school-based
sensing platform, combined with a targeted teacher professional development on
teachers' ability to support CT integration and promote student interest and
learning. The project will examine the affordances of this sensing platform--an
example of a new genre of robust, consumer-grade sensing technologies emerging
as part of the Internet of Things. Raw data will be collected through a series
of wireless sensor nodes measuring sound, light, motion, temperature, pressure,
and humidity; a network-enabled hub; a web-based data logging resource for real-
time data collection; and programmable motors and effectors for creating
interactive displays of phenomena of interest by using materials that produce
light, sound, and movement. This expanded environment for doing science enables
teachers across STEM disciplines to creatively integrate computational thinking
activities into their disciplinary instruction. By selecting personally or
locally relevant scientific phenomenon, deploying sensors to collect data
streams, and conducting data analyses, students will learn tangible computing
processes, collaboratively build interactive displays, and deepen their STEM
knowledge. Teachers will form a professional learning community, gain essential
content and pedagogical content knowledge, plan and implement lessons that
integrate science and computer science practices, and reflect on their
instruction and students' learning. The project will develop and study a
professional development process, the CT Integration Cycle, based on the
Problem-Solving Cycle, a research-based approach developed and studied to
support teachers in adapting their lessons and classroom instruction to
strengthen student-centered strategies. This professional development model is
an ongoing, highly collaborative process, whereby teachers plan, enact, and
analyze their instruction using video records of classroom
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborative effort will follow three
high-level theoretically principled conjectures that will guide the research and
development process: (1) Learning experiences that utilize the sensing platform
to investigate phenomena relevant to students' lives will engage diverse
learners in CT; (2) Learning experiences that deeply integrate CT practices and
science and engineering practices will support students to develop robust CT
skills, competencies, and dispositions as well as deepen their understanding of
STEM subjects; and (3) An adapted version of the Problem-Solving Cycle can
support teachers to productively integrate CT into their STEM instructional
planning and classroom implementation. The four sets of research questions of
the project are: (1) In what ways, and for which student populations, do the
SchoolWide Labs learning experiences deepen interest and engagement in CT?; (2)
Which learning experiences are most effective at deepening students'
disciplinary science knowledge?; (3) To what degree and in what ways do
teachers' planned and enacted sensor-based lessons change over time? Are there
differences across teachers and science content areas?; and (4) What
professional learning processes and tools support teachers to productively
integrate CT using a sensing platform into their disciplinary STEM instruction?
The pursued research and development activity will study the full trajectory of
teachers' CT integration processes, from lesson planning to lesson enactment.
Consistent with the principles of Design-Based Implementation Research, the
project will aim to understand implementation variation across disciplines of
STEM, with the intention of developing understanding of how best to make the
innovation work across a range of carefully sampled contexts. Denver Public
Schools will recruit 12 middle school science and integrated STEM teachers
(life, Earth, and physical science), organized into 3-4 school-based teams,
reaching 2,400 diverse and predominantly low-socioeconomic status middle school
learners over the project performance period. Data will be collected from
students (surveys, interviews, clickstreams, assessments, and project
artifacts); classroom lessons (written plans and videotaped observations);
teachers (interviews); and professional development workshops. For analysis of
student learning and also for teacher change over time, the project will employ
appropriate multilevel models, including two-level hierarchical linear modeling
due to the nested nature of the data. A power analysis (using a power level of
.80 and an alpha-level of .05) was conducted to determine how many students are
needed to detect an educationally meaningful effect of the program (minimum
detectable effect size of approximately 0.20). The results of the power analyses
showed the study is adequately powered to detect this minimum effect on student-
level outcomes. Utah State University will lead the evaluation component of this
effort, including formative, iterative, and summative perspectives. It will
center on both processes and products. The evaluation questions are: (1) To what
extent is the Research-Practice Partnership (RPP) producing research results to
foster educational improvement?; How effective are the implementation strategies
in terms of addressing a concrete educational need?; (2) To what extent are
Design-Based Implementation Research processes involving key participants?; What
are impacts of the design processes on beliefs and practices of participants?;
Are all participants in the RPP assuming their defined roles effectively?; (3)
What are the consequences, intended or not, resulting from the dynamics of the
partnership?; (4) Are products being iteratively refined by taking into account
feedback from all participants?; and (5) To what extent are the project's
products disseminated in ways that help practitioners? The project will generate
two toolkits as products to support teacher professional development and
classroom instruction. The research will advance theory and knowledge on
productive integration processes by studying the types of support STEM teachers
need to effectively integrate CT into learning activities that: (a) support
equitable engagement of diverse students; and (b) use CT as a vehicle to deepen
their students' science knowledge. Further, it will build on and extend
research-based principles of three dimensional science learning described in the
recently published science education framework (NRC, 2012) as a strategy for
productive integration, and contribute to theoretical literature on pedagogical
design capacity, curriculum adaptation, and teacher professional learning.