* 1742579
* Engineering/NSM Student Success Program Serving Low-Income Academically Talented Students
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Stuart Long, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 03/31/2024
* USD 999,029.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project will support the success of high-
achieving, low-income STEM students with demonstrated financial need at the
University of Houston. Over the five years of the award, the project will fund
80 scholarships for students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in STEM. Four
cohorts of 20 first- and second-year students will participate in a
comprehensive set of activities that includes orientation to scholarly work,
supplemental instruction, and mentored research. These supports are designed to
support timely progress toward graduation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a
comprehensive approach, the project aims to enhance success of low-income, high-
achieving students, especially those from groups that have been historically
underrepresented in STEM. The research component of the project aims to
determine which program activities make a difference in student outcomes, the
optimal frequency and intensity of such activities, and which kinds of
engagement are most effective at increasing persistence in college and raising
graduation rates. To estimate program impacts, the evaluation will use
propensity score techniques to match student scholars with a control group of
students who did not receive scholarships but who are similar to the scholarship
recipients. Descriptive analyses will compare the means and distributions of
participation rates between groups, across the College of Engineering and the
College of Natural Sciences and Mathematics. Chi-square statistics will also be
calculated to determine whether participation differs across program categories.
Following data preprocessing, ordinary least squares (OLS) regression will be
used to answer research questions related to the outcomes of interest. The
question of engagement by participation rate will use repeated measures analysis
of variance (ANOVA), where the dependent variables include measures of
engagement obtained from student surveys. Participation (i.e. no-, low-, and
high-) will be the repeated measure (within-groups factor) and program activity
category (i.e. academic, behavioral, social, affective) will be the between-
groups factor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.