* 1742041
* Paul Smiths College (PSC) Advancing Students to Careers in Ecology Program (ASCEP)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Celia Evans, Paul Smith's College of Arts and Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 08/31/2023
* USD 995,754.00

The Advancing Students to Careers in Ecology Program (ASCEP) at Paul Smith's
College (PSC) will provide 20 academically talented, low-income students with an
innovative, experiential educational opportunity that will advance them to
careers in ecology. As part of the career development process, PSC will educate
and inform students and their families about career pathways in ecology. ASCEP
will investigate the roles of service learning and family engagement in
improving academic success and career attainment for first-generation and for
rural college students. These research results may be useful to other
institutions as they develop programs to advance first-generation and rural
students into STEM careers and graduate education. This project will also
contribute new knowledge to the field of ecology through undergraduate student
research as well as increase the diversity of the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The goal of ASCEP is to provide an innovative, experiential
educational experience that will advance students to careers in ecology. As
students prepare for careers in Environmental Science, Fisheries and Wildlife
Science, and Forest Biology, ASCEP scholars will be supported by high-impact
practices such as learning communities, service learning, and both faculty-
mentored and independent research projects. ASCEP will educate and inform both
students and their families about career pathways in ecology. ASCEP will also
investigate the roles of service learning experiences, parental engagement, and
family support in improving both academic success and career attainment of
first-generation and rural college students. The project will contribute new
knowledge to the field of ecology through undergraduate research and, through
broad dissemination and replication of the model, will increase workforce
diversity in high growth green industries.