* 1742324
* Supporting Success of Science Transfer Students
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Katrina Miranda, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 12/31/2023
* USD 999,580.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project will
provide financial scholarships and academic support to low-income students
transferring from community colleges to the University of Arizona (UA) to major
in STEM disciplines. The dual goals of the project are to increase the academic
success of these transfer students and to ensure their persistence to graduation
with a STEM degree. Scholarship recipients will be academically talented, with
documented financial need. The principal investigator team also aspires to
recruit cohorts of students that represent the gender and ethnic diversity of
the State of Arizona. The rationale for the project is that students with
financial need, of first generation status or who transfer from community
colleges often face challenges that impede achieving their academic goals. The
animating idea of the project is that academic and financial support, faculty
and peer interactions, and support of a diverse student body will lead to
persistence to STEM degrees. Specifically, the project is designed to show that
mentoring, tutoring, advising, and financial assistance, from the time the
students enroll at UA, will enable an efficient path to graduation. Community
and relationship building early in their academic careers will allow students to
develop self-confidence and a sense of belonging. Two first-year courses will
provide professional development opportunities, focused initially on academic
success, utilization of campus resources, and career exploration, followed by
preparation for a research or internship experience. A citizen science project
in this course will integrate social and science identities and help students
understand how STEM research impacts issues of importance on a personal level.
The principal investigators will study the influence of individual support,
community building, and professional development activities on three key
outcomes for the two-year college transfer students: retention, persistence in
STEM, and graduation. In addition, they will also explore the potential for
broad implementation of citizen science projects early in the STEM
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Toward the project's goals detailed above,
need-based funding up to $10,000 per year will support 60 to 150 S-STEM scholars
for the five years of the program. Students transferring from community colleges
to UA are more ethnically diverse compared to the total student body, providing
the intrinsic opportunity to focus on underserved populations. In addition to
financial assistance, the program will create an environment of welcome and
support for students in a structured setting focused on building a strong
academic foundation, resiliency skills, a sense of belonging in STEM fields, and
planning for a well-matched career. A student-centered approach will meet all
scholars at their academic point of development, recognize each student's unique
circumstances, and validate a student's cultural wealth, altogether building
confidence, motivation, and success. This project will advance understanding
about factors and activities associated with retention, success, academic/career
pathways and degree attainment in a diverse population. Program analysis will
focus on effectiveness, sustainability and feasibility of expansion within the
scope of the UA's policy of 100% engagement. Key aspects that significantly
contribute to the success of students from diverse backgrounds and that may have
a long lasting and sustainable impact will be disseminated to other programs and
institutions.