* 1742069
* LIDS/IDSS Workshop on Smart URban Infrastructures. To Be Held in Boston, MA
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2017
* Asuman Ozdaglar, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 11/30/2017
* USD 35,000.00

Advances in networks of smart sensors, high-bandwidth wireless communication and
widespread use of smart phones allowed incorporating a cyber information layer
among users, resources and infrastructure service providers, enabling smart
services that achieve more efficient and dynamically adaptive allocation of
resources through decentralized decisions of heterogeneous agents. Such services
range from new apps that provide real-time information to users for better
decisions (e.g., traffic guidance systems), new platforms for sharing resources
and governing transactions among decentralized participants (e.g., ride sourcing
systems such as Uber and Lyft, bike-sharing systems such as Citi Bike in New
York City), and new decentralized control schemes which through careful design
of incentives aim to affect user behavior for more efficient use of resources
(e.g., electricity demand response programs, energy efficient buildings, and
smart parking and commuting programs). Another important enabler of this
revolution is our ability to collect and process vast amounts of data, which
allows us to build predictive models of user characteristics and consumption
patterns, peer and social network effects, and ultimately design, test, and
adapt incentive mechanisms for shaping user behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
such services are hailed as veritable breakthroughs and harbingers of enhanced
quality of life for society, their operation relies on a combination of
technological and social factors and may lead to unintended and unpredictable
consequences: real-time traffic information provided to a large fraction of
users leading to extreme crowding of certain routes, vulnerabilities in cyber
layer leading to extreme infrastructure damage, vast amounts of data collection
and analytics causing serious privacy concerns, and strategic behavior and
unexpected social peer effects (through physical and online social networks)
leading to herds, fads and inefficient outcomes. Design and operation of these
systems necessitates a holistic and systematic framework that incorporates
strategic human behavior, technological constraints, the interconnected and
networked nature of interactions, privacy and security implications and
resilience of the resulting system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building such a
framework requires systematically combining tools and methodologies from several
disciplines including optimization and control theory, economics, game theory
and social sciences, and statistics and data science in a way that was not done
before. To provide a forum for laying the foundations of such a framework, the
organizers plan to host a 2 day workshop on "Smart Urban Infrastuctures" at MIT
Media Lab, where the organizers bring together top researchers from academia,
industry, and government to share and discuss research challenges, questions and
recent ongoing work in this exciting emerging area. The Laboratory for
Information and Decision Systems (LIDS) is a unique place to host and lead such
a discussion given its long history and reputation of rigorous research in core
information and decision sciences and its recent expansion of research areas to
include game theory information and network economics, autonomy, optimization,
inference and statistics. LIDS has also recently joined and is playing a
leadership role in the newly launched MIT Institute for Data, Systems, and
Society (IDSS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the workshop is to address
complex societal challenges by advancing education and research at the
intersection of statistics, data science, information and decision systems, and
social sciences, and therefore provides the multi-faceted platform needed to
address the challenges associated with smart infrastructure services. The
workshop is organized around five panel sessions and also includes two keynote
speakers. Special care has been taken in providing a balance in terms of gender
and diversity of speakers and panelists. All panelists and speakers are at the
forefront of this emerging discipline and its related flagship domains. There
will be a student poster session showcasing the works of students. The workshop
will be recorded. By presenting and outlining a vision for research
opportunities in smart urban infrastructures, the workshop will bring together
ideas and communities that were not systematically connected before. By
explicitly taking diversity of speakers and ideas into account, the workshop
will promote and foster further interdisciplinary connections and will also
broadly impact the community.