* 1742943
* Collaborative Research: Investigating how transient electrical and magnetic signals relate to changes in recharge-driven redox state and iron mineral transformations
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Carl Isaacson, Bemidji State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 90,001.00

Hydrocarbon source zones resulting from oil spills and/or crude oil pipeline
ruptures result in persistent, long-term source of contamination of the aquifers
that store potable groundwater in the Earth. This project serves the national
interest by advancing the science needed to understand the long-term fate of
hydrocarbon contaminants in the Earth. Geophysical tools that have been
traditionally implemented to locate oil reservoirs and mineral deposits will be
used to explore how geophysical signals provide diagnostic information on the
progress of contaminant transformations that are largely driven by microbes in
the Earth. This exploration of the linkages between biogeochemical processes and
geophysical signals over time at an oil contaminated site may provide the
knowledge needed to reliably deploy relatively simple geophysical measurement
systems to monitor the long-term fate of oil spills. In the same way that
medical imaging uses non-invasive sensing of the human body, non-invasive
geophysical sensing of contaminant plumes might ultimately be used to understand
the subsurface Earth without the need to drill into it. A non-invasive approach
to monitoring the health of the human-impacted subsurface Earth would limit
exposure of humans and animals to contaminants and negate unwanted transport of
contaminants along pathways caused by invasive drilling methods. The research
will be performed by undergraduate students performing field-based research in
collaboration with government scientists from the United States Geological
Survey (USGS). The project will engage minority undergraduate geoscience
students from urban, economically disadvantaged neighborhoods in northern New
Jersey. Results of the research will be shared with other scientists and
students by running a workshop on geophysical signals associated with
contaminant plumes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transitional environments such as
hyporheic and water table fluctuation zones (WTFZ) are biogeochemical hotspots
where hydrologic processes driven by recharge events cause electron
donor/acceptor mixtures that enhance microbial metabolism. Hydro-biogeochemical
processes in transitional environments are challenging to study using
hydrological, microbial and geochemical proxies due to the spatio-temporal and
dynamic nature of these systems. Geochemical and microbial
processes/transformations occurring within the WTFZ at organic-rich contaminated
sites give rise to magnetic susceptibility (MS) and self potential (SP)
electrical signals that show evidence of being regulated by recharge events and
changes in water level. Understanding of the biogeochemical factors resulting in
the measured geophysical responses, as needed to apply these techniques to
investigate hydro-biogeochemical processes at field sites, remains incomplete.
This project will pursue interdisciplinary research at a highly characterized
site where decades of hydrological, geochemical and microbiological data are
available to interpret the driving mechanisms causing geophysical signatures. It
will integrate undergraduate education with basic research to advance
understanding of the origins of such biogeophysical signatures and how they are
regulated by variable hydrologic conditions. Supporting laboratory studies will
be performed to constrain the linkages between iron cycling and biogeophysical
signatures within the WTFZ. Datasets will be acquired to address the following
hypotheses: [1] Transient magnetic susceptibility profiles result from
hydrologically-driven iron cycling in the source zone; [2] Magnetic
susceptibility changes in hydrocarbon source zones result from the consumption
of iron-oxyhydroxides initially present on the sediments; [3] Transient self
potential signatures are associated with recharge-driven modifications of
dissolved or gas phase electron acceptors; [4] A microbial-mediated
Fe(II)/Fe(III) redox couple drives a biogeobattery causing an anomalous self
potential profile through the WTFZ in the source zone. Hypotheses will be
explored by a combination of field geophysical measurements, in situ geochemical
measurements on sediment packets suspended in boreholes and laboratory
simulations of the WTFZ zone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.