* 1742207
* Virginia Union University Community, Culture, Research Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 12/15/2017,11/30/2023
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson, Virginia Union University
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 11/30/2023
* USD 649,984.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project will
recruit, select, and award 25 scholarships to academically talented low-income
undergraduate students in the Department of Natural Science (DNS) at Virginia
Union University (VUU). Beyond receiving scholarship support the students will
participate in a variety of curricular and co-curricular activities that have
proven effective at increasing student retention and graduation rates. The
project aims to produce VUU graduates with a greater sense of the contributions
they can make to improve life in their communities and the world through the
application of STEM research. Since VUU is a Historically Black College or
University (HBCU), the success of the project will likely also increase the
level of diversity in the scientific community and enhance the connection
between diverse communities and the use of science as a tool to solve community
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will adapt evidence-based practices for
STEM retention to demonstrate how STEM education and research can align with the
interests, goals, and values of the scholars. Such practices include student
involvement in undergraduate research, social integration through promotion and
management of cohort experiences, and peer tutoring. A key activity will involve
engaging scholars at VUU in research projects that simultaneously teach research
techniques, make a scientific contribution, and address a social or community
concern that is valued by the student. Helping prepare students to exhibit a
sense of ownership and develop an awareness of the importance of STEM as a tool,
applicable to issues of their concern, will enrich their academic experience.
Moreover, the project will expand upon the understanding of how academic
programs at small liberal arts institutions can help underrepresented low-income
STEM students become successful graduates. In particular, the faculty team
leading the project will collect qualitative data (e.g. student interviews) and
quantitative data (e.g. grade-point averages, time-to-completion for key
courses, self-efficacy measures, persistence measures, etc.) regarding the
performance of the scholars. Such data will help the principal investigators
(PIs) at VUU generate and disseminate knowledge concerning the impact of project
activities. The data gathered from this project will inform recommendations for
institutionalization and expansion of project activities at the PIs'
institution. In addition, project findings will have implications for education
and preparation of talented underrepresented undergraduate STEM students at
other small liberal arts institutions.