* 1742461
* Improving the Persistence and Success of Students from Underrepresented Populations in Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2025
* Bojan Cukic, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 03/31/2025
* USD 1,040,199.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project will support the success of high-
achieving, low-income STEM students with demonstrated financial need. Over the
five years of the award, the "Improving the Persistence and Success of Students
from Underrepresented Populations in Computer Science (I-PASS)" project will
fund 15 scholarships to students who are pursing bachelor's degrees in computer
science (CS). The project will redevelop the standard CS curricula by inserting
topics that are tied to students' interests. The participants will have
opportunities to do CS research, as well as to engage in service projects.
Supports for student success include tiered mentoring and tutoring, and student-
centered activities in the CS gateway courses. The project will also provide
faculty professional development on issues of sexism, racism, and
microagressions to enhance the student learning experience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The I-PASS project aims to address issues of equity and
access in CS by: 1) increasing the retention and graduation of underserved
students in CS; 2) narrowing the CS performance gaps and graduation rates
between CS majors and underserved students; 3) broadening and enhancing the
gender, ethnic, generational, and social class backgrounds of CS students; and
4) developing interventions that can be extended to other STEM disciplines. The
project's intervention components will be evaluated using a quasi-experimental,
mixed method research design that involves a purposively selected treatment
group of the student scholars. The scholars will receive the project's
intervention for four years, starting the first semester of their first year in
college. Two control groups will also be selected and will allow the research
team to evaluate the success of the project using quantitative indicators of the
program's outcomes (e.g., grades, retention, and persistence to graduation). In
addition to quantitative indicators, the project will administer surveys and in-
depth interviews to assess the success of the interventions and examine how the
intervention components help (or fail to) mitigate obstacles the scholars face
in pursuit of their CS degree. The project will build on and add to the body of
evidence-based strategies that increase diversity and success of students in
STEM, and specifically, in CS. Findings will be disseminated through reports,
conference paper presentations, and published research
articles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.