* 1742081
* Collaborative Research: Debugging by Design: Developing a Tool Set for Debugging with Electronic Textiles to Promote Computational and Engineering Thinking in High School
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Mark Gross, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2022
* USD 376,454.00

Debugging is pervasive in both computing education and more generally in
problem-solving across many disciplines. Project "Debugging by Design" focuses
on the development of debugging for engineering electronic textiles as a central
computational thinking practice by putting engineering into high school computer
science (CS) classrooms. Unlike traditional approaches that teach debugging
strategies, the goal of this project is to investigate a new instructional
approach called "debugging by design" where the researchers turn the tables by
having students and teachers themselves design debugging activities and
materials supported by debugging tools. The hypothesis of the approach is that
debugging by design will strengthen teachers' and students' learning of
computational and engineering thinking while fostering a growth mindset around
computational competencies. Electronic textile construction kits include sewable
microcontrollers, sensors, and actuators combining computing, crafting, and
engineering thus spanning both the physical and the computational. This
particular hybrid medium is ideal for a study on the pedagogical value of
debugging in fostering computational thinking in engineering. Bugs can exist in
either or both of the media at the same time. Debugging such multi-faceted
systems lends itself not only to the practice of computational thinking and
programming as a technical skill, but it is also invaluable as a developmental
skill leading to a growth mindset and the concept of "productive failure". The
project is funded by the STEM+Computing program, which seeks to address emerging
challenges in computational STEM areas through the applied integration of
computational thinking and computing activities within disciplinary STEM
teaching and learning in early childhood education through high school
(preK-12). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes interconnected research
and materials-design components. The instructional materials developed will be
integrated into Exploring Computer Science (ECS) classrooms. The research
questions that the project aims to answer include how debugging furthers
computational thinking, how debugging encourages a growth mindset, how teachers
embed project materials into ECS, and what teachers learn from designing
debugging activities. Research will be carried out with ECS classrooms in the
Los Angeles Unified School District and School District of Philadelphia.
Researchers will work with 2 classrooms (35 students each) in each of the first
two years and eight classrooms in the third year. Two "Debuggathons" (debugging
design activities) will also be conducted in year 2, with both teachers and
students jointly participating. The deliverables of the project include (a)
debugging tool support that can help teachers and students debug the code and
circuit designs in their advanced electronic textiles; (b) designs and
implementations of instructional debugging activities that can be created and
used by students and their teachers in Exploring Computer Science high school
classrooms; and (c) student and teacher data and analysis that provide evidence
on how doing and designing debugging activities can further students'
computational thinking and foster a growth mindset.