* 1742899
* EAGER:   Characterizing and Accelerating Real-Time IoT Applications using FPGAs
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Matthew Tolentino, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 07/31/2019
* USD 174,881.00

Rapid advances in technology scaling have driven the development of inexpensive
sensing platforms with limited compute capabilities. Deployed at the network
edge, these platforms enable the instrumentation of the physical world. Using
offline analytical pipelines on cloud resources, municipalities have leveraged
this data to manage and even improve environmental conditions promoting public
health, safety, and quality of life. However, for emergency scenarios, such as
large-scale building fires where network access is limited, relying on off-site
cloud resources for real-time analysis of sensor data is impractical. This
project investigates how hardware acceleration can be efficiently integrated
into computing platforms at the network edge, enabling the use of real-time
analytical pipelines at the edge to create smart, intelligent systems without
requiring access to cloud resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses
the problem of efficiently integrating acceleration within edge devices by
characterizing and analyzing the power and performance of real-time workloads
with a focus on high-impact applications used by first responders. Based on this
characterization, we are building analytical performance and power models for
these emergent workloads. These models provide insight on prospective hardware
acceleration techniques and identify the limits of acceleration given the power
constraints for our specific real-time use cases. Using these models we are
integrating Field-Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) into prototype edge devices,
developing novel FPGA images for key analytical pipelines within our first
responder workloads, and evaluating the power and performance impact within real
systems. This work provides unique insight into the composition of future edge
devices to enable real-time analytics.