* 1742752
* NSF/DMR-BSF: Quantum transport of charge and heat in correlated electron systems
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Georg Schwiete, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2023
* USD 315,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Science Foundation and
the United States -- Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF) jointly support
this collaboration between a US- and an Israel-based researcher. The NSF
Division of Materials Research funds this award, which supports research and
education on fundamental aspects of charge and heat transport in metallic
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measurements of electric currents that flow
through a condensed matter system are often the tool of first resort for
characterizing newly synthesized materials, or for gaininig deeper insights into
the nature of interesting phases of matter. Often, measuring the flow of heat
can provide valuable supplementary information, in particular in cases where
quantum mechanical effects and interactions between the carriers are important.
This is because heat currents can be driven even when electric charge carriers
are immobile. While electric transport has been studied extensively in many
systems, thermal or thermoelectric transport remains relatively poorly
understood. To take full advantage of existing experimental techniques, it is
therefore crucial to further improve our theoretical understanding of these
transport processes. That is the main goal of this research project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In additional to its scientific merit, better knowledge of
fundamental mechanisms of charge and heat transport, especially in
semiconductors, holds promise for improving energy efficiency in electronic
devices. Further impact of this activity will lie in training graduate students
and postdoctoral fellows. Specifically, junior participants can greatly benefit
from this international collaboration, which will allow them extended visits at
a prestigious, non-US institute where they can be exposed to different ideas and
approaches, and make connections that will help them in their future
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Science Foundation and the United
States -- Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF) jointly support this
collaboration between a US- and an Israel-based researcher. The NSF Division of
Materials Research funds this award, which supports research and education on
thermal and thermoelectric transport in correlated electron systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In correlated electron systems, thermal and thermoelectric
transport coefficients offer complementary information as they probe different
aspects of the electron dynamics. To take full advantage of these experimental
techniques, it is crucial to further improve our theoretical understanding of
transport processes involving both electric charge and heat. Theoretical
understanding of transport in complex materials is often impeded by multiple
factors including strong correlations, impurities, Fermi-surface geometry, and
phonons. It is therefore important to study systems where only some of these
complications occur and can be studied in isolation to gain insights that may
then be applied to more complex systems. Following this strategy, the research
will initially focus on the disordered electron liquid near the metal-insulator
transition, and then branch out to include more exotic strongly correlated
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goals of the research project are: (i) To
study theoretically the temperature dependence of the thermopower on the
metallic side of the metal-insulator transition in disordered electron liquids.
In particular, we will explore possible violations of the Mott-relation and the
role of particle-hole asymmetry. (ii) To explore the effects of strong
interactions on electric and thermal transport. In two-dimensional electron
liquids, we intend to explore electric transport at the crossover between the
low-temperature regime dominated by impurity scattering and higher temperatures
where electron-electron collisions prevail. For strongly correlated materials,
the project will focus on the response to a nonuniform temperature, where
similar mechanisms can be at work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deepening our knowledge
on fundamental mechanisms of thermoelectric and thermal transport, especially in
semiconductors, may improve energy efficiency in electronic devices. In
particular, thermoelectric coolers and generators could benefit from
understanding how material properties like disorder, interactions or the
distance from a critical point affect transport coefficients. Further impact of
this activity will lie in training graduate students and postdoctoral fellows.
Specifically, junior participants can greatly benefit from this international
collaboration, which will allow them extended visits at a prestigious, non-US
institute where they can be exposed to different ideas and approaches, and make
connections that will help them in their future
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.