* 1742289
* A Scaffolded Learning Community to Increase Self-Efficacy and Persistence in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Timothy Walston, Truman State University
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 04/30/2024
* USD 999,915.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project at Truman
State University (TSU) in Missouri is designed to support at least 90
academically talented students with need-based scholarships for up to four years
while they pursue a degree in one of four science departments (Agricultural
Science, Biology, Chemistry, or Physics) to help address the regional and
national demand for more and better prepared STEM majors. Because many students
display poor self-efficacy, which serves as a barrier to success in earning a
STEM degree, this project will test whether development of a scaffolded learning
community with curricular and co-curricular activities improves self-efficacy
and retention in STEM. If students can see themselves as scientists, realize
available career paths, and have the tools to be successful in a STEM major,
they are more likely to graduate in STEM fields. The project includes an
aggressive recruiting plan that focuses on students from underrepresented ethnic
and minority backgrounds, first-generation college students, students from
families with low socioeconomic status (SES), and students from rural
communities with plans to increase the numbers of scholars from these groups who
graduate from TSU with STEM degrees. The scaffolded courses will form the
foundation for a novel Scientific Research minor that will be open to all TSU
STEM majors. The success of these courses, the research-focused STEM minor, and
the learning communities created will be disseminated as a model for supporting
student development and as a mechanism to increase participation of all students
in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will employ well-documented, high-
impact practices that increase success of students, and it will explore the
impact of several novel practices. Participants will learn the interdisciplinary
nature of science through a series of scaffolded seminars. In these seminars,
interactions within and between cohorts will develop a supportive learning
community. More experienced students will have increasing levels of
responsibility in the seminars as they realize their ability to be successful in
STEM and see themselves as developing into scientists. Through the scaffolded
seminar series and academic and professional development initiatives,
participants will see themselves as scientists and will be prepared to excel in
careers in STEM. The mentoring and scaffolded learning opportunities will
develop a supportive community for all students and will increase learning and
confidence of participants. The student success and professional development
activities reflect effective practices from the STEM education literature and
have been shown to be successful in supporting all students, including
underrepresented groups, in STEM at Truman and other institutions. Participants
will have peer and faculty mentors, and, as they progress through the program,
will become mentors to younger cohorts. Academic and professional development
activities will help the participants visualize the transition from being a
student to a STEM professional. Tutoring, intrusive advising, and study skills
development will be used to increase academic success in STEM courses. Through
professional awareness and development activities, such as an interdisciplinary
workshop and applications for research experiences, students will see an array
of career possibilities and feel prepared to explore them. The program has a
robust evaluation plan that will identify program success and direct
adjustments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.