* 1742599
* Inclusion of Data Science and Research in a STEM Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Jennifer Lindline, New Mexico Highlands University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 04/30/2024
* USD 661,868.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (S-STEM) program, the ?Inclusion of Data Science and Research in a
STEM Scholarship Program? will support high-achieving, low-income students with
demonstrated financial need at New Mexico Highlands University. Throughout its
five years, this project will fund 16 scholarships for junior and senior
undergraduate students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in Biology,
Chemistry, Computer Science, Mathematics, or Environmental Geology. The scholars
will take an interdisciplinary data science course, where they will learn
computational skills needed to analyze large data sets. This knowledge will
prepare them to complete a bioinformatics internship at Los Alamos National Lab
or the National Center for Genome Resources, work on a year-long independent
research project, and to mentor local high school students in a summer computer
science day-camp.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New Mexico Highlands University is a
public, Hispanic-Serving Institution in northern New Mexico, where many students
struggle with barriers to graduation that are common in rural, high-poverty
areas. This project seeks to support scholars to obtain a high-quality
education, by providing financial aid and academic support. Because STEM
disciplines use data science to analyze and solve complex problems,
understanding data science may give scholars broader career opportunities in
STEM. To help students develop data science skills, this project aims to
incorporate both educational and research opportunities in data science.
Scholars will have access to academic supports and enrichment opportunities,
including receiving supplemental instruction and/or tutoring, working as a tutor
and/or supplemental instruction leader, and participating in undergraduate
research. This project will analyze the impact of these student supports on
student engagement. The project will examine five scales of student engagement:
academic engagement; intellectual engagement; peer engagement; student-faculty
engagement; and beyond-class engagement. The project aims to determine how
financial support, coupled with direct student supports, increases student
engagement and successful degree completion. The ultimate project goal is to
develop a program that best assists HSI students to achieve success in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.