* 1742603
* Environmental Stewardship of Indigenous Lands Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Timberley Roane, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (S-STEM) program, the Environmental Stewardship of Indigenous Lands
(ESIL) Scholarship Program will support high-achieving, low-income students with
demonstrated financial need. Over five years, the project will fund 16
scholarships to students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in Biology, Civil
Engineering, or Environmental Science at the University of Colorado Denver. The
ESIL Scholarship Program will provide support, mentoring, and training in
environmental stewardship in collaboration with Indigenous peoples (American
Indian, Alaska Native and Native Hawaiian). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ESIL
Scholarship Program will address the need for environmental tribal liaisons,
individuals trained in both STEM and cross-cultural communication. To meet this
need, the ESIL Scholarship Program will enable scholarship recipients to
complete internships at tribal and non-tribal government partners, and to
participate in extracurricular activities designed to provide cross-cultural
awareness in STEM, academic supports, and professional development. The ESIL
Scholarship Program has the potential to produce valuable knowledge about: (1)
how a university can promote equity for all students, and (2) how non-technical
training in culture, professionalism, and communication can reduce barriers to
retention in STEM programs (e.g., the perceived need to abandon one's cultural
identity in favor of a new scientific dominant-culture identity). The ESIL
Scholarship Program will conduct research on how to provide programming grounded
in the viewpoint that cultural identity and scientific identity are symbiotic
rather than exclusive. The research will be carried out via both quantitative
and qualitative research methods. The ESIL Scholarship Program aims to increase
enrollment in STEM majors interested in environmental stewardship, improve
graduation rates of STEM students, and strengthen Indigenous culture on a
collegiate campus through deeper connections with tribal and government
partners. The project will develop a unique model for synergizing indigenous
culture and STEM through cross-cultural experiences and will train students who
will be uniquely qualified for STEM careers in land
stewardship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.