* 1742880
* UAV-based Underground Digital Photogrammetry for Geotechnical Characterization of Fractured Rock Masses
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Mary MacLaughlin,  Montana Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 174,747.00

Accurate geologic and geotechnical information, particularly orientation of rock
fractures, is critical for the design of safe underground openings. Large,
irregular mine openings known as "stopes" are particularly susceptible to
collapse due to inadequate geotechnical data, but accurate data are scarce
because access is often unsafe, and because of the limitations of other
available tools (LiDAR and ground-based photogrammetry). With recent advances in
unmanned aerial vehicles (known as UAVs, or drones), UAV-based digital
photogrammetry has the potential to allow high quality geotechnical
characterization of these large, unsupported underground openings if the
challenges associated with lighting, flight control, and image georeferencing
can be overcome. This research will address these issues, and a suite of indoor
and field experiments to pilot test the system will be conducted. The results of
this research have the potential to benefit society by enhancing safety in the
mining and underground construction industries, and have potential application
in a wide variety of other fields ranging from disaster response (inspection of
collapsed or damaged buildings), to exploration of enclosed spaces (caves,
storage tanks, ships, etc.) and documentation of sensitive historic
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is to develop
a UAV-based digital photogrammetry system to be used as a tool for geotechnical
characterization of inaccessible underground (unlit) sites. The system would be
able to capture good quality photos (well-lit, not blurry) with adequate overlap
to provide stereo coverage. This requires assembly of a UAV that can carry the
equipment to take the images as well as the required lighting and batteries, and
that can be guided to precisely controlled locations. Options that may be
investigated include video vs. still images, ambient vs. flash lighting, and
piloted vs. autonomous guidance systems. Additionally, a number of control
points are required to establish a georeferenced 3D model from sets of photos; a
system for establishing those control points will also be developed and tested.
The system will be tested in indoor spaces on the Montana Tech campus and in the
field at a nearby underground mine. The accuracy of the 3D models of the indoor
and underground spaces, including orientations of fractures in the rock mass at
the field site, will be quantified. The project will provide excellent
opportunities for the PI and students to interact with representatives from the
mining industry, and with personnel from the NIOSH Spokane Research Laboratory
(which is focused on mine safety and health research). It will also establish
the infrastructure for researchers in the Department of Geological Engineering
to contribute to future research projects involving UAV-based data collection,
and for the students involved in this research to have access to this state-of-
the-art technology.