* 1742607
* Promoting an Increased Sense of Belonging for Students and Their Families to Increase Success in Computer Science and Computer Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Georg Mauer, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 09/30/2023
* USD 650,000.00

The NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) program supports the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need. Throughout its five years of
funding, this project at University of Nevada, Las Vegas will provide
scholarships to 16 students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in computer
science and computer engineering. The project seeks to increase recruitment,
retention, student success, and graduation through academic support and student
support programs. In addition, the project aims to promote students' sense of
belonging by offering a family engagement program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project aims to advance understanding of how to better support student success
by incorporating self-study practices and involve families, especially those of
low-income and first-generation students. The project plans to investigate how a
student's sense of belonging, inclusion of families in the university
experience, and involvement of students' self-study will affect overall success
in the STEM disciplines. The project aims to provide Scholars with rich and
meaningful learning experiences in computer engineering and computer science.
The student support mechanisms will include: 1) a summer bridge program to
prepare Scholars for the transition to college; 2) academic supports via
tutoring and mentoring by faculty and peers; 3) social scaffolding with cohort
activities and family engagements; 4) faculty connectivity such as via seminars
and summer research; and 5) engagement with local STEM industries via tours,
conferences, summer internships, and industry-sponsored senior design projects.
The project intends to promote student success by reaching beyond the campus to
strengthen family understanding of the university experience. The knowledge
gained from this project could inform strategies to strengthen recruitment of
students into the STEM workforce and/or graduate
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.