* 1742056
* Institutional Partnership to Create Successful Student Transition in Smart Energy &amp; Materials
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2017,08/31/2024
* James Pitarresi, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 08/31/2024
* USD 4,153,852.00

Community college students face more barriers on their path to a STEM bachelor's
degree than those entering college through a four-year school. To create a
viable pathway to STEM degrees, and to ensure opportunities to students with
significant financial need, this project will establish a partnership funded by
an NSF Scholarships in STEM (S-STEM) Track 3 award centered at Binghamton
University that provides a smooth and supported transition from community
college through STEM baccalaureate degrees. The project will work with
established, successful partnerships between Binghamton, CUNY Queensborough
Community College, and the SUNY Broome Community College to increase retention,
success, and graduation of students as they transition from Associate of Science
(AS) to Bachelor of Science (BS) degree programs. The project emphasizes an
interdisciplinary approach, using "Smart Energy" as an educational emphasis that
is critical to the alternative energy future of the United States, and a
disciplinary focus on degrees in chemistry, physics, and mechanical engineering.
The project will offer 90 low-income, academically talented students four-year
scholarships and aim for all students in the program to complete their BS
degree. The project will recruit from proven networks for low-income,
academically talented, and underrepresented students. Project features will
include an early research experience, a 1-credit seminar, coordinated advising
support between 2-year and 4-year schools, faculty mentorship development,
industry internship and middle school outreach opportunities, articulation
agreements to support seamless transfer, and other forms of support to foster
learning communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental objective of this
proposed S-STEM program is to promote STEM BS degree completion and careers for
low-income, academically talented students, including underrepresented minority
and female students, through a well-supported, seamless transfer path from
partner community colleges to Binghamton University. The proposed students will
be trained in STEM fields related to Smart Energy, as a key societal challenge.
The students will gain hands-on experience, addressing current global problems,
and will contribute to knowledge gains in STEM fields, including new materials
and technologies for energy generation and storage at leading-edge research
programs at Binghamton. The American Chemical Society's ChemIDP will be employed
to take students through a process of self-assessment, career planning, goal
setting and skill strengthening. The project team will work with the American
Chemical Society's Education Division to provide professional development
workshops and resources to faculty involved in the project in support of upper
level student advising. This project will study interventions to improve
retention, completion and academic success for community college transfer
students, extending support to transfer students as soon as they begin at
community college, contributing to the body of knowledge about the factors that
shape student success in STEM education. Those activities deemed to be effective
in meeting the project goals will be brought to the SUNY Chancellor as a model
for seamless transfer across the 64 SUNY campuses and disseminated nationally
through regional meetings and educational symposia. By attracting scholars into
STEM programs and guiding them through BS degrees and into science-related
careers, this project will have impact beyond SUNY Binghamton to fill a national
need for highly trained scientists and engineers, while providing opportunities
for economically disadvantaged students.