* 1742798
* Workshop Proposal: Russian Elite Attitudes Toward Conflict and the West
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* William Zimmerman, Hamilton College
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2020
* USD 49,999.00

GENERAL ABSTRACT

Over the past two years, the relationship between Russia and the U.S. has
undergone a seismic shift. US-Russian relations are now more confrontational
than at any point since the Mikhail Gorbachev era began in 1985. This project
convenes two workshops to analyze the sources of this conflict, bringing
together leading scholars from the U.S., Europe, and Russia. Scholars will
analyze and present papers based on a series of more than 1600 interviews with
high-ranking individuals working in Russia's federal bureaucracy, parliament,
military and security agencies, private businesses, state-owned enterprises,
universities and academic research institutes, and major media outlets that
spans a period from 1993 to 2016. These papers will be published as a co-edited
volume that should be of interest to policy experts and academics alike. By
exploring the foreign policy attitudes of a broad swath of Russian elites, the
project should promote a deeper understanding of the causes of -- and possible
ways to moderate -- Russia's recent belligerence in the post-Soviet region and
its confrontational stance toward the West.

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT

We plan to convene two workshops to analyze the sources of the resurgent
conflict between Russia and the U.S. that has accompanied President Vladimir
Putin's return to the presidency in 2012. Leading scholars from the U.S.,
Europe, and Russia will analyze and present papers based on a unique data source
-- a series of interviews of high-ranking individuals working in Russia's
federal bureaucracy, parliament, military and security agencies, private
businesses, state-owned enterprises, universities and academic research
institutes, and major media outlets. The series, conducted on a quadrennial
basis since 1993 and extending to 2016, consists of seven waves. It includes
1,664 surveys that feature a consistent survey methodology, the use of the same
Moscow-based polling firm, and the replication of most survey questions. These
are the only repeated cross-sectional survey data of Russian elites extant
anywhere and as such, constitute a unique resource for the scholarly community.
The papers written using the data will be published as a co-edited volume that
should be of interest to policy experts and academics alike. By exploring the
foreign policy attitudes of a broad swath of Russian elites, the project should
promote a deeper understanding of the causes of -- and possible ways to moderate
-- Russia's recent belligerence in the post-Soviet region and its
confrontational stance toward the West.