* 1742017
* Teaming Engineering and Mathematics Students for the Future
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2024
* Pamela Lockwood, West Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 999,994.00

Increasing enrollments in STEM should reflect the nation's diversity. This
creates a compelling need to ensure access and support to economically-
disadvantaged and first generation students pursuing STEM careers. It is
imperative to understand which interventions most effectively support these
students. This project will award 100 scholarships over five years to first year
and transfer students entering West Texas A&amp;M University (WTAMU) as
engineering or mathematics students. It is designed to promote and ensure the
retention and graduation of engineering and mathematics students from three
underrepresented and/or disadvantaged populations: (1) rural, economically-
disadvantaged students; (2) minority students; and (3) first-generation college
students at this Hispanic Serving Institution. This project will compare the
benefit of financial support alone to the benefit of receiving support that
includes financial assistance as well as academic, social, and career support.
The project will also identify the modifications to traditional learning
communities and Peer-Led Team Learning (PLTL) models required to address the
challenges facing underrepresented students in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to develop well-trained professionals who are ready to
contribute to the economic growth and competitiveness of the nation's work
force. The project has three objectives: (1) increase the recruitment,
retention, student success, and graduation of low-income, academically talented
students pursuing degrees in STEM fields; (2) adapt, implement, and study models
of effective evidence-based practices, and strategies that contribute to
understanding of how these practices affect recruitment, retention, and student
success; and (3) contribute to the implementation of co-curricular PLTL and
Experiential Learning activities. The project will recruit academically talented
students from regional high schools and partnering community colleges with large
minority and economically disadvantaged populations. Scholarships will reduce or
eliminate the need for students to seek employment while pursuing their degrees.
The program will establish learning communities and block scheduling for
students with similar educational trajectories. The communities will be involved
in peer-led team learning, experiential learning, workforce exposure, and career
counseling to foster social and academic success. This will further enhance the
likelihood of persistence in STEM and STEM careers. The interaction of student
cohorts will encourage the exchange of ideas. It will also foster appreciation
of the interdependence and interdisciplinary nature of the sciences. Results
from the project will provide a model for higher education providers in states
across the nation experiencing growth in the Hispanic population and other
underrepresented groups to recruit, retain, and increase degree attainment of
undergraduate students in STEM fields.