* 1742118
* A Pathway to Completion for Pursuing Engineering and Engineering Technology Degrees
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Kim Bullington, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 09/30/2023
* USD 995,821.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (S-STEM) program, the ?Pathway to Completion for Pursuing
Engineering and Engineering Technology Degrees? project will support high-
achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial need. The project
will support students in STEM disciplines at the Frank Batten College of
Engineering and Technology (BCET) at Old Dominion University (ODU) in Virginia.
This project will fund 70 scholarships over five years for BCET students who are
pursuing bachelor's degrees in engineering and engineering technology. The
project will include recruitment of veterans who have exhausted their GI Bill
Benefits, but have not yet completed their STEM degree. In addition to
scholarships, the program will provide students with academic and mentoring
support to increase academic success and workplace readiness, ensuring these
students are ready to meet the demands of regional businesses near
ODU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This S-STEM Track 2 project builds on several existing
initiatives at Old Dominion University, and introduces additional effective
student support practices targeted at areas expected to be particularly critical
to student success. Through interventions and targeted support, the project aims
to address the significant barriers and risk factors to degree completion of
students pursuing engineering and engineering technology programs. The
associated research activities will increase understanding of successful ways to
support and encourage student success in STEM. This project has the potential to
provide a model for how to retain student interest and participation throughout
the completion of their degree. Qualitative and quantitative data will be
collected to gather information about self-efficacy and the value and cost of
education of participating students, especially veterans. The lessons learned in
this study will be relevant to other institutions of higher learning, and
military services may be able to use these findings to better prepare service
members as they transition from military service to higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.