* 1742320
* Maker Partnership: A Research Practice Partnership to Integrate Computer Science and Computational Thinking into Science Instruction
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Cheri Fancsali, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie Teasley
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,249,925.00

As computing has become integral to the practice of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM), the STEM + Computing program seeks to
address emerging challenges in computational STEM areas through the applied
integration of computational thinking (CT) and computing within disciplinary
STEM teaching and learning in early childhood education through high school
(preK-12). The three-year exploratory project, Maker Partnership: A Research
Practice Partnership to Integrate Computer Science and Computational Thinking
into Science Instruction, is designed to build knowledge about how to help
teachers successfully integrate computer science (CS) and computational thinking
into elementary grade science classes through maker pedagogy and curriculum.
Maker pedagogy emphasizes learning through student-centered inquiry, creating,
and innovating. It is based on the principles and practices of the engineering
design process, which is an iterative cycle that consists of defining a problem,
researching, planning, prototyping and testing solutions, and refining the
solution as necessary. The project will generate important lessons about how to
train and prepare elementary grade teachers to incorporate CS and CT into their
science teaching, particularly in the context of high-poverty schools that serve
large numbers of Black and Latino youth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a
research-practice partnership, the Research Alliance for New York City Schools,
Schools That Can, and MakerState will collaborate to iteratively design,
implement and test the Maker Partnership curriculum and professional development
(PD). The research will address the following research questions: (1) To what
degree was the Maker Partnership implemented with fidelity to the program model?
What were the facilitators and barriers to implementation? (2) To what degree
did participating teachers integrate CS and CT into their in-school science
instruction? What inhibited and facilitated that integration? (3) What were the
outcomes for teachers participating in the Maker Partnership, in terms of their
CS and CT content knowledge, pedagogical knowledge, instructional practice, and
dispositions? How did the Maker Partnership curriculum, professional
development, and support change teachers' approach to instruction? (4) What were
the outcomes for students in participating classrooms, particularly students
historically underrepresented in science? How did the maker curriculum and
pedagogy influence student engagement, interest and deeper learning of the
content? (5) How was the model adapted by teachers and schools to meet their
specific context and needs? What are the local context factors that should be
considered when expanding the Maker Partnership model to new sites? In the first
year of implementation, teachers will participate in a PD and support and then
implement the Maker Partnership curriculum in an afterschool setting. Throughout
the year, the research team will collect and analyze data on the PD and
implementation to inform improvements to the model, with a particular focus on
transitioning the curriculum and pedagogical approach from the afterschool
setting to the in-school classroom setting. In the second year, the team will
work with the same teachers and administrators to implement the model in their
science classrooms. They will continue to collect and use data to iterate and
refine the curriculum and PD and support and assess outcomes for teachers and
students. Data collected throughout the study will include teacher surveys,
student pre-post surveys, CS/CT and science skill and content mastery
assessments, CT and science standardized tests, school record data, interviews,
and observations.