* 1742533
* Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering Assistance for Transfer Improvement and Excellence
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2023
* Kunning Xu, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 12/31/2023
* USD 999,911.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, the Mechanical and
Aerospace Engineering Assistance for Transfer Improvement and Excellence
(MATRIX) project will provide support to low-income students with demonstrated
financial need and academic promise to succeed in STEM disciplines at the
University of Alabama in Huntsville (UAH). The project is funding 64
scholarships over five years for students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering. This project will improve the performance,
retention, and graduation rate for financially disadvantaged transfer students
in the Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering Department. Transfer students are
often a forgotten group because of the focus on first-time full-time (FTFT)
student cohorts for university statistics and comparisons. Many merit-based aid
opportunities for FTFT students exist, but such opportunities are rare for
transfer students. Thus, many transfer students take part-time jobs to cover the
cost of education, which reduces their time for study. Unlike FTFT students who
are well socialized into the campus and the services available, transfer
students often do not know what campus services exist, and lack the academic and
social assistance to adjust their new environment. These and other factors
contribute to the lower average GPA and graduate rates of transfer students
compared to FTFT students at UAH and around the country. To address this
discrepancy, this project seeks to better acclimate transfer students to UAH and
provides full tuition for two consecutive years to reduce or eliminate the need
for part-time jobs, allow students to focus on academic and social activities,
and support building a community. In addition, this project will partner with
local Huntsville engineering companies to provide hands-on research experiences,
mentoring, and industry opportunities for transfer
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the MATRIX program is to improve the
performance, retention, and graduation rate for financially disadvantaged
transfer students in the Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering department at UAH.
MATRIX scholars will be fully supported financially for up to two consecutive
years beginning with their first fall semester at UAH. During the first week of
their first semester, the students will participate in an "Enter the MATRIX"
orientation program. The first MATRIX year focuses on community building and
undergraduate research. The second MATRIX year focuses on professional
development, networking, and internships. Specific objectives of the program
include improving academic performance, retention, and graduation rates of
MATRIX students, improving the use of campus academic support services, creating
specific transfer student cohorts to assist with campus acclimation, and
providing research opportunities and professional development activities for
students. One of the major aspects of this program is the partnership with local
engineering companies to provide professional development, networking, and
internship opportunities for the MATRIX scholars. The internships will provide
hands-on experience in engineering to help students obtain employment post-
graduation. Once students are accepted to the MATRIX program, they must
demonstrate continued satisfactory progress in their degree program, research
activities, and attend program activities to retain their
scholarships.&lt;br/&gt;