* 1742241
* Developing a Life Sciences Workforce with Strong Quantitative Skills
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Declan McCabe, Saint Michael's College
* Standard Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 09/30/2023
* USD 999,989.00

The NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) program supports the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need. This project at St. Michael's
College will provide scholarships to students who are pursuing bachelor's
degrees in life sciences, in combination with a major or minor in mathematics,
computer science, or statistics. Throughout its five years of funding, this
project will fund 20 scholarships in five groups of four students. Science
graduates with strong complementary mathematical and biological skills are
ideally positioned to innovate and drive the United States bioscience economy.
This project aims to integrate computational and life science education. The
graduating Scholars will have computational skills essential for life science
careers, and conversely, science backgrounds to support collaborations that
require computational approaches. This project expects to increase the number of
students graduating with majors, minors, and double major combinations from life
sciences and computational sciences. These efforts aim to bridge the 'culture
gap' between computational and life sciences. The project will recruit low
income students from different groups, including first generation, female,
rural, and other groups that are underrepresented in STEM fields. Graduates of
this program are expected to advance scientific understanding in the workforce
and to contribute to the U.S. STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project
will crosslink successful life science and computationally intensive programs to
develop effective interdisciplinary curricula that can educate graduates with
strong life science and mathematical skills. To accomplish these goals, it will
offer Scholars enrichment colloquia, alumni networking, conference travel,
internships, and research opportunities, and will support faculty to build
interdisciplinary connections. The project predicts that cohort-strengthening
activities will enhance student retention in science and math major/minor
combinations. They also expect that mathematically adept students will more
often choose to pursue research-based careers than their peers. The project
researchers will analyze retention rates in STEM majors, numbers in major/minor
combinations, and surveys comparing attitudes towards science in the cohort,
other STEM, and non-STEM majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.