* 1742351
* Collaborative Research: Integrating computing in STEM: Designing, developing, and investigating a team-based professional development model for middle- and high-school teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Tiffany Barnes, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 08/31/2023
* USD 861,773.00

As computing has become integral to the practice of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM), the STEM+Computing program seeks to address
emerging challenges in computational STEM areas through the applied integration
of computational thinking and computing activities within STEM teaching and
learning in early childhood education through high school (preK-12). The goal of
this collaborative STEM+Computing project is to design, develop, and investigate
outcomes of professional development (PD) designed to support in-service
teachers in integrating computing and STEM curricula across middle- and high-
school classrooms. Approximately 360 teachers in North Carolina and South
Carolina will be recruited to participate in summer PD workshops. In each state,
one workshop will implement a new PD model that provides interdisciplinary teams
of STEM+C teachers with an opportunity to work with the investigators and
together -- in the workshop and throughout the academic year -- to build
lessons, activities, and resources that integrate computing into classroom-based
activities. These resources will be freely shared with other teachers and the
public. A second workshop in each state will employ a more traditional, single-
teacher focused approach to PD. Following the workshops, the project will
support the teachers year-round through monthly online meetings, and
opportunities to participate in an online forum and attend in-person sessions.
Investigators from Citadel Military College of South Carolina and North Carolina
State University will collaborate to: design and develop the team-based PD;
investigate its effects on educational practice; create computational tools as
needed to support classroom-based activities; and work to advance knowledge on
how the new resources can be effectively adopted across diverse classrooms,
contexts, and cultures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore how PD
contexts (e.g., individual or team) and cultures (discipline, state) impact the
quality and implementation of STEM curricula integrated with computing. The PD
will be implemented and studied in three phases, with a particular focus on
teacher outcomes, utilizing data obtained through administration of extant
instrumentation, interviews, focus groups, video and audio recordings of
classroom interactions, and analyses of artifacts. Members of the project team
will design new integrated STEM+C curricula; develop standards crosswalks; map
the curricula to standards; develop, test, and refine tools (including Snap!
programming modules that will help students integrate complex computing and STEM
content into creative projects); build and support a community of teachers
integrating computing in STEM; and conduct a rigorous comparison study across
two states (North Carolina and South Carolina), and PD types (individual and
team). Standards crosswalks and project research will make explicit connections
across state and national STEM standards, computing standards school curricula,
and classroom contexts. An independent evaluator will assess: implementation;
teachers' reactions to professional learning; changes in teacher content
knowledge as a result of professional learning, and implications for classroom
instruction; and teachers' attitudes and behaviors, and the extent to which
teachers are adopting new computing pedagogies and activities.