* 1742282
* The Appalachian High Achievers in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2024
* Michael Madritch, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 03/31/2024
* USD 999,982.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (S-STEM) program, the "Appalachian High Achievers in STEM" project
will support high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Appalachian State University. Throughout its five years, this project
will fund scholarships for 42 undergraduate and graduate students who are
pursuing degrees in chemistry, computer science, geology, mathematics, or
physics. This S-STEM Track 2 project will establish a simulation- and
visualization-focused framework for interdisciplinary collaboration among the
participating disciplines. Simulation and visualization are essential for
understanding the vast amounts of data available now in STEM and other fields.
Students from all STEM disciplines will use computer applications to simulate
abstract models of systems or to visualize numerical information mathematical
models. Scholars will be immersed in a supportive community as they engage in
interdisciplinary research projects, mentored by faculty. The research projects
will draw from multiple STEM areas. The Appalachian High Achievers project aims
to increase understanding of how these activities produce social and academic
benefits, and increase professional and workforce preparation. It also has the
potential to prepare students for the technology industries in the Appalachian
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to prepare students for future
careers in data rich environments. Recruiting efforts will emphasize students
from the Appalachian Mountain counties that surround the university, where
poverty rates are among the highest in North Carolina. Mentoring clusters, a
STEM Seminar, and peer-led study halls will support student success. Cohort
cohesion will be strengthened through informal activities such as sports,
participation in a simulation and visualization project, and work to develop a
skill set that spans multiple disciplines. Leadership training and certificates
will be used to incentivize participation in project activities. Local companies
have committed to provide speakers who can link students with potential careers.
This speaker program will be coupled with alumni mentoring to strengthen the
scholars' ties to the local workforce. The PIs aim to establish a learning
environment that mimics an interdisciplinary real-world experience. Teams of
scholars from chemistry, computer science, geology, mathematics, and physics
will examine interdisciplinary topics and investigate research problems that
involve simulation and visualization. This focus has the potential to increase
student preparation for jobs or graduate studies in multiple fields. The program
is expected to have a broad impact as it generates knowledge about effective
approaches to improve the recruitment and retention of the students it serves,
and to contribute to the economic development of North Carolina and the
Appalachian region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.