* 1742242
* Tangible Programming Environment Targeted for Students who are Visually Impaired
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Joshua Miele, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,109,303.00

As computing has become integral to the practice of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM), the STEM+Computing program seeks to advance
applied research integrating computational thinking and computing activities
within disciplinary science, technology, engineering, and mathematics teaching
and learning in early childhood education through high school (preK-12). There
is currently no accessibility solution that allows blind and visually impaired
learners use of the new highly visual programming languages that are ubiquitous
and which are specifically designed to improve sighted students' engagement and
ease of learning computer programming. The aim of this proposed project, by
Virginia Commonwealth University and Smith-Kettlewell Institute, is to provide a
new interface "tSCRATCH" for the programming environment to enable visually
impaired students to be engaged in computation and computational thinking. This
work has the potential to improve learning of computer programming for all
students, but will particularly focus on providing equal and shared access to
individuals who are visually impaired. The learning approach is to develop a
non-visual interface for a learning application, Scratch, that takes into
account the strengths and weaknesses of the haptic (physical) and auditory
systems. The project will be evaluated by Praxis Associates, who will provide
ongoing feedback on the project to the project team. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work has the potential to improve learning of computer programming for all
students, but it will focus on providing access to individuals who are visually
impaired. The approach is to develop a tangible, non-visual interface for
Scratch that takes into account the strengths and weaknesses of the haptic and
auditory systems. It will adapt a low-cost tactile tile concept to represent
program commands, along with a grid surface and other organizational structures,
to ensure that programs of moderate complexity can be created. A key aspect of
the approach is to allow users to manipulate commands as a group to enable
chunking (i.e., grouping into a whole) of information for ease of manipulation
and cognitive understanding. Multi-media instructional material will be
developed by experts in teaching students computer programming who are visually
impaired. Further, this intervention will explore the possibility of tScratch to
be used alongside of Scratch in mainstream classrooms by the use of the tScratch
prototype in a computer camp type setting. The assessment of the intervention
will consider the change in both blind and sighted students' ability to apply
programming concepts, share in teamwork, views of each other, and views of
computer science.