* 1742618
* Building Social Capital and Professional Efficacy for Computer Science Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Youwen Ouyang, California State University San Marcos Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2023
* USD 999,998.00

This "NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
Program (S-STEM)" project at California State University San Marcos (CSUSM), an
Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI), will serve the financial, academic, and
career needs of a diverse set of talented low income students pursuing a
bachelor's degree in an area of acknowledged national need - computer science
(CS). The project is designed to break down the barriers faced by low-income
students and increase their identity and confidence as CS majors and in the
profession. This population of students to be served typically does not have
access to social networks that connect them to academic or professional
resources. In line with this, the project is structured to enhance S-STEM
Scholars' social capital by providing: professional connections (industry
mentors, non-profit organizations), academic connections (faculty mentors),
enhanced personal connections (CS peers and other majors), and crucial
information (professional development workshops) to increase the likelihood of
their academic persistence and professional success in CS fields. Over the
5-year duration of the project, sixty (60) CS students will form four cohorts of
CSUSM S-STEM Scholars. Each Scholar will join the project as a sophomore and
receive a two year scholarship. The focus of support for sophomore and junior
years is based on research that has found middle year undergraduate STEM
students struggle with staying engaged and persisting in their
major.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's goals include: (1) increasing
retention rates and academic success for the S-STEM Scholars through evidence-
based instructional support and (2) helping the Scholars build social capital
and professional efficacy to prepare for a computer science (CS) based
internship before graduation. The project team will investigate a key research
question: How do social capital, cultural capital and community wealth inform
the ways that low-income, academically talented CS majors navigate their middle
years? Focusing on the middle years of college will contribute new insights to
students' success and add to the growing national and scholarly trend that seeks
to understand the 'sophomore slump.' The project will create, implement, and
investigate a Fab Friday experience, which consists of students working in teams
on Friday afternoons to fabricate computing solutions for real world projects
and challenges presented by community and industry partners. The project team
will use a mixed methods approach to collect and analyze data. The Fab Friday
experiences will provide a venue to connect students with resources from
industry and community, which, in turn, will help serve as preparation for the
STEM workforce. The project will offer the Scholars a cohort experience that
builds on two forms of social capital - bonding (sharing resources and
information among the same group) and bridging (gaining information and
resources from outside groups, such as faculty and industry partners). The
project will serve as a model for other institutions, especially those with a
large student body of underrepresented students.