* 1742941
* EAGER: The effects of soil moisture on fungal weathering, diversity, and abundance.
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Zsuzsanna Balogh-Brunstad, Hartwick College
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 07/31/2018
* USD 29,816.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A non-technical description explaining the
broader significance of the project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soil is arguably the
most important physical resource that exists at the Earth's surface. It is
essential for the growth and development of our food supply and soils help
regulate the composition of the atmosphere. Despite this central role, knowledge
of the processes of soil formation is still very rudimentary. Microbial activity
has a principal role in breaking down rocks into fertile soil and identifying
the major mechanisms and types of microorganisms is an ongoing research
activity. Fungi are a class of these microbes that have received little
attention, but likely are very important contributors to soil generation. This
project will take a close look at the abundance and distribution of fungi in
soils, their activity as a function of moisture availability, and the possible
role they play in soil formation under a variety of climatic
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A technical description of the
project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore the relationship between
moisture content of soils and fungal weathering of igneous rocks, estimate
fungal weathering rates, and identify and quantify the fungal community. The
study will examine responses of the fungal community to decreasing soil moisture
content (drought) and the processes facilitated by mycorrhizal fungi to help
plants cope with water stress. These will be tested by collecting soil samples
along a climate gradient, and then interrogate these samples by using DNA and
aquaporin (integral membrane proteins) analyses, and microscopic and
spectroscopic techniques. The project will use the Catalina-Jemez Critical Zone
Observatories and the Landscape Evolution Observatory at Biosphere 2 of
University of Arizona, which provide opportunities to study processes along a
climate gradient. Four undergraduates from a Primarily Undergraduate Institution
will assist with the project and the results will be used to augment general
science education.