* 1742808
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2017 Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD 2017)
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Qiaozhu Mei, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 05/31/2018
* USD 25,000.00

This grant provides domestic and international travel support for about 24 U.S.
based graduate student participants to attend the 23rd ACM SIGKDD Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD 2017), to be held in Halifax, Nova
Scotia, Canada on August 13-17, 2017. KDD is the world's premier conference in
data science. It is a prestigious interdisciplinary conference that brings
together researchers and practitioners every year, over 2,000 in recent years,
from all aspects of big data, data mining, and knowledge discovery. A strong
representation of U.S. researchers at the conference, particularly students, is
essential in maintaining U.S. competitiveness in this important area today and
into the future. Since 2013, the conference also includes a Broadening
Participation in Data Mining workshop. As in various STEM fields, increasing the
diversity of participants at KDD is a primary goal. This grant will provide
travel support for approximately 24 students based on merit and need. The
selection committee will put particular emphasis on diversity for the selection
of awardees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The KDD technical program includes oral and
poster presentations of refereed papers, panel discussions, and invited talks by
the world's leading experts. It provides an international forum for presentation
of original research results as well as exchange and dissemination of innovative
and practical development experiences, which are particularly valuable for
student participants. Besides the technical program, the conference features
workshops, tutorials, demonstrations, exhibits, and a data mining contest (KDD
Cup). Information on KDD 2017 can be accessed at http://www.kdd.org/kdd2017/.
Proceedings will be made available through the ACM Digital Library.