* 1742667
* Educating Talented Leaders for Tomorrow's Science
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Derek Dube, University of Saint Joseph
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 08/31/2023
* USD 649,650.00

The NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) program supports the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need. Throughout its five years of
funding, this S-STEM project at the University of Saint Joseph will provide
scholarships to two cohorts of ten students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees
in biology, chemistry, or biochemistry. The project will engage students in
advising and cohort activities designed specifically to meet the changing needs
of Scholars over their four-year academic programs. The major goal of the
project is to increase the number of students who enroll as STEM majors at the
University of St. Joseph, and who then complete STEM degrees and enter the STEM
workforce or enroll in STEM graduate programs. Because the University of St.
Joseph is an all-women institution transitioning to co-educational status, it is
expected that many of the Scholars will be women, a population that is
underrepresented in many STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team
will study the effectiveness of project activities on the retention and success
of students in STEM baccalaureate degree programs, as well as on their continued
commitment to those fields after graduation. Throughout their undergraduate
program, Scholars will receive faculty mentoring, peer mentoring, supplemental
instruction, and research experiences. A novel component of the project is the
requirement that the Scholars maintain a scientific writing portfolio across
their four-year college experience. This work is expected to enhance the
Scholars' critical thinking skills, academic achievement, commitment to STEM
fields, job readiness, and employment in STEM fields. Industry partners will
provide facility tours, mentoring, and internships to further assist in the
development of Scholars' specific career interests and employability-enhancing
skills. The effectiveness of practices to recruit high school students into STEM
majors by near peers will also be studied, as well as the correlation of those
activities with academic success and retention in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.