* 1742195
* A Study of a Technology-enhanced Curriculum Integrating Science, Engineering Design, and Computational Modeling to Achieve Synergistic Learning with Elementary Students
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Satabdi Basu, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,699,962.00

As computing has become integral to the practice of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM), the STEM+Computing program seeks to address
emerging challenges in computational STEM areas through the applied integration
of computational thinking and computing activities within STEM teaching and
learning in early childhood education through high school (preK-12). This
project will develop a 6-week unit for upper elementary students that integrates
science, engineering, and computational thinking concepts and practices. The
classroom materials to be developed will blend disciplinary core ideas, science
and engineering design practices, and crosscutting concepts as described by the
Framework for K-12 Science Education and the Next Generation Science Standards
(NGSS). Expected project outcomes include: (1) A refined, technology-enhanced
curriculum unit featuring innovative supportive learning technologies aligned
with NGSS performance expectations integrating Earth science, engineering, and
computational thinking; (2) A computational systems modeling environment where
students can develop models of Earth systems phenomena to test, compare, and
refine engineering solutions related to those phenomena; (3) Educative
supporting resources that help upper elementary teachers implement the unit and
integrate the disciplines of engineering and computational thinking into their
science teaching; (4) Empirical evidence of the unit's effectiveness at
promoting student proficiency with integrating science, engineering, and
computational thinking; and (5) A principled design process for developing NGSS-
aligned multidisciplinary curriculum materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This design
and development project will use a principled design process based on
established design approaches--Evidence Centered Design, Knowledge Integration,
and Informed Engineering--to ensure that all materials are aligned to the
learning goals of the project. The project team will collaborate with schools
serving populations of culturally, economically, and linguistically diverse
students, and the design process will incorporate a fairness/equity design
framework, helping to ensure that assessments, curriculum materials, and
technology supports are relevant, fair, and helpful to diverse student groups.
Â A mixed-methods design-based research approach will be used by the project to
investigate the following research questions: (1) How can a technology-enhanced
curriculum unit that integrates science, engineering design, and computational
modeling help upper elementary students achieve synergistic learning of these
disciplines along the three dimensions of the NGSS? (2) What domain-specific
supports do upper elementary students need to develop computational models of
Earth systems and use computational models to develop engineering solutions? (3)
How can supporting resources educate elementary teachers and support their
implementation of science curriculum materials integrating engineering and
computational thinking? The project will conduct two types of empirical
classroom studies to pursue answers to these research questions: (1) A series of
design-based research studies will be conducted during year 2 of the project to
address the first two research questions; and (2) A learning and implementation
study will be conducted to address all three of the research questions.