* 1742301
* Springboard to Success:  Developing Future Arkansas Scientists
* EDU,DUE
* 12/15/2017,11/30/2023
* Matthew Moran, Hendrix College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 11/30/2023
* USD 649,153.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project will
provide financial support to Pell-eligible, academically talented students
interested in pursuing the sciences at Hendrix College in Arkansas. In addition
to covering all out-of-pocket expenses, this S-STEM Track 1 project will also
provide significant academic, social, and mentoring support to ensure the
success of the scholarship recipients. Such support includes mentoring,
specialized living accommodations, undergraduate research and internship
opportunities, career counseling, and exposure to psychological interventions
proven to increase success and retention. Through this project Hendrix College
seeks to increase the likelihood of success for low-income students, many of
whom are first-generation college students hoping to break the cycle of poverty
endemic to many parts of Arkansas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students from
underprivileged backgrounds from the Mississippi River Delta, the Arkansas River
Valley, and additional parts of rural Arkansas will be recruited in this
"Springboard to Success" project. These areas have significant minority
populations, high percentages of low income families, low levels of higher
education, and a high proportion of first-generation college students. The
financial support component of this S-STEM project will allow students to
matriculate at no immediate cost, thus removing a prohibitive financial burden
in attending college for these economically disadvantaged students. In addition,
each scholarship recipient will be able to participate in a freshmen
introductory orientation trip, a seminar course, a STEM mentoring program, three
years of undergraduate research or internships, involvement in a STEM-themed
living and learning community during their sophomore year, and field trips to
STEM research laboratories and industries. Students will also have access to a
high-quality career services program and personal advising and mentoring.
Collectively, these activities are expected to increase retention and academic
achievement of Pell-eligible students in STEM fields at Hendrix College, thus
addressing a significant institutional challenge. In addition to providing a
high quality and enhanced undergraduate experience, different intervention and
mentoring programs that have the potential to increase success of at-risk
students interested in a STEM career will be evaluated. The results of these
studies will provide guidance for how to most effectively educate future Pell-
eligible STEM students and contribute to the research literature on the efficacy
of so-called "wise" interventions, which are short, targeted actions that
promote a sense of community and belonging. Finally, the use of frequent
assessment throughout the project will be used to ensure its effectiveness and
provide critical feedback for its enhancement and expansion into the future.