* 1742706
* WORKSHOP:   Doctoral Consortium at ASSETS 2017
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Jennifer Mankoff, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2018
* USD 19,821.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) of approximately 12
promising graduate students (10 from the United States to be funded by this
award), along with 5 distinguished research faculty. The event will take place
on Sunday, October 29, immediately preceding and in conjunction with the 19th
International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility (ASSETS
2017), to be held October 30-November 1 in Baltimore,, MD. The ASSETS
conferences are the premier forum for presenting innovative research on the
design and use of both mainstream and specialized assistive technologies. This
includes the use of technology by and in support of: individuals with hearing,
vision and other sensory impairments; individuals with motor impairments;
individuals with memory, learning and cognitive impairments; individuals with
multiple impairments; older adults; and professionals who work with these
populations. Researchers and developers from around the world, in both academia
and industry, will meet at ASSETS 2017 to exchange ideas and present their
latest work. More information about the conference may be found online at
http://assets17.sigaccess.org/. A key component of building any community is
through its youth. The Doctoral Consortium will help expand the participation of
young researchers pursuing graduate studies in this field, by providing them an
opportunity to gain wider exposure in the community for their innovative work
and to obtain feedback and guidance from senior members of the research
community. It will further help foster a sense of community among these young
researchers, by allowing them to create a social network both among themselves
and with senior researchers at a critical stage in their professional
development. Because the students and faculty constitute a diverse group across
a variety of dimensions, including nationality/cultural and scientific
discipline, the students' horizons are broadened to the future benefit of the
field. The organizers will take steps to promote participation from institutions
with relatively large numbers of students from under-represented groups. To
further increase diversity, the organizers will aim for equal participation of
females and males in the consortium, and will not invite more than 1 or 2
students from the same educational institution; if two students from the same
educational institution are selected, the organizers will ensure that at least
one of them is from an underrepresented minority in STEM. In an effort to
further integrate the Doctoral Consortium participants into the conference
itself, a session has been set aside in the technical program to allow all
Doctoral Consortium participants to present their research to the full
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ASSETS 2017 Doctoral Consortium will be a
research-focused meeting of an international group of selected Ph.D. candidates
and an international panel of distinguished research faculty (the latter yet to
be named). It will provide an opportunity for graduate students from diverse
backgrounds (computing, engineering, psychology, architecture, etc.) to come
together and explore their research interests in an interdisciplinary workshop,
under the guidance of the PI and the panel of experts, so that they can
appreciate the broader spectrum of research and development approaches to
assistive technologies and universal usability, and also experience the
community in which they can pursue their endeavors. Student participants will
make formal presentations of their work during the consortium, and will receive
constructive feedback from the faculty panel. The feedback is designed to help
students understand and articulate how their work is positioned relative to
related research, whether their topics are adequately focused for thesis
research projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen and applied, and
whether their results are appropriately analyzed and presented. Thus, the
consortium will help shape ongoing and future research projects aimed at
assistive technologies and universal access, will promote scholarship and
networking among new researchers in these interdisciplinary fields, and will
also expose the young researchers to a larger community. In addition, the
faculty will give a presentation on job opportunities for researchers in both
academia and industry, to better inform the students when considering career
options. An evaluation of the consortium will be conducted and the results made
available to the organizers of future such events.