* 1742517
* Academic Collaboration and Coordination model to Ensure Student Success in STEM (ACCESS STEM): A Partnership to Improve Recruitment, Retention, and Student Success
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Adel Ali, St. Cloud State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 12/31/2023
* USD 4,999,656.00

This Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM)
Track 3 project, ACCESS STEM, addresses two critical attrition points for low
income students trying to major in STEM: first-year retention and the transition
of community college students to a four-year university. It also aims at
improving student success in gateway mathematics courses. The project will
recruit and support with scholarships at least 100 academically high-achieving,
Pell-eligible students, of which 40 will start at a 4-year institution and 60 at
Community College Institutions. ACCESS STEM's cornerstone is the strategic
partnership between the ACCESS Institutions: St. Cloud State University (SCSU),
Anoka Ramsey Community College, North Hennepin Community College, St. Cloud
Technical and Community College, and Ridgewater College. The project's retention
and student success model will comprise a holistic student support services
approach with interventions categorized under two intellectually cohesive
systems of experiences: sense of belonging to institution and sense of belonging
in STEM. It is expected that the early integration of career pathway exploration
and preparation, coupled with a focus on interventions that promote a sense of
belonging in STEM, will successfully prepare ACCESS STEM Scholars to meet
regional and national STEM workforce demands. The ACCESS Institutions, as
members of Minnesota State Colleges and Universities, the fifth largest public
system of colleges and universities in the country, serve more students of
modest financial means than anyone else in the state. The significance of this
project is that it will bring opportunities to expand and strengthen the
system's plan to create transfer pathways for baccalaureate completion. This
expected outcome also responds to recent mandates from the State of Minnesota's
legislature. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The ACCESS STEM project will test the
predictive power of an in-house sense of belonging index survey instrument to
understand its association with retention and graduation. Qualitative research
investigating why enhanced student support service interventions influence the
sense of belonging and how interventions impact first-year retention at
community colleges and four-year institutions will fill a knowledge gap to
understand the nuances and complexities of STEM intervention programs for low
income students. The project's innovative dissemination strategy involves
creation of Community ACCESS STEM, a video journal series chronicling
longitudinal reflections of ACCESS Scholars and Mentors on their STEM
aspirations and sense of belonging to their institutions and to their chosen
STEM majors. In addition, SCSU will also publish sense of belonging survey
instruments, rubrics, and other publications.