* 1742823
* Energy Scaling in Rock Cutting
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Emmanuel Detournay, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 449,385.00

The drive to mechanize the excavation of hard rock in civil or mining
engineering projects has brought to the forefront the need to quantify the
mechanics of tool-rock interaction. A related issue is the interpretation of the
scratch test. This experimental technique has garnered interest lately, because
it appears to offer a simple and economical means to measure strength and
fracture properties of quasi-brittle materials such as rock, ceramics, and
concrete. However, there remain questions on which parameters can be determined
in these experiments and how to interpret them from the test data. Therefore,
whether predicting the cutting force (mean and fluctuations) to design
mechanical excavation equipment and establish the excavation schedule and costs,
or interpreting the measured force in controlled scratch experiments, the same
fundamental question arises: what is the dependence of the cutting force (i) on
the depth of cut and the cutter geometry, and (ii) on the strength and fracture
properties of the rock. By recognizing that different regimes of failure take
place in rock cutting and therefore that different parameters affect the cutting
force depending on the prevailing regime, the research has the potential to
develop universal scaling laws for rock cutting. Furthermore, this research has
also the potential of informing our understanding of the failure of engineered
materials with a grain structure, such as concrete or ceramics. Failure of
structures made of these quasi-brittle materials is characterized by scale
effects and possible transition between shear- and tensile-dominant failure
mechanisms. However, engineering design practice is still rooted in the
strength-based approach, despite its restricted range of applicability when
dealing with quasi-brittle materials. If successful, the research will result in
a simple experimental means for characterization of fracture properties, thus
promoting fracture mechanics -- an essential concept for such materials -- to
engineering practice. The findings of this research will be incorporated into
classroom teaching at both undergraduate and graduate levels, in an effort to
equip the next generation of engineers with fundamental knowledge of rock
mechanics, fracture mechanics and experimental mechanics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses the fundamental question of energy
scaling in rock cutting, i.e., the dependence of the specific energy - the
energy spent per volume of rock removed, on the depth of cut and on the rock
properties. Understanding how the specific energy scales (or alternatively how
the cutting force scales) is critical for designing mechanical excavators for
hard rocks, as well as for interpreting the scratch test - a technique to assess
the properties of quasi-brittle materials. The research is grounded on empirical
evidence that suggests the existence of three asymptotic regimes in rock
cutting. With increasing depth of cut (larger than the rock mean grain size),
different modes of failure can indeed be observed: namely, (i) a ductile regime
at shallow depth of cut, with the rock intensely sheared in front of the cutter;
(ii) a fragmentation regime with the rock breaking into fragments that are
distributed according to a power law over a significant range of sizes, and
(iii) brittle regime with macroscopic cracks initiating from the tool tip and
propagating unstably ahead of the cutter. The research builds on three
respective empirical scaling laws for these regimes, which are informed by the
available experimental data and insights from numerical simulation and scaling
analysis, for the case where the cutter is at least as wide as the rock slab
thickness. The main objective of this research is to provide theoretical
underpinnings to these empirical scaling laws using theoretical and
computational models, as well as to obtain experimental results for the brittle
regime, for which the empirical evidence is weakest.