* 1742794
* Standing Committee on Medical and Public Health Research During Large-Scale Emergency Events
* ENG,EFMA
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2018
* Justin Snair, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 06/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

Finalized Abstract for 1742794/Snair &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;There have been a
number of disasters around the Nation where NSF has funded, through its RAPID
mechanism, fundamental science to assist in disaster response. Several Federal
agencies have responded to these disasters and have worked collaboratively to
help in recovery. To facility collaboration in future disasters as well to
affect a more efficient response, the National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM) has organized a Standing Committee on "Medical
and Public Health Research during Large-Scale Emergency Events? where the
Federal Agencies can provide guidance in the preparation, response and recovery
in future disasters. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The direct involvement of two NSF
programs, Environmental Engineering and Environmental Sustainability, relates to
the two overarching goals of programs to protect public health and environmental
health. Although response to recent emergencies has typically used the best
science available at the time, additional research, done in parallel with and
immediately following the response is often essential to address the most
pressing knowledge gaps presented by public health emergencies and to ensure
that they are addressed before another disaster strikes. Traditionally what has
been lacking is the infrastructure to rapidly mobilize these information
gathering resources in response to an on-going emergency. The National Academies
have a long tradition of providing advice from a national perspective. This
tradition rests on the ability of the institution to convene committees of
experts who are charged to deliberate important issues of health and health care
policy in an objective and independent environment that assures rigorous
analysis. It can serve an important function by bringing representatives from
diverse groups together to achieve consensus on complex issues. The Standing
Committee builds on prior work and activities of the Forum on Medical and Public
Health Preparedness for Disasters and Emergencies, which has identified the need
for sustainable infrastructure to conduct important medical and public health
research and gather needed information during and immediately following large
scale emergencies.