* 1742561
* Integrated Support and Community Engagement to Increase Undergraduate Recruitment, Retention, and Graduation in Physical Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Brian Rague, Weber State University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 09/30/2023
* USD 647,943.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project will support high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need at Weber State University. Over
the five years of funding, this project will provide scholarships to 30 students
who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in the physical sciences including
chemistry, geoscience, mathematics, physics, computer science, and engineering.
The program will also support the Scholars through graduation with a system of
academic support services that emphasizes the development of community
leadership and involvement. Scholars will complete their coursework in cohorts,
attend a weekly STEM seminar course, meet regularly with faculty mentors, and
participate in leadership opportunities. The goal of the project is to improve
the four-year graduation rate of the Scholars from 12% to 50%. Moreover, the
project will investigate and assess which interventions are the most significant
to improve student success and persistence to degree completion for this
population of students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to lower the
unmet financial need of low-income, high-achieving students, and implement
evidence-based interventions to enhance student success. The interventions
include targeted recruitment to STEM degrees, student academic cohorts, STEM
faculty mentors, and a STEM seminar course responsive to students as they
progress through the program. An important aspect of the program is a consistent
focus on engaging the Scholars in their community, including participation in
community engaged learning projects. By using student focus groups, the project
will investigate students' perceptions of STEM careers and assess the
effectiveness of these interventions within the context of regional student
demographics. The research results will provide formative assessment to guide
ongoing project improvements and will identify effective strategies for
recruiting and retaining future students. These results can also provide
information to other institutions that aim to increase the participation and
success of STEM students from diverse, low-income populations in which cultural
or religious beliefs may discourage pursuit of a STEM
degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.