* 1742944
* Understanding Storm Track Position and Intensity Across a Range of Timescales
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2022
* Tiffany Shaw, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 01/31/2022
* USD 450,352.00

Warm days preceding and cold days following the passage of frontal weather
systems are a familiar feature of winter weather in the continental US and other
middle latitude regions. This alternation is important not only for local
weather but for the global transport of heat and moisture, as warm moist air
crosses the middle latitudes from the tropics to the poles while colder and
drier transits in the opposite direction. This north-south exchange of heat and
moisture plays an essential role in earth's climate, keeping the poles from
getting too cold while limiting the temperature excess of the tropics. Such
climatic effects of weather systems are commonly studied by looking at the
midlatitude stormtracks, defined as zones of maximum weather system activity. In
the Northern Hemisphere separate stormtracks are centered over the northern
North Pacific and North Atlantic, while in the Southern Hemisphere a continuous
stormtrack extends around the "roaring 40s" over the uninterrupted Southern
Ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to understand how the mean
latitude of the stormtracks, and the and strength of the energy transport by the
weather systems moving along them, change in response to external factors
including the seasonal cycle of solar heating, greenhouse gas concentrations,
stratospheric aerosols, ice age cycles, and the distribution of continents and
oceans. The research is conducted using a theoretical framework developed by the
Principal Investigator (PI) in which stormtracks are characterized in terms of
the flux of moist static energy (MSE) across them, where MSE is a measure of
energy which includes the thermal energy associated with air temperature, the
latent energy of water vapor released as heat during condensation, and the
potential energy of air parcels lifted against the force of gravity. The MSE
flux in stormtracks works in concert with MSE flux in circulations around large
stationary pressure centers such as the Aleutian Low and the Bermuda High
(referred to as stationary waves), and the circumglobal meridional overturning
circulations (the Hadley and Ferrel cells), to transport energy from the tropics
to the poles and balance the atmospheric energy budget. Much of the previous
research on stormtracks has been conducted through analysis of the momentum
budget and related quantities (potential vorticity and Eliassen-Palm flux, for
instance), thus the MSE analysis of the present work offers a novel and
complementary perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary work by the PI and
colleagues shows compensation between MSE flux in stormtracks and stationary
waves as a prominent feature of the seasonal cycle and the midlatitude response
to El Nino events, while compensation between MSE flux in stormtracks and
meridional overturning circulations appears in simulations of the atmopsheric
response to greenhouse gases and the radiative effects of aerosols. The present
work extends these investigations and seeks to determine the fundamental
dynamics through which these compensations, in which changes in stormtrack MSE
flux are accompanied by opposing changes in other forms of MSE flux, come about.
The work is conducted through a combination of observational analysis and
simulations with numerical models at varying levels of
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has societal relevance as well as
scientific interest due to the importance of stormtrack behavior for human
activities in the midlatitudes, including the continental US. In addition, one
goal of the research is the identification of "emergent constraints" which can
be used to assess the credibility of climate change simulations. Emergent
constraints are relationships that emerge between model-to-model variations in
simulated present-day climate (the predictor) and model-to-model differences in
simulated future climate change (the predictand). Such constraints are used to
assess the credibility of climate change projections, as models which
incorrectly represent the predictor, which can be compared to real-world
observations, are likely to produce comparable misrepresentations in their
simulations of future climate change. Such tests of climate change projections
are valuable given the use of climate models to inform climate change adaptation
efforts. The project also supports a graduate student and the participation of
an undergraduate, thereby providing for the education and training of the future
workforce in this research area.