* 1742446
* Building Educational Bridges Between Computer Science and Biology Through Transdisciplinary Teamwork and Modular Curriculum Design
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Elizabeth Ryder, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,228,848.00

As computing has become integral to the practice of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM), the STEM+Computing program seeks to address
emerging challenges in computational STEM areas through the applied integration
of computational thinking and computing activities within STEM teaching and
learning in early childhood education through high school (preK-12). This
project will develop, implement, and test an innovative modular curriculum for
high school biology that integrates computing and computational thinking with
science content and practices. The curriculum will be developed by a
transdisciplinary team consisting of university specialists in biology and
computer science, two graduate students, two undergraduate students, two high
school students, and four high school teachers. The team will design and
implement an experimental system that integrates biology practices and computing
components to address complex real-world biological problems. Teachers will
employ the experimental system during a summer institute, and will use it to
develop and pilot test a modular curriculum that focuses on a complex real-world
problem, pollinator decline. The curricular strategy being tested is
generalizable, and can be modified to address other biological questions, and
complex real-world problems in other STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proof of principle study will examine the effectiveness of a transdisciplinary
team in designing, developing, and testing modular curricula that integrate
scientific practices and computer science approaches used to model complex
natural systems. Project activities are guided by two research questions: (1) Is
developing a transdisciplinary, vertically integrated team comprised of
biologists, computer scientists and education specialists a transformative
precursor for the generation of effective computational tools and STEM+C
curriculum? And (2) Will a modular curriculum incorporating computing and
computational thinking into scientific practices allow teachers to effectively
deliver classroom content to students at multiple levels in biology and computer
science? The curriculum will engage students and teachers in scientific
practices using biological data that they collect themselves, and computational
tools that they design and implement to address a complex real-world problem,
pollinator decline and loss of biodiversity. Curriculum quality, modularity, and
effectiveness will be measured using multiple instruments, including surveys of
curriculum quality and implementation feasibility, pre and post testing of both
teachers and students on biology and computer science content knowledge and
scientific practices, and attitudes toward biology and computer science.