* 1742828
* Effect of Doping and Nanostructuring on Properties of perovskite oxide catalysts for oxygen evolution
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Meilin Liu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 435,599.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Rechargeable metal-air batteries and water splitting
systems are the most promising technologies for a clean and secure energy
future; the former will be the power source for future electronic devices and
electric vehicles while the latter will be the most efficient option for storage
of renewable energy. However, the commercialization of these technologies is
hindered by the scarcity and high cost of noble metal-based catalysts for oxygen
evolution reaction (OER). This project seeks to gain a profound understanding of
the effect of doping and nanostructure engineering on OER activity of
inexpensive perovskite catalysts. A combination of experimental and
computational approaches is used to unravel the mechanisms of OER in order to
develop low-cost OER catalysts for a new generation of metal-air batteries and
water splitting systems with dramatically enhanced performance. The results of
the project are widely disseminated through peer-reviewed publications, and the
new scientific knowledge is expected to have a significant impact on the
rational design of perovskite electro-catalysts for other chemical and energy
transformation processes. The new knowledge is also being incorporated into
courses offered at Georgia Tech. Students are being trained in a
multidisciplinary environment and graduates typically find employment in the new
energy sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Carefully designed in
operando Raman spectroscopy is combined with electrochemical measurements,
together with DFT-based calculations, to investigate the electrochemical
processes at the surfaces of two model oxide catalysts: a single perovskite and
a double perovskite. These model materials will then be modified by cation
substitution and nanostructure engineering to explore the effect on OER activity
and durability. In operando Raman spectroscopy is ideally suited for probing
surface chemistry and structure of electro-catalysts under realistic operating
conditions. The direct correlation between the surface features and the
electrochemical behavior is vital to gaining critical insights into the
mechanism and kinetics of OER on perovskite catalysts, providing scientific
basis for knowledge-based design and controlled synthesis of highly-efficient
and robust OER electro-catalysts for next-generation energy storage and
conversion systems. One graduate student and two undergraduate students are
working as research assistants on the project; the students are gaining valuable
experience with cutting-edge in operando characterization techniques.