* 1742413
* A Comprehensive System for Undergraduates to Reach Goals in Education
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Tuncay Aktosun, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 03/31/2024
* USD 998,652.00

The NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) program will fund A Comprehensive System for Undergraduates to Reach
Goals in Education (SURGE) project. The SURGE project will support the success
of high-achieving, low-income STEM students with demonstrated financial need at
the University of Texas at Arlington (UTA). Over its four years, the project
will fund 36 scholarships for students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in
mathematics. The project includes a comprehensive mentoring system involving
faculty, doctoral students, and industrial scientists, as well as opportunities
for undergraduate research. Scholarship recipients will have support to achieve
a successful transition from being a student into industrial careers or graduate
studies. This project will foster a collaboration between UTA with two large
community college systems in the area: the Dallas County Community College
District (DCCCD) and Tarrant County College (TCC). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
SURGE project will build on an existing mathematics learning community, anchored
by the local student chapter of the Mathematical Association of America (MAA).
In addition to close interactions with their mentors, the students will have
opportunities to take on leadership roles in the local MAA chapter, enabling
peer mentorship among all mathematics majors. The SURGE project will also host
regular activities for students and mathematics professors at DCCCD and TCC.
This outreach seeks to catalyze interactions between the institutions, with the
goal of supporting a smooth transition of students from a community college to
the mathematics degree program at UTA. Through data collection and studies that
compare the scholarship recipients with other mathematics majors at UTA, the
project aims to identify key factors that increase the number of students who
complete the mathematics degree program, as well as reduce the time to
graduation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.