* 1742527
* Broadening Ecosystem Attributes for Talented Scholars (BEATS)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Richard Wesel, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 934,308.00

The Center for Excellence in Engineering and Diversity (CEED) at University of
California Los Angeles (UCLA) will develop the "Broadening Engineering
Attributes of Talented Scholars" (BEATS) project to provide annual scholarships
for thirty-eight academically talented students pursuing bachelor degrees in
engineering and computer science. In addition to scholarship assistance, this
program will provide students with academic curricular and non-academic co-
curricular programs aimed at positively reinforcing each student's sense of
belonging in their major and in the Henry Samueli School of Engineering and
Applied Science. CEED staff will organize and host summer critical transition
math/science boot camps that will prepare incoming freshmen and transfer
students for the fast-paced quarter system of UCLA. Industry will host and
organize multiple corporate-led professional development opportunities
throughout the academic year. Scholars will participate in individual and peer
mentoring sessions to increase their social and academic engagement in
engineering and computer science, which will lead to higher rates of degree
completion and ultimately increase the number of talented scholars entering the
engineering and computer science US workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the BEATS project is to increase the number of academically talented students
who graduate with engineering and computer science degrees, and enter the STEM
workforce either directly or after pursuing a graduate degree in engineering or
computer science. The curricular and co-curricular active learning community
will foster both peer motivation and individual motivation, which will
positively correlate with social and academic integration and engagement.
Freshmen scholarship recipients and their non-scholar peers will enroll in an
"Introduction to Engineering Disciplines" course in which they will be assigned
to groups for a research project that will be finalized by a capstone
presentation at the end of the Fall quarter. Analysis of the relationships
between critical transition programs, the active learning community, and a sense
of belonging will provide insight into which activities have the most influence
on social and academic integration and engagement, self-efficacy, and
subsequently persistence-to-degree completion and higher GPAs in engineering and
computer science.