* 1742112
* Supporting Multiple Pathways Through the Undergraduate Engineering Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Michele Miller, Campbell University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 09/30/2023
* USD 649,782.00

The NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
program supports the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-income
students with demonstrated financial need. This four-year project at Campbell
University will provide 18 to 28 scholarships per year to first, second, and
third year undergraduate engineering students. In addition to financial support,
the project will provide students with research-based experiences and support
that have been shown to increase student retention in STEM. These experiences
include tutoring, professional development workshops, faculty and peer
mentoring, career advising, and service projects. This project will support
students on multiple tracks through the engineering curriculum, depending on
student needs and academic backgrounds. This flexibility is particularly
valuable for low-income, high-potential students who did not have access to high
quality, college-preparatory high school education. The project will focus on
assisting students in mathematics and chemistry courses, which have been
demonstrated to be critical attrition points in engineering education at
Campbell University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on prior work that examined
the social capital characteristics of first generation college students, this
project will examine the relationships between mathematics preparation and
social capital characteristics in the undergraduate engineering experience. This
research topic connects with Campbell's general engineering and liberal arts
approach, which helps students integrate social and ethical considerations into
their work. The research will be based on the Name and Resource Generator
developed by Dr. Julie Martin as part of her NSF CAREER award. Using this
survey, the project will track scholars' social capital development as they move
through the program. Based on their responses to this instrument, selected
students will be interviewed, and their responses will be coded and analyzed
based on social capital theory. Insights gained from this qualitative analysis
will inform the project about the effectiveness of various components and guide
future inquiries. In addition to the usual dissemination through conference
presentations and journal publications, the insights from this project will be
shared through a workshop at a national professional engineering education
conference, allowing for a more detailed sharing of the practical lessons
learned in implementing these ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.