* 1742171
* 2017 Physical Metallurgy Gordon Research Conference and Seminar
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Ji-Cheng Zhao, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 05/31/2018
* USD 10,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2017 Gordon Research Conference
(GRC) on Physical Metallurgy has a subtitle: Frontiers
of&lt;br/&gt;Quantification and Predictive Capability in Physical Metallurgy.
The GRC is one of the most highly&lt;br/&gt;acclaimed topical conferences in the
field of physical metallurgy. Held every two years, it provides
a&lt;br/&gt;unique forum for in-depth discussion of cut-edging advances in the
field and pathways to the future. The&lt;br/&gt;associated Gordon Research
Seminar (GRS) provides a forum for early career researchers and students
to&lt;br/&gt;showcase their work and to participate at career discussions. The
GRS will be held on July 22-23, and the GRC&lt;br/&gt;will be on July 23-28,
2017, both at University of New England, Biddeford,
Maine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of
Physical Metallurgy is currently seeing major changes in its research aims from
qualitative&lt;br/&gt;understanding to quantitative predictive capability. This
is largely driven by our ability to handle massive&lt;br/&gt;3D data describing
the structure of materials, to locally evaluate materials properties, and to
acquire&lt;br/&gt;systematic data series in high-throughput experiments. As 3D
imaging is transitioning from technique&lt;br/&gt;development to application, it
permits one to test modeling approaches at different levels of
complexity&lt;br/&gt;and spatial resolution. Here, the direct modeling and
simulation of experiments and the inverse modeling&lt;br/&gt;of the experimental
results just begin to demonstrate their analytic power and their power to
increase the&lt;br/&gt;accuracy of the measurements. Meanwhile, the classical
core of the field, modeling of materials behavior&lt;br/&gt;and of structure-
property relations, is still challenged by the difficulties to seamlessly
transition between&lt;br/&gt;different modeling scopes from atoms to materials
defects to continuum field equations. The frontiers of&lt;br/&gt;the field
therefore are concerned with the systematization and the quantification of
information on&lt;br/&gt;materials and with the assessment and increase of the
predictive capability of the modeling and&lt;br/&gt;simulation. Modeling and
simulation is beginning to provide thermodynamic information on materials
in&lt;br/&gt;complex environments. Small scale experiments can be pushed to the
scale of individual defects and can&lt;br/&gt;challenge modeling particularly
concerning the mechanical properties of materials: fracture,
fatigue,&lt;br/&gt;friction and wear. Additive manufacturing is posing new
challenges to modeling and at the same time&lt;br/&gt;opens entirely new avenues
to alloy development. The aim of this Gordon Conference is to assess
these&lt;br/&gt;current frontiers of the field and to sketch central questions
which the community will have to solve for&lt;br/&gt;Physical Metallurgy to
advance as a field that spans from understanding atomistic processes
on&lt;br/&gt;femtosecond time scales to assessing the behavior of structural
components for years in service.&lt;br/&gt;