* 1742656
* Image-Data-Driven Deep Learning in Geosystems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Zhen Liu, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 227,367.00

Breakthroughs in deep learning in 2006 triggered numerous cutting-edge
innovations in text processing, speech recognition, driverless cars, disease
diagnosis, and so on. This project will utilize the core concepts underlying the
recent computer vision innovations to address a rarely-discussed, yet urgent
issue in engineering: how to analyze the explosively increasing image data
including images and videos, which are difficult to analyze with traditional
methods. These concepts will be employed to explore the possibility of
accurately assessing the safety of retaining walls with image data. This effort
aims at setting up a paradigm for connecting engineering disciplines to
artificial intelligence and enhancing the safety of geosystems as an essential
infrastructure component by enabling their analysis with image-data-driven deep
learning. The project will help revitalize traditional artificial intelligence
sub-areas in geotechnical and other engineering areas, just as deep learning
rekindled the interest in artificial neural networks and machine learning, and
turned them into leading players in STEM research and innovations. The project
may also change engineers' opinions regarding how to create knowledge with a
revolutionary way attributed to deep learning, i.e., learning directly from data
instead of indirectly from models established based on the data. Innovative
education and outreach effort will be made by means of developing a mobile app
to disseminate the idea and products of the project. The project will contribute
to education by outreaching to K-12 students, underrepresented groups, and
geotechnical engineering researchers and practitioners with the project products
including the app at various events at the PIs' institution and professional
conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this study is to understand the
image-data-driven deep learning in geosystems with an exploratory investigation
into the stability analysis of retaining walls. To achieve the goal, the recent
breakthroughs in computer vision, which were later used as one of the core
techniques in the development of Google's AlphaGo, will be studied for its
capacity in assessing the stability of a typical geosystem, i.e., retaining
walls. The core concept enabling machines to surpass humans in visual
classification capacity, i.e., convolutional neural nets (CNN), will be used to
process the big data in geotechnical engineering, which primarily consist of
still and live images (videos), that cannot be readily analyzed using
traditional geotechnical engineering methods. Conventional neural nets will be
used to analyze images for retaining walls to tell whether a wall is safe or
failed. For quantitative analysis, 2D and 3D images for retaining walls will be
generated using stochastic methods and analyzed using traditional limit analysis
and numerical methods for labeling. These labeled image data will be used as
input to train convolutional neural nets for supervised learning. The trained
nets will be tested against another independent set of data generated in the
same way as the training data. Three research tasks will be conducted in this
project: 1) understanding the data science for image-data-driven geotechnical
engineering research, 2) investigating the connections between those image
patterns in deep learning and the physical mechanisms, and 3) revealing the
robustness and extrapolation capacity of the deep learning approach in the
stability analysis of retaining walls.