* 1742210
* Renewable Energy Materials Scholars STEM (REMS-STEM)
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Izabela Stroe, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 02/29/2024
* USD 649,905.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, the Renewable Energy
Materials Scholars STEM (REMS-STEM) project is providing support to low-income
students with demonstrated financial need and academic promise to succeed in
STEM disciplines at Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI). REMS-STEM will
contribute to the important work of providing new pathways for students entering
the STEM workforce with undergraduate degrees. Specifically, this project will
provide scholarships to 20 low-income, academically-talented, underrepresented
students who transfer from community colleges to WPI to complete bachelor's
degrees in the field of renewable energy materials. Expected outcomes of this
S-STEM Track 2 project include an exemplary degree attainment rate for REMS-STEM
scholars (90% in two years and 100% in three years)and an increase in the number
of low-income students who attain employment or pursue graduate research in a
clean energy technology field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the
project is to overcome the known barriers to community college students in
completing a four-year degree in STEM education. REMS-STEM will provide wrap-
around support services to funded students, including: a combined approach
towards curriculum enrichment; applied research opportunities; hierarchical
mentoring; and career-development services. The REMS-STEM program will provide
enhanced career development support by including entrepreneurial mindset
training through a student-centered pedagogy and by facilitating the access of
REMS-STEM scholars to a network of national and regional partnerships. The
project will rely on existing WPI support systems but also provide a significant
faculty mentoring program for REMS-STEM scholars. The project will produce
knowledge about the effectiveness of the supports for the S-STEM scholars,
particularly in the area of mentoring, where the faculty will mentor advanced
students who will mentor early undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.