* 1742915
* EAGER:   Collaborative Research:   E-Witness:  Preserve and Prove Forensic Soundness of Digital Evidence
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Nasir Memon, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2020
* USD 125,000.00

This project seeks to explore the challenges of developing E-Witness - a system
that allows civilians to use their smart devices to collect forensically sound
multimedia evidence. In order to be considered authentic and forensically sound,
a digital evidence needs to have a proof of being untampered and the time and
location of the event needs to be attested in a way that it is immutable. Such
research on forensically sound and anonymous evidence gathering is hard due to
various challenging requirements: user friendly application interface, unbiased,
collusion-resistant and privacy-preserving time-stamping service as well as
accurate location attestation. The effectiveness of each aspect needs to be
proved to build a robust system. The overarching reward of this project is its
ability to record and validate facts in real-time while bringing forensic
accountability to such collected evidence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The building
blocks of E-Witness consist of: (a) a secure smart phone application, (b) a
time-stamping service implemented as a public blockchain maintained by
individual miners, and (c) a location-attestation service that provides
confidence on the truthfulness of the location reported by the evidence device.
A prototype will be developed and performance analysis will be performed over a
testbed deployment to ensure correctness of all components of the system. A
pilot study involving University users will be performed to identify the
challenges of a large-scale deployment.