* 1742504
* Promoting Engagement in Chemistry, Physics, and Earth Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2023
* Cyrill Slezak, Utah Valley University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 11/30/2023
* USD 999,826.00

Open universities enroll an increasing number of students, many of whom have not
considered a career in one of the physical sciences. To serve as a model and
advance knowledge, this project at Utah Valley University (UVU) will further
develop the capacity of a comprehensive open enrollment university with a
markedly different student population from those at research-focused
institutions. This project will attract, retain, and graduate students in the
physical sciences and prepare them for science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) professions. The primary aims of the project are to: 1)
promote student success and degree completion for academically promising
students in the physical sciences of chemistry, earth science and physics at UVU
through financial-needs-based scholarships; 2) prepare students for post-
graduate education and careers by providing faculty-mentored research
experiences and other support services aimed at enriching the education of
scholars; 3) increase STEM enrollment and completion in an open-enrollment
teaching institution with traditionally low enrollments in STEM disciplines; and
4) advance knowledge of evidence-based practices relative to faculty-mentored
research. Questions of interest include (a) close examination of the evolution
of student attitudes and abilities for doing science from their uncertain
beginnings into those consistent with confident, STEM-career-committed
graduates, and (b) the role played by the faculty mentor and student cohort in
that process. Project research will focus on which programmatic factors most
affect women and other underrepresented groups in STEM. Dissemination of results
and research will include publications and presentations at appropriate venues
and workshops on evidence-based best practices both locally and in regional
discipline-specific educational conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding
from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, over the course of five years this
project will provide scholarships for full tuition and books to 50 academically
talented and financially needy students in physics, chemistry and earth science
baccalaureate degree programs. The interventions are grounded in evidence-based
practices and focus on the most essential elements that affect student success.
This project builds on the successful components of a Track 1 S-STEM project,
including the strength of faculty mentors and student involvement in faculty-
mentored research, participation in regional, national, and international
conferences, and preparation for and acceptance to graduate school. Based on the
evidence of the previous project, this program will ameliorate several
institutionally-identified attrition points in the STEM educational pipeline
including lengthy time to completion, excessive part-time work, and feelings of
isolation by some women students. Exit interviews of students supported in the
Track 1 project indicated that the program made a substantial difference in
keeping them in school, expanding their vision of science, and giving them a
stepping stone to success. It is expected that at the end of the project period
at least 90% of students will have received a baccalaureate degree in the
physical sciences or be on track to graduate on time.