* 1742945
* Conference Support for the Fourteenth International Meeting on Ferroelectricity
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,01/31/2018
* Amar Bhalla, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 01/31/2018
* USD 6,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The Fourteenth International Meeting on
Ferroelectricity (IMF2017) is being held Sept. 4-8, 2017, at San Antonio, Texas,
USA. It is the first time this series of international meeting is being hosted
at San Antonio and sponsored/organized by a Hispanic Serving Institute. Special
attempts are made in order to enhance the students' participation from
underrepresented institutes and from countries of growing economies. The meeting
is to be attended by researchers coming from more than 50 different countries
and regions, including substantial participation of researchers from South
American countries. A significant number of attendees will be students and a
substantial number of the attendees are women. The meeting will publicize
materials research worldwide and bring positive impact to student/postdoctoral
participants by broadening their networks, career pathways and expanding their
collaboration opportunities. A successful IMF2017 meeting will publicize and
accelerate research in the field of ferroelectrics which heightens
competitiveness and brings broad impact in advanced electronic devices and
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The IMF meeting series
provides a platform to bring together researchers from academia, industry and
government laboratories to share their latest knowledge in the field and to
present the development of novel applications of ferroelectricity in various
interdisciplinary and cross-coupled research areas. The conference provides an
inclusive and cumulative understanding of the many novel emerging ferroic and
multiferroic materials. The major themes and drivers of this premier meeting
have been to present/explore the recent developments enabling a new
understanding of ferroelectricity, various new materials design and novel
materials synthesis approaches, and advances in the field that bring out novel,
emerging, and cross-coupled effects among various materials including
semiconductor, magnetic and biological materials.