* 1742789
* EAGER:  Collaborative:  A Criminology-Based Simulation of Dynamic Adversarial Behavior in Cyberattacks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Shanchieh Yang, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 149,611.00

In 2016, the cyberthreat landscape showcased advanced attack techniques,
escalated attack frequency, and high levels of adversarial sophistication.
Conventional cyberattack management is response-driven, with organizations
focusing their efforts on detecting threats, rather than anticipating
adversarial actions. This reactive approach has limited efficacy, as it does not
capture advanced and sophisticated adversaries, mutating or unknown malware,
living-off-the-land techniques or new variants being deployed. There is thus an
immediate need for a paradigm shift in the area of cybersecurity. Security
experts are calling for anticipatory or proactive defense measures that focus on
adversarial behavior and movement. This research aims to develop a
criminological theory that captures the dynamics of cybercrime and a
corresponding simulator to generate attack scenarios that adapts to ever
changing and diverse cyber vulnerabilities, defense, and adversary tactics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has two connected objectives: (1) Develop
(and evaluate) an integrated Dynamic Routine Activities Theory (DRAT), which
examines the continually changing interaction between offender, target, and
guardian (OTG) along cyberattack trajectories aided by Monte-Carlo simulation;
and (2) Understand how variations in OTG impact dynamic adversarial attack
trajectories. Specifically, how can these variations and amounts of variations
be measured, modeled and simulated, and what might these variations imply for
DRAT -- Understanding adversarial attack trajectories, and how these can be
disrupted to impact adversaries, will be instrumental in comprehending
anticipatory cyber defense and ultimately contribute to the paradigm shift
towards proactive cybersecurity. This exploratory, multidisciplinary research
marries the two disciplines of criminology and computer engineering to push the
research frontier on proactive cybersecurity. This groundbreaking intersection
will generate new criminological theoretical knowledge, mixed-method
innovations, and theoretically-informed simulation that prepare defenders with
preemptive and comprehensive knowledge and tools in facing adaptive and
sophisticated adversaries.