* 1742215
* Scholarships for Geoscience Educational Opportunities
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2023
* James McNamara, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

This NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
(S-STEM) project at Boise State University in Idaho is designed to help address
the regional and national need for an estimated 135,000 new highly trained
geoscientists within the next decade. The project will contribute to the
geoscience workforce by increasing recruitment, retention to graduation, and
preparation for and placement of students in careers or geosciences graduate
programs while broadening participation, especially among underrepresented
minority and female students. The project will span the university community
from students satisfying their general education science requirements through
geoscience undergraduate students, graduate students and faculty. Undergraduate
students from all disciplines will benefit from the work of Learning Assistants
(LAs) in introductory geoscience courses. Undergraduate geoscience majors (not
only those receiving scholarships) will benefit from many program elements
including improved metacognitive and computational skills, greater career
awareness, continuity of teaching assistants (TAs), and the potential for on-
campus jobs as LAs. Graduate students in the department will benefit from
proposed modifications to TA assignments through pedagogical training associated
with the curricular interventions. Both graduate and undergraduate students will
benefit from recruiting diverse geoscientists to speak in the department seminar
and from having those speakers share choices related to their career paths.
Project results will be shared through various outlets to reach local, regional,
and national colleagues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will adapt established
curricular and co-curricular interventions and study their impact on student
success. The project has the following objectives: 1) provide scholarships and
mentoring to cohorts of low-income, academically talented geoscience students;
2) enhance the BS Geosciences curriculum by implementing specific evidence-based
instructional practices (EBIPs), especially to improve metacognitive and
computational thinking skills in students; 3) provide curricular and co-
curricular opportunities for students to investigate and prepare for geoscience
careers; and 4) study the impact of project activities on student success,
retention, and degree attainment. The project has a comprehensive plan to
generate new knowledge related to the impact of simultaneous curricular and co-
curricular activities on cohorts of BS Geosciences students at a large public
institution. The activities build strongly on successful practices implemented
in the Department of Geosciences and leverage prior NSF support that helped
develop effective S-STEM practices for recruiting and cohort building, helped
promote the exploration and adoption of EBIPs among STEM faculty, and helped
establish an overall focus on practices to promote student success. The project
team and advisory board members represent a variety of campus perspectives and
areas of expertise including geoscience, education, administration, advising and
student support, diversity, faculty development, financial aid, institutional
research, and industry. Faculty in the department will receive training in
mentoring and on the use of several EBIPs. The project expects significant gains
in first year retention rates and 4-year and 6-year graduation rate for both
full time freshmen and transfer geoscience students as well as an increase in
degrees conferred to underrepresented minority students and women.