* 1742124
* Physical Sciences Scholars (PSS) Program
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Janet VanLone, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 05/31/2024
* USD 996,128.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, the Physical Sciences
Scholars (PSS) Program is providing support to low-income students with
demonstrated financial need and academic promise to succeed in STEM disciplines
at Bucknell University. The project is funding 84 scholarships over 5 years for
students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in the physical sciences (Physics
and Astronomy, Chemistry, Geology &amp; Environmental Geosciences). The PSS
program will provide opportunities for academic enrichment outside the classroom
to help low-income students make successful transitions into rewarding careers
in STEM disciplines by enhancing their self-identification as scientists. There
are five primary tactics to accomplish the PSS Program objectives: provide
scholarships; create a cohort of students that starts with shared living at the
Discovery Residential College; provide dedicated and sustained faculty
mentorship; encourage participation in student-faculty research and associated
scholarly activities; and facilitate career placement by working closely with
the Career Development Center. As a result, it is expected that PSS scholars
will be better prepared to succeed in STEM majors as undergraduates and better
equipped for careers in STEM after graduation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This S-STEM
Track 2 project will research questions emerging from a focus on needs
identified by Self-Determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic
motivation. In particular, it will contribute new knowledge to what is known
about the effects of interventions on the STEM degree attainment of economically
disadvantaged students. Bucknell University's PSS program also seeks to better
understand the impact of faculty mentoring and cohort dynamics on the academic
success of academically talented low-income students, who often are also
underrepresented minorities, majoring in STEM disciplines at a private, liberal
arts four-year institution focused on STEM. Program assessment activities will
focus on the retention and success of the PSS scholars and explore which
activities are most important for academic success of these students in this
environment. The following three Research Questions will be explored: (1) What
is the relationship between student employment and academic performance among
low socioeconomic status physical science majors at a private rural liberal arts
institution? (2) How will students' self-identification as scientists vary over
time as a result of programming provided by this grant? (3) How do intrinsic
motivation and curiosity vary over time and relate to students' self-
identification as scientists? The results will be widely disseminated at STEM
education conferences and journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.