* 1742597
* New Futures in Science and Mathematics: Supporting Engagement, Retention, Graduation, and Entry of Women into STEM Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Angela Frey, Alverno College
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 09/30/2024
* USD 974,698.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project will support high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need at Alverno College, an all-
women institution. Over the five-year funding period, this project will provide
scholarships to forty undergraduates who are pursuing baccalaureate degrees in
biology, molecular biology, mathematics, chemistry, broad-field science, and
environmental science. In addition to scholarship support, the project will also
provide Scholars with closely integrated advising, mentoring, tutoring, and
professional development. The project will build upon tested strategies for
increasing engagement, persistence, and graduation among low-income, high-
achieving women to address persistent underrepresentation in the field and
increase employment rates. The project emphasizes development of close bonds
between students and science instructors, which is known to be a key factor in
retention of students in STEM fields, especially retention of women and students
from other groups that are underrepresented in STEM. As both a women's college
and Hispanic Serving Institution with a high percentage of students of color in
Wisconsin's poorest county, Alverno College has a distinctive opportunity to
broaden participation in STEM. Because Alverno College has a strong track record
of placing interns and graduates at regional STEM employers, this project has
the potential to strengthen the regional STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is an expanded version of the
previous, successful S-STEM project at Alverno College (DUE-0850288). This
expansion will add new offerings for a larger cohort of 40 total students over
five years, increase focus on early engagement (first-year), and provide longer
per-student involvement. The program emphasizes frequent interaction (student-
to-student and student-to-faculty), and active participation, drawing on best-
practices in undergraduate STEM education for low-income, high-achieving
students and building results from the previous S-STEM award. National research
indicates that the most important factors for predicting success of women in
STEM are the development of a positive science/mathematics identity and
undergraduate socialization. Consistent with that result, evaluation of prior
work at Alverno College supports the value of social events, undergraduate
research activities, and professional conferences. By expanding and integrating
these proven activities with new approaches, such as including a first-year
seminar and supporting students throughout all years in college with dual
advising by faculty and professional advisers, the project aims to improve
retention and graduation rates. The project will investigate the correlation
between the amount and type of participation in the project activities and
persistence and graduation in STEM majors at Alverno College. The project will
share these research results with the public via press releases, websites, and
traditional publications. In addition, it will present the results at national
meetings of scientific and educational societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.