* 1742269
* Fostering Science Identity through Interdisciplinary Research for Underrepresented Students in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Rebecca Simmons, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 01/31/2024
* USD 999,519.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, the US MASTER II
(Undergraduate Scholarships with Mathematics And Science Training, Exploration
and Research) project will provide support to low-income students with
demonstrated financial need and academic promise to succeed in STEM disciplines
at University of North Dakota (UND). The project will fund a minimum of 36
scholarships over five years for students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in
Biology, Chemistry, Geography &amp; Geographic Information Science, Mathematics,
and Physics &amp; Astrophysics. Participating students will be involved in
scientific research projects including individual research supervised by
participating faculty, and semester-long interdisciplinary, team-based projects.
Students will also receive mentoring support from multiple sources, including
peers, academic advisors and research mentors. Ultimately, these strategies to
foster diversity and broaden participation in the STEM fields will fuel
innovation and progress in scientific discovery both in the region and across
the country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support and encouragement of first generation,
and underrepresented minority (URM) students are key to increasing diversity in
the STEM fields, especially among students from rural environments such as are
found in North Dakota. To this end, an integrated multi-tiered mentoring (IMM)
program will be developed and assessed along with other high impact practices
(HIPs) that will boost retention and success by formally attending to the
development of students' science identity within the scholarship program. These
program goals will be achieved through recruitment of talented low-income
students who are likely to be underrepresented (including first generation)
individuals. Integrated multi-tiered mentoring by academic advisors, research
mentors, and peer-mentors, high impact practices that guide students through all
aspects of scientific research and educational training will be implemented.
Knowledge generation will occur via a pilot IMM study investigating mentoring
roles and functions as they relate to the development of students' science
identity. The project includes strategic coordination of support services
already present at UND, including financial, academic and other support. The US
MASTER II program will produce a cadre of talented scientists ready for the
challenges of graduate studies and research careers. Intermediate and final
results from this study will have practical implications for STEM education and
student support, and will be shared widely with diverse audiences in the social
sciences, STEM fields and higher education through presentations and specific
mentoring sessions or symposia throughout the entirety of the US MASTER II
program.