* 1742519
* Integration of Computing in Rural Agricultural Education
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* C. Matt Seimears, Emporia State University
* Standard Grant
* Bradley Barker
* 08/31/2021
* USD 454,356.00

As computing has become integral to the practice of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM), the STEM+Computing program seeks to address
emerging challenges in computational STEM areas through the applied integration
of computational thinking and computing activities within STEM teaching and
learning in early childhood education through high school (preK-12). This
proposed Exploratory Integration study is to determine under what conditions
integrating computation and computational thinking in agricultural education and
problem solving will increase student interest, motivation, performance in
courses, independent projects, and technical careers. It is expected that
students will gain proficiency in the application of programming to solve
specific problems in agriculture and will derive interest in pursuing
computational science and/or computing in their future academic courses and
career selection. The objectives of the project include creating an educational
program for students composed of four introductory and two advanced modules
focused on agriculture challenges. Investigators will utilize online training
workshops to prepare the participating cohort of teachers to effectively
implement the education program, and to build a peer-support network to support
teacher success. This project is an integration of computation within
agricultural science to provide an opportunity to build a youth career model
that will be applicable or adaptable to the multitudes of rural agriculture
communities and schools in the Nation.

Many national reports indicate the need for advancing computer science and
advancing the integration of computing into STEM content in response to
computationally-intensive careers, but there is a scarcity of studies examining
embedding computing into non-computing careers and technical courses, such as
agriculture science or agricultural mechanics classes. Thus, this agricultural-
based project will address an important gap in academic research and the impact
of computational agriculture on the future workforce. Although primarily-rural
industries like agriculture and natural resource management are becoming
increasingly technical and computationally-driven, rural students see themselves
as consumers of these technologies rather than potential creators of the
technologies and applications. Rural students continue to be underserved in
computing and STEM education. This project will address these deficiencies by
deriving high-quality educational courses exposing students to computing in a
way that will appeal to the culture of the rural audience. Investigators want to
know: under what conditions does integrating computing skills and competencies
to address and help solve agricultural problems, increase student interest,
motivation, and career opportunities? Further, how do students of different
demographic and academic backgrounds interact with the computing-modified
agriculture curriculum? Do these students have similar engagement patterns,
performance, interest, and attitude changes? How do teachers' implementation
models lead to greater classroom impact? Finally, what aspects of the
implementation and integration influence student engagement and interest in
future computing and STEM courses and careers?