* 1742614
* Culturally Adaptive Pathway to Success (CAPS)
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Jianyu Dong, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 05/31/2024
* USD 999,315.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project at
California State University, Los Angeles (Cal State LA) is designed to address
the NSF strategic goals of transforming frontiers by preparing future engineers
and computer scientists with new capabilities and expertise as well as
diversifying the workforce. As a federally designated Title III institution, the
university has an historic commitment and record of service in meeting the
educational needs of culturally diverse communities in Los Angeles. With support
from S-STEM, the university will develop the Culturally Adaptive Pathway to
Success (CAPS) program, which will build an inclusive pathway to accelerate the
graduation for academically talented, low-income students in one of 4 majors
(Civil Engineering, Computer Science, Electrical Engineering, and Mechanical
Engineering). The financial disadvantage of many students at the College of
Engineering, Computer Science, and Technology (ECST) is often connected with
inadequate academic preparation through K-12 education and limited family
guidance. Hence, many students, including those who are academically-talented,
experience significant challenges in achieving their academic goals. CAPS will
focus on progressively developing social and career competence in students via
three integrated interventions: (1) Mentor+, relationally informed advising that
encourages students to see their academic work in relation to their families and
communities; (2) peer cohorts, providing social support structure for students
and enhancing their sense of belongings in engineering and computer science
classrooms and beyond; and (3) professional development with difference-
education, giving students support in situations where they practice reconciling
how to navigate a world where others may have a different cultural script. The
collaborative research between the educational psychologist and engineering and
computer science educators will lead to better understanding on (a) how these
interventions affect the development of social belonging and engineering
identity of CAPS scholars, and (b) the impact of Mentor+ on academic resilience
and progress to degree. The findings will be used to enhance the CAPS program
and establish a sustainable Scholars Support Program at the university that can
be transferred to similar culturally diverse institutions to increase success
for students who have socio-economic challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAPS will
support 2 cohorts of 14 scholars from their sophomore to senior years. The three
key interventions (Mentor+, peer cohort, and difference-education in
professional practice) will address the social and academic needs of students,
including those from underrepresented minority groups. Using this holistic
support structure, the goal of the project is to have at least 90% of scholars
persist in the programs, 50% graduate within 5 years and an additional 40%
graduate within 6 years in engineering or computer science majors. The program
will implement these interventions through a variety of activities including
Mentor+ advisement, field trips, professional seminars, a sophomore learning
cluster, and participation by scholars in professional conferences. By
leveraging the existing college student services and initiatives, CAPS will
extend the college capacity to support academically talented, low-income
students and accelerate their graduation. Strong administrative support will
ensure the smooth operation of the program. The CAPS program will also pilot a
system to develop culturally responsive advisors and create a culture of
culturally adaptive advising.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.