* 1742380
* Transfer Student Research and Integration Program: A Model for Strengthening Student Success in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Kenneth Fedorka, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 01/31/2024
* USD 999,975.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, the Transfer Student
Research and Integration Program (TRIP) is providing support to low-income
students with demonstrated financial need and academic promise to success in
STEM disciplines at the University of Central Florida. The project is funding 72
scholars over five years who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in Biology and
Biotechnology. Fields within STEM are critical to our nation's infrastructure
and economy. Â Unfortunately, high rates of attrition from STEM programs have
produced a shortfall of STEM-educated workers. A fast and cost-effective way to
alleviate this issue is to reduce attrition rates in existing student
populations. Transfer students (i.e., those who obtain an Associate's degree
prior to matriculating into a 4-year institution), a large and growing segment
of the student population, exhibit unusually high rates of attrition. Research
suggests that attrition for these students often results from a lack of (i)
undergraduate research experiences, (ii) integration into vital communities that
facilitate peer networks, (iii) professional development, and (iv) financial
solvency. Although many students suffer from these deficits, transfer students
are particularly susceptible due to their entrance into a 4-year institution
late into their academic studies and a greater than average need to work while
pursuing a Bachelor's degree. To minimize these issues, TRIP scholars will enter
a 2-year program that engages them in team-oriented original research,
integrates them into academic and scientific communities, and facilitates their
professional development. All the while, TRIP scholars will receive a
scholarship that allows them to more fully pursue their research and educational
activities by minimizing their need to work. TRIP's short-term mission is to
increase the retention of these students in STEM majors while providing the hard
and soft skills necessary for success. TRIP's long-term goal is to increase the
representation of this diverse group within the scientific workforce, including
positions in local, state and federal government; academic institutions; non-
government organizations; and private industry. Importantly, TRIP represents a
model that can be adopted by other STEM programs (such as Chemistry, Physics and
Mathematics) as well as other institutions, especially those that are beacons
for talented students lacking financial independence and that are burdened with
a high student to faculty ratio. It is our goal to create a sustainable model
grounded in the Science of Teaching and Learning that can address a litany of
institutional barriers that deprives academically talented students access to a
career in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The global objective of TRIP is to
increase the number of Biology and Biotechnology graduates who enter the
University of Central Florida as transfer students. To this end, 18 transfer
students per year will be selected for TRIP, based on financial need and
academic potential. At its core, TRIP addresses the pressing need for students
to acquire original research experience while pursuing a STEM degree.
Unfortunately, most students traverse their undergraduate careers without
engaging in the process of science due to the scarcity of available faculty
mentors. TRIP alleviates the mentor shortage by engaging cohorts of students in
an Introduction to Research course, followed by a Group Effort Applied Research
(GEAR) 4-credit laboratory. The GEAR curriculum provides concept-driven lectures
coupled with authentic, team-oriented research embedded within the research
program of the faculty instructor. After GEAR, students enroll in an Independent
Study course where they transform their efforts into a scientific poster and/or
manuscript. While enrolled in their three research courses, students will
interact through numerous community integration and professional development
activities, including social events, team building exercises, and career
workshops. These activities strengthen peer networks and provide additional
skills needed for success. After the courses are complete, TRIP scholars will
integrate into the larger scientific community by presenting their work at two
scientific conferences.