* 1742224
* A Community Assets Program that Fosters the Next Generation of STEM Leaders
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* George Rutherford, Illinois Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2023
* USD 4,649,261.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project will
support high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial need at
Illinois Wesleyan University, Heartland Community College, and Illinois State
University. Throughout its five years of funding, this project will fund 280
annual scholarships for two cohorts, each containing up to 35 students who are
pursuing bachelor's degrees in STEM. The project is built on the premise that
the three partnering institutions of higher education can generate more, and
more successful, STEM graduates by working together, and with community
partners, than by working separately. The project will offer substantial four-
year scholarships, research experiences, and mentoring to talented high school
seniors who are interested in STEM, but for whom significant financial need and
limited familiarity with STEM careers are obstacles to bachelor's degree
completion. In this way, the program aims to increase the number, diversity, and
preparation of STEM professionals in central Illinois.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research demonstrates that STEM students who participate
in research and who are enculturated into their fields are more likely to
complete bachelor's degrees and consider graduate study. Consequently, Scholars
(and high school recruits) will participate in faculty-led, community-based
research projects carried out by teams that span the three partner institutions.
By working as part of a team to solve STEM problems for local agencies, Scholars
will see the societal relevance of their degree programs, build technical
confidence in their fields, develop soft skills that are needed in the
workplace, and contribute to their communities. Moreover, the cross-campus
nature of these experiences will broaden students' professional networks, raise
their awareness of different degree programs and career paths, and allow them to
find academic and social affinity groups beyond the confines of their own
campuses. Scholars whose interests or needs change during their course of study
will be able to transfer their scholarships between the three partner
institutions. Scholars who start their educations at Heartland Community College
will be guided in making the transition to a bachelor's degree program and gain
increased access to resources at the two universities, including intermediate
coursework and STEM-focused student organizations. Each Scholar will have three
mentors: a faculty mentor; a college senior mentor in the Scholar's major
discipline; and a sophomore mentor to help with the high school to college
transition. The educational interventions built into the project include high-
school to college bridge activities, mentoring, and student research, all of
which are proven ways to increase the participation and persistence of low
socioeconomic status students in STEM fields. With the goal of sharing effective
aspects of the project with the broader STEM community, program faculty will use
surveys, interviews, and students' academic records to study how program
activities influence Scholar's persistence in STEM disciplines. The results of
these studies will be disseminated through electronic media, peer-reviewed
publications, and conference presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.