* 1742011
* Formative Assessments for Computer Science in NYC
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Matthew Berland, Teachers College, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,401,950.00

The project is funded by the STEM+Computing program, which seeks to address
emerging challenges in computational science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) areas through the applied integration of computational
thinking and computing activities within disciplinary STEM teaching and learning
in early childhood education through high school (preK-12). Integrating computer
science into the United States schools is one of the most significant changes
for K-12 public education in decades. The New York City (NYC) CS4All initiative
is a leader in this educational reform and serves as a model for other cities
and states. One aspect of the NYC efforts is to integrate computer science
concepts across disciplines. A challenge with this approach is helping non-
computer science teachers, and their students, in assessing if they have met
computer science learning goals. This project seeks to create a method to
measure this learning through an interactive technology-enhanced assessment
system that will provide formative feedback to students and teachers. This
project will address core research questions about how to provide ongoing
assessment of student computer science (CS) learning that: (a) provides useful
feedback to teachers and students; (b) is appealing for students to engage with;
and (c) can be used with a wide diversity of curricula that integrate CS and
STEM domains. The tool will be open-sourced and made available to approximately
600 students during the project, with an eye to serve over 100,000 diverse and
low-income NYC middle school students, and eventually to other districts across
the U.S. In addition, the project will provide insight on research and design in
areas as diverse as assessment, CS education curricula, and educational game
design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the nationwide need for a
validated instrument that provides formative feedback on student progress with
diverse computer science curricula. The is a three-year project to design,
develop, and conduct research with a validated system of formative assessment
for middle school computational thinking that would meet NYC's needs and create
opportunities for broader impacts nationwide. Building on research-based
approaches, including stealth assessment and evidence-centered design (ECD) of
assessments, this project incorporates a range of performance tasks on the topic
of Data and Analysis as outlined in the K-12 CS framework. Students will engage
in a construction environment and formative feedback on student knowledge and
performance will be generated from their interactions. Using participatory
design methods, the project will engage stakeholders with designing tasks and
reports that best meet teachers' and students' needs. The project will be
piloted and then implemented in schools using varied CS curricula throughout
NYC. The research will provide empirical data on how integration of formative
assessment with adoption of varied CS curriculum can enable districts to meet
the needs of a diverse student population. Furthermore, adopting an iterative
design process steeped in participatory methods will allow for the generation of
theory-driven design principles around how students and teachers from diverse
schools and neighborhoods encounter core CS constructs from a variety of CS
curricula.