* 1742236
* Mentoring Math Scholars for Success
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2024
* Oscar Vega, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 01/31/2024
* USD 999,752.00

California State University, Fresno's "Mentoring Math Scholars for Success"
program will recruit academically talented, low income students and provide them
with scholarships, plus supports that enable them to graduate in four years and
successfully enter the workforce or graduate school. The program will guide the
selected Scholars along an intense, 18-credit STEM course-taking pathway from
their first year and presents them with problem-solving challenges to cultivate
interest and readiness for advanced mathematics. Faculty mentors will support
these academic challenges by cultivating and deepening the pre-research
environment in the Scholars' first and second years, preparing them to succeed
at research experiences and advanced courses in their junior and senior
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of these problem-solving challenges
will generate open-ended investigation to strengthen the Scholars' sense of
mathematical proficiency and individual problem-solving skills. Also, these
challenges will prepare them for mathematical jobs that require an inquisitive
mind and the ability to communicate mathematics well, both orally and in
writing. As the Scholars approach graduation, the faculty mentors will coach
them in applying for jobs and graduate schools. Finally, industry partners will
engage the Scholars early on with site visits to stimulate interest in career
paths and to develop high value job skills, such as mock interviews. The
program's mathematics education researcher will measure the effectiveness of
each intervention, as well as the entire suite of interventions, to strengthen
the Scholars' intellectual foundation and experience. The Math Department will
institutionalize activities as the results merit and make them available to
similar institutions nationwide, moving closer to the goal of supporting the
nationally available pool of mathematics talent.