* 1742086
* Intrinsic Properties of Zirconium Carbide Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Gregory Hilmas, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2021
* USD 640,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This project focuses on the intrinsic mechanical,
thermal, and electrical properties of zirconium carbide ceramics. Zirconium
carbide is a candidate material for use in extreme environments such as those
associated with hypersonic flight, nuclear fission, concentrated solar power,
and high-speed machining. These applications involve extreme temperatures, heat
fluxes, radiation levels, or other conditions that are beyond the capabilities
of available materials today. Previous studies by other research groups have
reported seemingly contradictory behavior for nominally identical zirconium
carbide ceramics due to extrinsic effects such as carbon stoichiometry (e.g.,
the C:Zr ratio of the final ceramic) and the presence of impurities.
Accordingly, the mechanical, thermal, and electrical properties are being
investigated in a systematic and controlled manner. The project is using the
unique experimental facilities at the Missouri University of Science and
Technology, which include capabilities for producing dense ceramics with
extremely high purity and characterizing properties from room temperature up to
at least 2000Â°C. These studies are needed to provide data that can then be used
to design zirconium carbide ceramics for use in extreme environments and enable
revolutionary gains in performance and efficiency. This project is training two
graduate students in the processing, densification, characterization, and
analysis of materials for extreme environments, while also preparing them for
careers in the aerospace and power-generation industries. Graduate students are
mentoring undergraduates who are assigned research tasks and assist with
outreach activities. The project team is also reaching out to teachers and
students from rural high schools that lack access to research facilities needed
for class projects. Groups of high school students are invited to use campus
laboratories and the intent is to hire at least one high school student from
those groups to work on the project during each
summer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The project is advancing the
fundamental knowledge of the intrinsic properties of zirconium carbide ceramics
with low (0.01 to 0.4 at%) hafnium contents and known oxygen and nitrogen
impurity levels that are as low as possible. The four primary areas of emphasis
are: 1) reactive synthesis of high purity zirconium carbide; 2) intrinsic
properties of zirconium carbide; 3) ultra-high temperature microstructure-
property relationships; and 4) effects of carbon stoichiometry, hafnium content,
and other impurities on thermal transport. A focused experimental study is
complemented by physics-based models to connect property measurements with
fundamental electronic structure, bonding, and transport properties. The
knowledge of zirconium carbide ceramics is being transformed by revealing
intrinsic densification mechanisms, structure-property relationships at ultra-
high temperatures, and the effects of carbon stoichiometry, oxygen content, and
other impurity levels on properties. Graduate and undergraduate students working
on this project are learning to design characterization methods and property
tests for extreme environments that have heretofore not been explored through
experimental methods, providing them with unique skills for future careers in
fields such as aerospace, nuclear power, or alternative energy.