* 1742099
* The Finishers Program: A Cohesive Support System From High School Through College
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2024
* Jessica Carson, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 12/31/2024
* USD 996,040.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project entitled
"The Finishers Program: A Cohesive Support System from High School through
College" will provide scholarships and support for five years to 30 low-income
students with academic promise and who have demonstrated financial need to
succeed in STEM disciplines at the University of New Hampshire (UNH). The
significance of this project is that it will build a cohesive high
school/college/industry pathway that bridges transition points and uses
evidence-based approaches to improve educational equity. The Finishers Program
will address the increasing local economic need for a STEM-educated workforce
brought about by high-tech companies moving to New Hampshire. High School
students will be selected from low-income and disenfranchised backgrounds, some
from STEAM Ahead, an innovative public high school/private industry college
readiness program in Manchester, New Hampshire's largest city, and others from
Dover, New Hampshire's fastest growing city who have not been exposed to STEAM
Ahead. These high schools historically graduate at much lower rates than the
average for the state; students will be supported to pursue bachelor's degrees
in STEM fields. The University of New Hampshire will implement a novel support
structure, the Finishers Program, that spans the divide between high school and
college, with proactive assessment and mentoring, one-on-one academic advising,
in-depth faculty interactions and support, and group workshops during the
scholars' senior year of high school and throughout their college education. It
is expected that these interventions will smooth the transition between high
school and college, allow university staff and faculty to identify challenges
unique to each student before arrival on campus, and develop the necessary
supports.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate the extent to which
the Finishers Program scholars make connections with communities and their
impact on their persistence through a STEM degree. Students' academic outcomes
and their non-cognitive skills development will also be longitudinally tracked
and analyzed, with an initial emphasis on how self-valuation and a growth mind-
set nurtured through the program increase persistence for this urban student
population, controlling for their exposure to a college readiness program and
other variables. The Finishers Program is also expected to have a positive
impact on the student support system at the University of New Hampshire. The
data on non-cognitive factors, taken as Finisher Program scholars interact with
various supports and academic structures, will provide a broader understanding
of what helps students from low-income, urban backgrounds be successful in
acquiring an undergraduate STEM education. The knowledge will be regularly
disseminated to help the public-school system better understand how partnerships
with universities and industry can create a pipeline model that could help
economically depressed areas if students are supported through college.
Knowledge generated by the project will also be disseminated at several STEM
education venues and publications.