* 1742864
* EAGER: Structures of Defects and Interfaces in Block Copolymer Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Edwin Thomas, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2020
* USD 285,200.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The detailed structure of defects in soft materials like polymers has received
relatively little attention compared to the vast literature on defects in hard
crystalline materials (metals, ceramics and semiconductors), where high-
resolution electron microscopy and other techniques have quantitatively imaged
the new arrangements of the atoms caused by the various kinds of defects, thus
enabling a very detailed understanding of the key role of different kinds of
defects on controlling important material properties such as mechanical strength
and electrical conductivity. This research will explore the use of new, highly
advanced electron microscopic and tomographic techniques in an attempt to
provide valuable data for comparison to theoretical simulations of the
morphology of microdomain interface morphology in important classes of polymeric
materials called A-B diblock copolymers. For these materials the interplay of
minimization of interfacial area between the A and B domains versus the
stretching of the polymer molecules within the respective domains controls the
shape of the interface. Additionally, the PI will extend and verify advanced
microscopy techniques to explore the 3D nature of grain boundary and line
defects that can frequently occur in technologically important diblock polymeric
materials and can limit their performance. This research will also contribute to
the training of postdoctoral scholars and graduate and undergraduate students in
advanced electron microscopic and tomographic techniques. Results from this
project will also be incorporated into relevant graduate-level courses.



TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This research seeks to image the 3D shape of the microdomain interface in
network phases and around grain boundary and dislocation defects in block
copolymers (BCPs). In noncrystalline BCPs, the order is not in the atoms but in
the interfaces separating the component blocks (the so called Intermaterial
Dividing Surface, IMDS). Previous limitations to 3D reconstructions will be
overcome via incoherent imaging using high-angle annular dark-field scanning
transmission electron microscopy (HAADF STEM). Computational work will define
the limitations of the reconstruction techniques by simulations using ideal
morphological models combined with the known technique limitations (missing data
wedge, strong oscillations in the contrast transfer function for bright-field
imaging, defocus across tilted specimens). 3D imaging of the morphology is
crucial but very challenging -- the inherent lack of contrast and the
susceptibility of organic materials to electron beam damage are formidable
obstacles. For some morphologies, reliable reconstructions may not be realizable
due to experimental limitations. The few literature studies featuring 3D
reconstructions of BCPs display some seemingly unrealistic features of the
microdomain interface. Should the approaches turn out to be unable to overcome
such experimental limitations, the focus will shift to setting limits on
"interpretable resolution" and cautioning that the reconstructions in the
published literature to date may have been "overinterpreted". No matter what the
outcome, these results will be important for the polymer materials community to
view and to understand. For ordered materials, the presence of defects can
contribute positively or negatively to material performance. With such
fundamental understanding, it should be possible to eventually learn to
manipulate the defect types and their numbers in BCP systems and accordingly
influence transport properties applicable to fuel cells, battery membranes,
etc., where the light weight, flexibility, and low cost of polymers makes them
highly attractive.