* 1742666
* Workshop:  Addressing Technology and Skills Gaps in Adulthood Transitions: Challenges and Opportunities at the Human-Technology Frontier; September, 2018: University of Arkansas
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Patricia Herzog, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2019
* USD 49,974.00

The goal of this workshop is to advance thinking about social changes occurring
at the human-technology frontier. Specifically, the workshop begins with
transitions into adulthood when youth begin to establish themselves into the
labor force and take on adult roles. The first day of the workshop will ask how
developmental processes hinder or enhance the capacity of emerging adults to be
accurate consumers of data. The second day will explore how contextual effects
(e.g. rural locale, cultural inequalities, educational access, and generational
disconnects) hinder or enhance broad exposure to social and technological
skills. The third day explores institutional factors: technology, new media, and
organizational learning. The workshop will invite industry partners and
representatives to participate in discussions about ways to avoid brain drain in
rural communities where youth are concentrated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop will address four technology and skills gaps: 1) data literacy among
emerging adults (the capacity to be accurate consumers of knowledge created by
data analytics; 2) workforce preparation (contextual factors that may affect
exposure to updated social and technology skills); 3) high-tech communications
(access to accurate and trusted knowledge to inform decisions); and 4) exposure
of rural emerging adults to knowledge capital that sustains equitable solutions.