* 1742175
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: An integrated multiscale modeling and experimental approach to design fouling-resistant membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Ilenia Battiato, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 12/31/2019
* USD 211,656.00

1534304(Sarupria) &amp; 1533874(Battiato)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses a grand challenge facing society today--how to make clean water
available to a growing population at low cost. Membranes used in water treatment
processes are exposed to feed waters containing organic, inorganic, and
biological species, which leads to fouling and loss of membrane productivity
over time. Since performance loss due to fouling is one of the largest costs
associated with membrane processes in water treatment, discovery of new surface
treatments that limit fouling would have significant economic and societal
impacts. Fouling propensity of a membrane depends greatly on its surface
properties such as chemistry and morphology. The goal of this project is to
develop the multiscale mathematical framework to predict fouling behavior on the
surfaces of membranes with different geometric patterns and chemical coatings.
The ability to predict fouling properties of new membrane surfaces in silico
will accelerate the discovery of novel membrane designs and decrease the time
from laboratory to market. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, comprehensive
studies involving iterative feedback between computational modeling and
experimental measurements will be performed to test two main hypotheses: (1)
targeted combinations of geometric and chemical patterns on a membrane surface
will significantly reduce membrane fouling, and (2) experimentally-trained
multiscale computational models will accelerate the discovery of novel geometric
and chemical surface modifications that significantly reduce membrane fouling.
This research will (i) produce a mathematical framework and corresponding models
to identify the physical mechanisms and geometric features controlling mass and
momentum transfer through and over micro- and nanopatterned membranes, (ii)
provide a deep understanding of how foulants and energy fluxes are controlled
and regulated by complex topologies, and (iii) elucidate how the macroscopic
behavior of filtration flow rates and reactive transport processes are coupled
with phenomena at the micro- and nano-scale. This work will be transformational
because delivering an experimentally-validated computational framework will
enable rapid screening of many membrane surface modifications to short-list the
most promising ones for further testing, and it will lead to a leapfrog
improvement in membrane filtration technologies. This project will provide a
multidisciplinary environment for training graduate and undergraduate
researchers. New communication platforms such as Zoom video conferencing will be
used to deliver virtual science demonstrations and laboratory tours to
elementary school.