* 1742780
* CAP: Advancing Technology and Practice for Learning Reading and Writing Skills in Secondary Science Education
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Rebecca Passonneau, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 06/30/2018
* USD 23,264.00

The proposed workshop brings together researchers and educators to discuss how
to advance technology and practice to better promote secondary school science
literacy. There is a clear need for new directions in science literacy. Over the
past decade, the National Center for Education Statistics has consistently
identified poor reading and writing skills as a serious problem, one which
undoubtedly contributes to low science achievement. In addition, written and
oral communication skills have been identified as a significant dimension of
science practice and education. Secondary school, the focus of this workshop, is
a critical period when students first experience a separation between subject
matter and literacy. The resulting disciplinary silos may create discontinuities
in students' learning of both science content and literacy skills. It may be
advantageous for instruction in science and the English language arts to be
brought closer together at the secondary level, and to facilitate this through
digital learning environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Secondary science education
has benefited from a range of digital technologies, including computer supported
collaborative learning systems (CSCL) and intelligent tutoring systems (ITS).
The hypothesis motivating the workshop is that results from a decade of work in
computer-based learning for science and inquiry can be applied to science
literacy. One precondition is appropriate application of automated techniques to
analyze the texts that students read and write, so as to provide students with
tailored feedback in an online setting. A second precondition is to apply
insights from the psychology of education on the acquisition of general literacy
skills, and argumentation skills in particular, to foster evidence-based
communication. The workshop includes researchers from the three critical areas
of computer-based learning environments, natural language processing, and the
psychology of education. It has three main goals. The first is to share results,
datasets and demonstration systems in order to identify the potential for
collaborations that would both deepen the analysis of existing data, and
identify criteria for the collection of novel datasets that specifically address
science literacy. The second workshop goal is to foster collaborations among
researchers in the three disciplines, with participation from practitioners, to
study the potential impact on students' learning of science literacy skills. The
third workshop goal is to identify mechanisms to foster an interdisciplinary
community that will continue to investigate science literacy.