* 1742062
* Collaborative Research: TRAIN (TRansfer to Interdisciplinary Natural sciences): A Community College-University Consortium to Increase Community College Transfer and Success
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2023
* James Tuohy, Maricopa County Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,055,135.00

The TRAnsfer to Interdisciplinary Natural sciences (TRAIN) program supports
students from community college through graduation from Arizona State
University's New College.  TRAIN students begin with scholarships and a robust
set of support structures at the community college, which follow them seamlessly
through transfer to ASU.  Students are recruited from Phoenix, South Mountain,
and Glendale Community Colleges (all HSIs), where approximately 85% identify as
individuals traditionally underrepresented in STEM.   In addition to scholarship
support, students benefit from engagement with faculty mentors, specialized
advising, peer mentoring, tutoring, research experiences, and participation in
cohort-based activities.  Authentic, career-focused experiences underpin the
cohort formation; students are offered various opportunities, such as
undergraduate research, internships, volunteer opportunities and field trips. 
Students blog about these authentic experiences, relating them to their
educational and career development.  Weekly blog comments by students and
faculty mentors keep the cohort connected and help to develop a robust peer-
teaching and support network. &lt;br/&gt;                &lt;br/&gt;The TRAIN
program will add to the collective knowledge in STEM education by utilizing a
value-added model of programmatic analysis which will analyze the unique
challenges faced by students underrepresented in STEM, and determine how
interventions and support structures impact diverse students differently. A
cost/benefit analysis of the support structures by sub-population will be
undertaken and an analysis conducted to determine which yield the best returns
on investment.  Broader impacts of TRAIN include the construction, evaluation
and improved understanding of an innovative transfer pipeline between the
nation's largest public university and one of its largest community college
systems featuring several HSIs. This project could transform how community
college students are supported during the attrition-prone transfer from two-year
to four-year institutions.