* 1742034
* CSMP Scholarship Program of Central Connecticut
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2023
* Robert Hadley, Central Connecticut State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 12/31/2023
* USD 4,982,084.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, the CSMP Scholarship
Program of Central Connecticut will provide support to low-income students with
demonstrated financial need and academic promise. This support will help
students succeed in selected STEM disciplines at Central Connecticut State
University (CCSU), Manchester Community College (MCC), and Tunxis Community
College (TCC). The project is funding 88 scholarships over five years for
students pursuing bachelor's degrees in Computer Science, Mathematics, and
Physics (CSMP). This scholarship program supports students planning to continue
their studies in a graduate program as well as to those planning to enter the
workforce upon earning an undergraduate degree. This project implements co-
curricular activities proven to improve student persistence and will study the
effects on student success of these activities and other factors. The
scholarship program will complement and enhance the newly created Transfer
Articulation Program (TAP), enabling seamless transfer of students with two-year
degrees from community colleges to four-year institutions in the state of
Connecticut. The scholarship program will target prospective students recruited
through public schools, two-year colleges, and community organizations, as well
as promising students already enrolled in CSMP and related programs at CCSU.
Faculty serving as mentors will proactively provide interventions for students
who experience academic or social/emotional difficulties while in the program.
This program builds upon the success of the previous two NSF S-STEM awards that
established a well-functioning student support infrastructure and faculty and
staff who have experience with these types of interventions. The current program
structure incorporates and builds on lessons learned from the prior work. This
project will support the study, implementation, and evaluation of co-curricular
activities leading to improved academic success of low-income academically
talented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This S-STEM Track 3 project seeks to
improve educational opportunities for financially needy academically talented
students and help them succeed in many STEM academic areas. CCSU, MCC, and TCC
serve an ethnically-diverse population within the greater Hartford area of
Connecticut. A student cohort will create a supportive environment for scholars,
supporting their academic success, retention, and timely graduation. The
importance of the project stems from the membership of CCSU, MCC and TCC in the
Connecticut State Colleges and Universities (CSCU) system, which makes the
project potentially scalable to the other CCSU institutions across the state.
The strategies used by the scholarship program focus on peer and faculty
involvement, academic integration and development, goal commitment, social
integration, academic performance, and institutional commitment. Students will
benefit from previous interdisciplinary curricular enhancements supported by
previous NSF funding. In addition, students will have the opportunity to
participate in ongoing research projects with an emphasis on interdisciplinary
research which has shown correlation with retention.