* 1742029
* The Biology, Coastal and Marine Science, Molecular and Cellular Biology, and Neuroscience Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Kirk Bartholomew, Sacred Heart University
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 09/30/2023
* USD 649,544.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, this project will support high-achieving, low-income
students with demonstrated financial need at Sacred Heart University (SHU) in
Fairfield, CT. Throughout its five years of funding, this project will fund 56
annual scholarships to provide four years of support for two cohorts of seven
students. Scholars will be pursuing bachelor's degrees in general biology,
coastal and marine science, molecular and cellular biology, or neuroscience. The
project is designed to ensure that students from lower socioeconomic backgrounds
will have strong faculty and peer relationships that can support learning
activities, thus improving student achievement and retention.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This S-STEM Track 2 project will implement the following
activities: a pre-fall orientation, biology-focused first-year seminar courses,
faculty mentoring, peer-led team learning in four biology courses, learning
communities that extend throughout all four years, research experiences, and a
research and career "STEMinar" series. Cohort-based activities for the scholars,
regardless of major, will expose the scholars to the diversity of perspectives
found in the biological sciences. SHU will conduct a research study to
investigate the effects of student-faculty and student-peer support on
achievement, retention, and graduation. The objectives are to enroll 14
scholars, retain 12 of the original 14 (86%) until their sophomore year, retain
10 of the 14 (71%) through graduation in four years, and place 12 out of 14 in
STEM-related careers or graduate school within one year of graduation. Scholars
who leave the program will be replaced. The project aims to strengthen existing
relationships with industry partners and graduate programs, and to foster new
ones. The project management team will gain and disseminate new knowledge
related to the impact of providing strong faculty mentoring across all four
years of study, combined with enhanced peer relationships through the
implementation of peer-led team learning in courses that are identified
attrition points.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.