* 1742149
* Preparing Academically Talented, Low-Income STEM Students for Our Data-Intensive World
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Mary Walczak, Saint Olaf College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2024
* USD 991,596.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project will support high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need at St. Olaf College in
Minnesota. Throughout its five years of funding, this project will provide 30
low-income students with approximately 85 annual scholarships. The Scholars will
be undergraduates who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in mathematics or computer
science. In addition to scholarships, this project will provide Scholars with
critical academic and personal support, will enhance their skills in data
science and statistics, and will expand their quantitative competency. As a
result, it is expected that the Scholars will have expanded academic and career
possibilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This S-STEM project will recruit students
during their first year of college and support them for up to three years. In
addition to scholarships of up to $7,000 per year, a key component of the
project is development of a new course that bridges the gap between the
traditional first course in statistics (which is social sciences-based) and the
first course in statistical modeling. This new course will introduce students to
statistical computing and the core principles of data science, as they access
and analyze real data to answer questions that they find to be personally
compelling. The project also features Supplemental Instruction and extensive
tutoring. The project will coordinate its efforts with St. Olaf College's TRIO
programs, including the McNair Scholars Program. Participating students will
also be recruited to join St. Olaf's Center for Interdisciplinary Research
(DMS-1045015), which undertakes quantitative analyses guided by faculty from
disciplines outside of the mathematical sciences. An advisory board consisting
of individuals from area industries will help identify internship opportunities
for Scholars and will support their entry into data-intensive careers after
graduation. The project will assess the effectiveness of instruction and
academic support strategies intended to increase persistence in data-intensive
STEM fields. These findings will contribute to the national conversation about
how best to support the success of STEM students from low income
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.