* 1742997
* I-Corps: Advanced Anodes For Lithium Ion Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2017,11/30/2018
* Carol Hirschmugl, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 11/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/ commercial potential of this I-Corps project is wide
reaching with potential applications for the naocomposites that range from
active anode material for advanced batteries to electronic ink. Advanced
batteries for electric vehicles can offer the opportunity to achieve longer
range (reduce range anxiety), higher power solutions (for nimble acceleration
and handling), increased range of operating temperatures (increased utility in
colder climates). Similar improvements will impact portable electronics and
power tools. In all cases, but particularly in military and aerospace
applications, low weight and longer lasting portable energy sources are
critical, and batteries using materials with these characteristics will support
important technological advances in these wide-ranging applications. The
batteries based on these technologies will likely have lower manufacturing cost
compared to current technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
further develops and explores the commercialization potential of a carbon and
oxygen-based two-dimensional nanocomposite that has novel electronic properties
(ranging from semi-conducting to conducting) and morphology (1:1-Carbon:oxygen
ratio, layered structure, flexible). This combination of properties can benefit
applications where materials development is critical for future technological
advances. In particular, these materials are made from non-toxic, abundant
materials with controllable electronic properties and nanocomposite structure.
Recent efforts in the lab have focused on scaling up the production quantity of
these materials. This supports the idea that determining strategies for
manufacturing scale-up can be achieved once the specific required properties,
application and required quantities have been identified.