* 1742696
* Electrochemically-Induced Fracture of Ionic Conductors: Electrolyzers and Batteries
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Anil Virkar, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 07/31/2022
* USD 419,937.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Many technological and consumer applications involve
use of electrochemical devices such as batteries. For the next generation
automobiles, one fuel choice is hydrogen which is often made by high temperature
electrolysis. These devices are subject to failure during operation. Even more
dramatic are recent failures of lithium batteries that have led to fires.
Numerous instances of fires caused by failed batteries in laptops, cell phones,
skate boards, and airplanes have been reported. Even though electrolyzers do not
catch fire, they are still subject to failure. Much of the reported research has
been on attributing failures to effects such as electrode cracking, changes in
microstructures, and defective electrodes. Theoretical research demonstrates
that the key component that undergoes failure is often the electrolyte itself.
The electrochemical transport (ionic current) through the electrolyte under
certain situations can cause failure due to the electrochemical-mechanical
coupling, which causes electrochemically-induced fracture of the electrolyte and
device. Theoretical and experimental work is conducted to investigate the
fundamental reasons of battery and electrolyzer failures. Understanding
electrochemical fracture also helps design more durable batteries and minimize
the propensity to accidental fires. Experimental work is conducted on lithium
and oxygen ion conductors. Theoretical work is conducted on understanding the
origin of electrochemical fracture and the rate of crack growth. The project
supports one graduate student working towards a PhD and one undergraduate
student. Students will be trained for employment in academia and battery
companies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Although numerous instances
of fires due to lithium batteries have been reported, understanding of
fundamental causes of failures has been elusive. Electrolyzers are known to fail
under certain conditions. The common thread is that they fail during operation.
This project investigates electrochemically induced fracture of the electrolyte
which leads to the ultimate device failure, both theoretically and
experimentally. Theoretical work examines occurrence of crack growth during the
passage of current which leads to fracture under internally generated load.
Experimental work is conducted on lithium and oxygen ion conductors. Metallic
probes are embedded inside the electrolyte with terminals protruding out.
Electrochemically induced fracture is initiated by testing the samples in
electrolytic mode. The measurement of current and generated Nernst potential
gives information on local pressure and onset of crack growth. Measurement of
impedance spectra gives kinetics of electrochemically induced crack growth.
Solution to coupled electrical-mechanical problem gives a quantitative approach
to investigating fundamentals of electrolyte failures, which have important
implications concerning battery fires. The work is timely as larger batteries
are needed for handheld electronics and automobiles with added urgency to
minimize propensity to fires. Understanding of electrolyte failures under
electrochemical operation has the potential to lead to safer batteries.