* 1742635
* STEM MILES:  Mentoring Innovative Learning Experiences for Students
* EDU,DUE
* 12/15/2017,11/30/2023
* Jan Kmetko, Santa Rosa Junior College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 11/30/2023
* USD 649,981.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, the STEM MILES
(Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Mentoring Innovative Learning
Experiences for Students) project is providing support to low-income students
with demonstrated financial need and academic promise to succeed in STEM
disciplines at Santa Rosa Junior College. This effort aims to improve the
academic outcomes of low-income, academically talented STEM students by
expanding the role that community college faculty play in advising and mentoring
while pairing that role with financial support. Community college students will
be provided with the high-touch, focused-faculty advising model, typically found
at smaller private four-year institutions of higher education. Sixty low-income
students majoring in Biological Sciences, Chemistry, Physics, Engineering, or
Mathematics will be recruited, in three cohorts of twenty students over the
grant life span. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Led by an interdisciplinary team of STEM
faculty at Santa Rosa Junior College, the STEM MILES project will provide
interventions that develop students' scientific self-efficacy, identity,
motivation, and values that are known to promote successful transfer to four-
year institutions or completion of degrees in the STEM fields. To reinforce
their sense of belonging to the scientific community and encourage their
perseverance in STEM academic pathways, the MILES scholars will enroll in an
interdisciplinary course on Critical Thinking in the Sciences and participate in
co-curricular faculty mentoring. To enhance faculty-student collaborations
within the STEM community, the scholars will participate in career exploration
opportunities through networking, field trips, job shadowing events, career
fairs, and internship opportunities. To foster scientific self-identity and
self-efficacy, the students will select from a menu of professional development
opportunities every semester, in order to gain experience with research, as well
as build leadership and job skills. The evaluation and assessment of this
project will inform the transformative process from traditional STEM instruction
to specialized instruction. Formative assessment will track the experience of
the scholars through the Program via end-of-semester checklists and surveys. The
summative assessment will be done via questionnaires comparing students at the
beginning versus the end of the program and the statistical analysis of student
performance data against a baseline cohort. The underperformance of
traditionally disadvantaged groups in the STEM fields is a well-documented
phenomenon, and this project holds promise for providing a model that
counteracts that underperformance. The MILES Program adds curricular components,
a comprehensive system of faculty advising, and encourages the STEM departments
to track data related to the progress and completion of STEM-related student
pathways. The results of formative and summative assessments will be of interest
to the increasing number of community colleges that are redesigning their
academic programs to provide coherent pathways leading to improved student
graduation and transfer.