* 1742387
* Factors for STEM Student Success: The Relative Influence of Self-Efficacy, Mentorship, Leadership, and Belonging
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2024
* David Johnson, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 04/30/2024
* USD 649,179.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics program, the "Factors for STEM Student Success" project will support
high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial need at the
University of Utah. Throughout its 5 years, this project will fund 15
scholarships for students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in Computer
Science (CS). Along with scholarship support, the project will provide student
scholars with leadership training, leadership roles in summer outreach programs,
student peer support, college readiness assessment, and faculty mentoring with
the goal of increasing retention and success rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project's primary approach will be to form three cohorts of five students who
will be: 1) assessed on their preparation and their own sense of potential, 2)
provided preparation and mentoring throughout their college career, and 3) given
tools to transform their sense of accomplishment through leadership and
mentoring roles. Along with developing support and mentoring structures for CS
students, this project will investigate the academic and extracurricular factors
that lead to STEM student success. The research goals for this project will
include understanding the social cognitive factors that promote student success
and retention. The project also seeks to identify psychological, social, and
cultural drivers of academic persistence and success for students, including
traditionally underrepresented students, majoring in CS. This project aims to
yield new interventions for retention and success for a diverse set of students
pursuing CS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.