* 1742890
* Transformation of American Southern Commemorative Landscapes
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2018
* David Butler, Middle Tennessee State University
* Continuing Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 12/31/2018
* USD 157,857.00

Commemorative landscapes both reflect cultural values and provide a context to
sustain and challenge those values. Landscapes can be constructed and used to
actively remember or forget certain identities, groups, and histories in order
to maintain or sometimes challenge those histories. Southern plantation tourism
plays an important role in developing basic understanding of race in the United
States by establishing a sense of place and meaning through the exploration of
commemorative landscapes. How southern commemorative landscapes provide symbolic
and substantive representations of what it means to be southern and how southern
culture is defined and debated form key questions in the scientific study of
social memory and commemorative landscapes. The objective of this research is to
contribute to theory centered on the transformation of racialized southern
commemorative landscapes within the United States. Specifically, the researchers
examine the processes and politics of incorporating slavery into plantation
landscapes as sites symbolic of contemporary struggles over the meanings and
uses of southern and American heritage. Incorporating critical discussions of
slavery at such sites not only enhances historical accuracy, but is also
necessary to understand contemporary race relations in the United States. This
research describes and explains the manner and extent to which southern tourist
plantations are moving toward an incorporation of the history of the enslaved
into the commemorative landscape of the region and nation. These issues are of
importance to contemporary American society as a whole, and of specific interest
to those who own, manage, or visit these tourist sites.

Traditionally, tourism plantations have given authority to the idea of white
privilege and the erasure of the enslaved from southern plantation history, but
these representations have begun to change. This framework drives the following
research questions: (1) To what extent and how are owners/operators of
plantations incorporating slavery into the built, narrative, and performative
landscapes at plantations? (2) What were/are the impetuses for change, towards
an inclusion of slavery into the built, narrative, and performative landscapes
of plantations? (3) What are the tourists' expectations regarding slavery and
reactions to the exclusion or inclusion of slavery as part of the built,
narrative, and performative landscapes of plantations? (4) How is the
incorporation of slavery into the built, narrative, and performative landscapes
perceived changing over time at plantations? (5) How do docents embrace, resist
and embody the inclusion of slavery into the built, narrative, and performative
landscapes of plantations? (6) What are the tourists' pre- and post-conceptions
of slavery as part of the built, narrative, and performative landscapes at
plantations? The project breaks new ground in the literature by conducting
fieldwork at multiple plantation sites and types, as well as examining multiple
stakeholders (e.g., owners/operators, docents, and tourists). The study compares
three prominent plantation regions through multiple study sites in each region.
At each site, the researchers apply a mixed methods approach, including a quasi-
experimental design, to interview plantation owner/operators, participant
observers of plantation tours, interview docents, and surveys and interviews of
tourists.