* 1742496
* Closing the STEM Labor Gap through a Path to Graduation for Low Income, Rural Students
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Paul Adams, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,068,658.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, the "Path to
Graduation" program (PTG) at the University of Arkansas aims to close the STEM
labor gap by recruiting previously overlooked populations and increasing the
number of low-income students, especially those from rural regions. Degree
programs aimed at producing a high-quality STEM workforce are a national
priority that underpins progress in science, the advancement of national health
initiatives, and overall national prosperity in an increasingly technical
economy. While the STEM-based economy has been an enormous economic boon in some
regions, others are falling further behind economically due in part to their
inability to meet STEM labor demands. Arkansas is an example of one such state
that struggles to meet its STEM labor needs, ranks 49th in college attendance,
and 45th per capita in Bachelor of Science degrees in scientific and engineering
fields. Previous STEM student recruitment and retention efforts have largely
ignored the unique challenges faced by low-income students from rural areas.
These students often struggle with academic persistence in college due to
insufficient funds, poor academic preparation by their small, financially
struggling schools, and little social support given the lack of college-going
culture in their communities. PTG will adapt proven student retention and
graduation initiatives to better address the financial, academic, and social
barriers to success so that these students can thrive and succeed in their STEM
studies. Not only will the program increase both the size and the diversity of
Arkansas' STEM labor pool, it has the potential to create best practices for
recruiting and retaining low-income STEM students, especially those from rural
areas. These practices can then be implemented in other remote, economically
challenged regions of the country, developing pipelines of STEM talent, creating
new regional STEM technology centers, improving these regions' economic well-
being, and bringing much needed diversity to STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through academic, financial, and social
initiatives, PTG will help 36 students thrive and excel in their STEM degree
programs at the University of Arkansas. Students will be recruited largely from
rural, impoverished regions of Arkansas where large populations of
underrepresented minority and first-generation students are prevalent but
opportunities for a STEM education are not. Two cohorts of 18 STEM students per
year will receive annually renewable scholarships of up to $4,500, or $5,500 if
they join the Honors College. These students will participate in PTG's evidence-
based retention and graduation initiatives, including: an in-residence summer
bridge program; a Living-Learning Community (shared housing); Academic Success
Advising; faculty and peer mentoring; and on-campus or industry-based research
opportunities. PTG will help identify and describe the barriers deterring low-
income students, especially low-income students from rural backgrounds, from
achieving a STEM degree. PTG will develop and implement retention programs for
low-income, rural STEM students and will contribute significantly to the STEM
education literature by developing and evaluating much needed initiatives for
under-served, low-income, rural populations that frequently struggle with
academic persistence.