* 1742961
* "13th International Conference on Catalysis in Membrane Reactors, ICCMR-13," to be held in Houston, TX July 10-13 2017
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2017
* Benjamin Wilhite, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 11/30/2017
* USD 15,000.00

This grant is to provide travel support for US-based academic researchers to
attend the 13th International Conference on Catalysis in Membrane Reactors,
ICCMR-13, to be held in Houston, TX, from July 10 to 13, 2017. The ICCMR-13 will
cover the major current research topics in the field of membrane reactors with
participants from around the world. The continued development and implementation
of membrane reactors has significant societal, economic and environmental
impacts. For example, electrochemical membranes (fuel cells) promise direct
conversion of hydrocarbon fuels from multiple renewable sources (e.g., biomass)
or net-zero carbon fuel cycles (e.g., those based upon ammonia, methanol) thus
avoiding the Carnot-cycle limit on thermal efficiency inherent to combustion-
based power systems. Hydrogen and/or oxygen-permeable membranes promise the
ability to efficiently manipulate a broad range of industrial chemistries in
order to minimize waste and associated energy costs related to product
separation and recycle. Biological and enzymatic membranes, alongside more
conventional catalytic membrane reactors, provide low-energy pathways to water
purification. This is the first time that this biennial international conference
will be held in the United States, thus providing a uniquely valuable
opportunity for US researchers, students and young investigators to engage with
the international catalytic membrane community. It is anticipated that
approximately 30 US-based researchers will receive partial travel support to
attend this conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main topics of the ICCMR-13
include: Modeling of Membrane Reactors and Processes, Biochemical &amp;
Enzymatic Membrane Reactors, Inorganic (Metal-Organic Framework, Zeolitic)
Membranes and Membrane Reactors, Environmental Application of Membrane Reactors,
Sustainable Energy Application of Membrane Reactors, Proton-conducting Ceramic
Membranes and Membrane Reactors, Oxygen-conducting Ceramic Membranes and
Membrane Reactors, Hydrogen Generation in Membrane Reactors, Fabrication and
Characterization of Palladium Membranes for Reactor Applications, Palladium
Membrane Reactors, Demonstrations and Applications. Over the past two decades,
the ICCMR-13 Conference has served as the driving force behind the membrane
reactor community for advancing such technologies. Anticipated outcomes of the
Conference are the presentation of 50 oral and at least 20 poster papers, in
addition to invited plenary presentations. The PI has secured agreements with
Elsevier to generate special issues of Catalysis Today, and International
Journal of Hydrogen Energy resulting from papers presented at ICCMR-13. The
Conference organizers plan to aggressively pursue attendance of US-based
researchers, with particular emphasis upon enhancing attendance by members of
underrepresented groups, through financial assistance.