* 1742304
* Scholarships-Creating Opportunities for Applying Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Daniel Burkett, Indiana University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 02/29/2024
* USD 996,752.00

The National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) program will fund the Scholarships-
Creating Opportunities for Applying Mathematics (S-COAM) project. The S-COAM
project aims to support 87 low-income students with demonstrated financial need
and academic promise to succeed in STEM disciplines at Indiana University of
Pennsylvania (IUP). The scholarships will be provided over five years to
students who are pursuing either bachelor's degrees in STEM with a minor in
mathematics or master's degrees in applied mathematics. The project will create
a supportive connection between master's students and undergraduates by engaging
them in cohort activities, including include research and internship
opportunities, conference travel support, and hands-on technology workshops. The
project will also encourage students to pursue advanced mathematics courses and
will connect students with mentors and external speakers. First year students
will participate in linked courses and customized peer-led discussion sessions
with support from graduate assistants and cohort peers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on existing student support infrastructures at
IUP, this project aims to: (1) Increase numbers of science undergraduates
pursuing a mathematics minor and enhance their preparation for the workforce and
further studies; (2) Improve retention of undergraduate and graduate students
majoring in mathematical areas; (3) Enhance diversity of STEM students through
targeted recruitment initiatives; (4) Expand recruitment for the master's
program in Applied Mathematics; (5) Enhance overall academic environment,
student culture, and research opportunities; and (6) Strengthen students'
leadership abilities, technical skills, and aptitude for life-long learning.
Strategies to achieve these goals include: (a) Integrating a supportive
mentoring program with cohort activities and timely advising; (b) Connecting
students to university-wide networks for academic, social, and career
development; (c) Building interventions to help new graduate students succeed in
advanced courses; (d) Creating hands-on training workshops for advanced
industry-standard software; (e) Leveraging IUP's multicultural recruiting to
enhance STEM diversity; and (f) Inviting a diverse group of researchers and
industry professionals to interact with students. The S-COAM project will
investigate the relationship between faculty interaction, networking, project
ownership, and persistence as well as the impact of peer-led team learning for
students enrolled in Calculus I, Calculus II, and Linear Algebra. The S-COAM
project will develop a systematic survey tool to assess mathematical
professional identity and beliefs. The project aims to identify best practices
and analyze how curricular and co-curricular activities affect retention,
student academic success, persistence to degree completion, placement in
graduate programs, and pathways to STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.