* 1742339
* WSU Students ASK: A Success &amp; Scholarship Program for Students Applying Scientific Knowledge
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Steven Higgins, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 02/29/2024
* USD 997,589.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (S-STEM) program, the "WSU Students ASK: A Success and Scholarship
Program for Students Applying Scientific Knowledge" will support high-achieving,
low-income students with demonstrated financial need. The program focuses on
supporting the success of mathematics and science majors at Wright State
University. This S-STEM Track 2 project is expected to last five years and will
provide scholarships to 42 financially at-risk students majoring in science and
mathematics. The scholarships will begin in the students' second year of
college. The project includes a comprehensive mentoring and experiential
learning pathway to support students' academic and career
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All scholarship students will participate in
at least one year of undergraduate research. During their second year in college
(first year in the program), scholarship recipients will enroll in a classroom-
based undergraduate research experience, then join a faculty research team for
one semester. The program will support students who want to continue their
research through the summer. In their third year, students can continue to
pursue research, or participate in external internships and related
opportunities. The fourth year focuses on assisting students with career
placement and/or application to graduate or professional programs. The project
team will conduct research that can contribute new knowledge about the impact of
experiential learning coupled with financial aid on scientific skill set
development, STEM community membership, and academic success. Program assessment
will include a mixed-methods approach that combines qualitative methods, network
analysis, and statistical modeling. Since Wright State has an academically
heterogeneous student body compared to many other undergraduate research
institutions, the project team will focus on a study of factors that help to
scale the many positive effects of this program to a more diverse population of
students. The project has the potential to generate new knowledge about four
dimensions (experiential STEM learning, membership in the STEM community, skill
development, and academic success) relevant to the success of low-income,
academically talented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.