* 1742971
* EAGER:  Model-based Foundations of Collective Systems Design Theory
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Paul Grogan, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2020
* USD 119,796.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) grant supports
fundamental research to create and validate models of collaboration in
engineering systems design. Engineering systems encompass a broad class of real-
world systems which go beyond traditional boundaries of engineered artifacts to
interact with and contribute to key societal functions. Performance is partially
driven by technical capabilities but also by social constructs including
policies, markets, incentives, and objectives. Pursuing shared objectives such
as sustainability or security requires collective efforts among a diverse set of
actors representing multiple firms, organizations, and agencies with potentially
conflicting individual objectives. Existing systems engineering approaches do
not align well with the decentralized nature and barriers to information
exchange inherent to engineering systems. Consequently, engineering systems
development often results in systems that are more costly than anticipated, take
longer to develop than anticipated, and fail to meet desired levels of
performance. This project contributes a mathematical framework and preliminary
experimental results to understand how collaborative, systems-based approaches
can achieve shared objectives in the design of engineering systems. This project
will yield basic results that are applicable to many kinds of engineering
systems, including but not limited to transportation systems, energy systems and
defense systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
understand how the structure of a design problem and interactions among design
actors can facilitate or inhibit collective action. A mathematical framework
characterizes a multi-actor system design problem as a set of design decisions
and value flows contributing to strategic behavior. It builds on a game-
theoretic model of system design as a two-part decision: lower-level decisions
choose designs to maximize value in a fixed context and higher-level decisions
choose a collective strategy to maximize value under interactive effects. This
project considers simplified two-player design problems structured to represent
four canonical coordination games. A human subjects experiment asks role-players
to complete a series of pair design problems to maximize individual objectives.
Results analyze how the problem structure and observed interactions influence
the balance between cooperative versus non-cooperative strategies while
controlling for demographic and personality factors believed to affect
individual and collective performance. Understanding how technical and
organizational factors influence designer behaviors will contribute to improved
mechanisms and incentives to achieve desired collective results.