* 1742128
* Improving STEM Persistence and Retention via Curricula, Centralization, Cohorts, and Collaboration
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Heather Woodson, Gaston College
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,232,318.00

This project is funded by the NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, which provides support for low-
income, high-achieving students with demonstrated financial need. During the
five-year award period, this project aims to fund 156 scholarships for students
who are pursuing associate's or bachelor's degrees in the biological sciences.
In addition to the scholarships, students will receive faculty and peer
mentoring, have access to targeted advising, and participate in summer research
opportunities. Each of the partner institutions will also redesign STEM courses
in which students often struggle, so that the courses emphasize student-centered
learning. Together, these efforts have the potential to increase the number of
students graduating with a STEM degree from each partner institution, and
prepare these graduates to enter the STEM workforce or pursue further study in
STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Limited studies of community college retention
appear in the research literature. Using Tinto's model of integration, this
project focuses on several points of attrition that reduce students' academic
and social integration into the biological sciences and contribute to reduced
retention in STEM careers. At the community college level, academic supports
will be critical for maintaining student interest in biology. High impact
supports include faculty mentoring/advising intended to increase successful
transfer to the biology major at the University of North Carolina, Charlotte,
and co-curricular activities such as contact with faculty and peer mentors from
UNCC. Once they have transferred to University of North Carolina, Charlotte,
scholarship students will benefit academically from co-enrolling in sections of
required courses, including organic chemistry and calculus, in which biology
majors have historically struggled. To support their success, scholarship
students in these courses will have access to peer mentors who have received
training about how to address transfer student issues. Other activities include
involvement in research opportunities, which has the potential to increase
student integration into their campus and scientific communities. The impact of
each program component will be investigated via a mixed methods design, to
determine the component's impact on integration of transfer students into the
UNCC community and degree completion. This research focuses on the interplay
between socioeconomic status, gender, and institutional factors that limit or
support integration into STEM communities and impact persistence in the biology
major. The results from this research will help to refine existing theories of
student integration and contribute to a growing body of work on
intersectionality in STEM. Dissemination of these findings may inform the
creation of similar discipline-based learning communities for transfer students
at UNCC and other public institutions of higher education with large transfer
student populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.