* 1742257
* Foregrounding Agency versus Structure as Models for Designing Integrated Mathematics and Computational Thinking Curriculum
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Douglas Clark, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,294,407.00

The project will design and study new learning environments integrating
mathematical and computational thinking. While integrating content has been
suggested as a strategy for students' learning, there has been limited
investigation about how mathematics and computational thinking should be
connected in learning experiences. Computational thinking is an essential skill
for STEM careers including concepts such as algorithms and programming, data
collection and analysis, using abstractions, and problem solving. These
computational thinking concepts and practices can be related to mathematics
concepts. This project will examine how to design learning modules that place
mathematics concepts. By exploring how different kinds of designs support
learning and engagement, the project will establish a set of design principles
for supporting mathematical and computational thinking. The project is funded by
the STEM+Computing program, which seeks to address emerging challenges in
computational STEM areas through the applied integration of computational
thinking and computing activities within disciplinary STEM teaching and learning
in early childhood education through high school (preK-12). The Discovery
Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12
students and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources,
models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using design-based research as a methodology to
support iterative design and research, the project will explore two core
tensions that are relevant to the integration of mathematics and computational
thinking. Each tension deals with how to balance competing goals, and
investigates the influence of foregrounding one goal over another. Specifically,
the project will design, test, and begin to apply in schools a set of modules
that contrast: 1) foregrounding mathematics vs. computational thinking; and 2)
foregrounding agency vs. structure. The model of implementation includes two
summers of camp sessions for middle school students, and a year of
implementation in classrooms, thus allowing exploration beyond the potential for
math and computational thinking to be integrated, and extending into what such
integration looks like in the institutional context of schools. The research
questions to be investigated include: (1) What are the advantages of modules
that teach mathematics through computational thinking (foregrounding
mathematics) vs. those that teach computational thinking through mathematics
(foregrounding computational thinking)? (2) What are the advantages of modules
that teach computational thinking through open exploration (agency) vs. game
play (structure)? (3) What kinds of instructional supports do math teachers need
or request as they are teaching students at the intersection of computational
thinking and mathematics? The project will result in (a) a set of instructional
sequences for middle school that propose productive intersections of
computational thinking and mathematics, (b) an understanding of how and why
these instructional sequences support diverse participation, and (c) conjectures
about the support math teachers need to integrate computational thinking in
their classrooms. Different sections for students will be created to compare
different conditions that will foreground mathematics, computational thinking,
structure or agency. Data collected will include measures of student learning,
interviews, analysis of student work, and video analysis to examine student
engagement and interest.