* 1742065
* AGEP National Research Conference
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Mark Richards, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 07/31/2022
* USD 435,566.00

The Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) program funds
research and the development, implementation, and investigation of models to
transform the dissertation phase of doctoral education, postdoctoral training
and/or faculty advancement of historically underrepresented minorities (URMs) in
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) and/or STEM education
research. This conference convening will bring together researchers who have
been funded by AGEP to share their research results and ongoing studies to
better inform continued investigations in the field and better inform continuing
research funded by the program. The goals of the conference are to: (1) Advance
knowledge with presentations of research findings, relevant to the AGEP
program's goal (to increase the number of URM faculty in STEM disciplines and
STEM education research fields by advancing knowledge about pathway models to
career success); (2) Provide professional development for the AGEP Principal
Investigators (PIs) and a select group of advanced graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows who are conducting social science or educational research
relevant to advancing knowledge about the barriers and opportunities for URMs in
the STEM academe; (3) Disseminate the results of the conference with the
production and publication of a conference proceeding
volume.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two days of conference sessions will include AGEP
awardee presentations about exportable and scalable results and outcomes of
their research and activities to develop, implement and investigate academic
professional advancement of URMs in STEM and/or STEM education research
disciplines. Additional sessions will address, but are not limited to, project
data collection, storage and sharing; award management and resources for
sustaining and scaling projects to benefit the nation; and dissemination
strategies for informing the public and the appropriate research communities
about the outcomes and impacts of the awards. In addition to the formal
conference sessions and posters, opportunities for less formal interactions will
be available to encourage cross-award collaborations and to stimulate potential
innovations beyond those discussed in the formal sessions. Two hundred (200)
attendees, with 20 postdoctoral fellows and graduate students who are engaged in
research, are anticipated to attend and contribute to the conference outcomes.
The additional focus on including a select group of advanced graduate students
and postdoctoral fellows will contribute to advancing their pursuits in academic
careers in STEM social science and/or STEM educational research.