* 1742326
* The STEMPath Approach: Success for Low Income Students
* EDU,DUE
* 12/15/2017,11/30/2022
* Martin St. Clair, Coe College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 11/30/2022
* USD 649,659.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project will
provide a cohort of 14 low-income, academically talented students with multi-
year financial support to pursue a STEM major at Coe College in Iowa. This
S-STEM Track 1 project will guide these Pell-eligible students to graduation
through a four-year program called STEMPath designed to help them persist and
succeed in a STEM major in Biology, Chemistry, Physics, or Mathematics/Computer
Science. The STEMPath program will also provide these students support beyond
direct financial aid in the form of social and academic connections, skills
training, career option exposure, research and internship experiences, peer
education, work study and mentoring experiences, and access to additional pre-
college orientation and trained instructional specialists. Key program
highlights will include: first-year bridge activities, participation in a Living
and Learning community, and academic coaching. During their second year,
scholars will enjoy alumni mentoring and a summer research exposure, followed by
a full internship/research experience in their third year. Finally, as seniors,
the scholarship recipients will receive job and graduate school exposure and
application guidance. Students will meet every semester with selected STEM
faculty to monitor their progress in the STEMPath program and receive additional
guidance. This project will thus help at-risk students successfully navigate and
complete their chosen STEM major.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This S-STEM project seeks
to address common pitfalls for academically talented Pell-eligible students.
Most notably, the project seeks to monitor and address first-year student
retention and STEM persistence issues for introductory courses. Four goals guide
the work of the principal investigators. First, the faculty seek to increase the
first-year retention and STEM persistence rate of scholarship students in the
introductory courses to match that of non-Pell grant students. Second, the
project will increase the overall graduation rate of STEMPath students to at
least 86% (12/14). Third, the project intends to provide all scholarship
recipients with significant career-training experiences including a full summer
of scientific research. Finally, the project seeks to increase the average
graduation GPA of its students from 3.12 to at least 3.3. Faculty mentors will
guide students from before entering first-year orientation through a mentored
research experience anchored in Coe's NSF-REU program through graduation and
into STEM graduate work or careers. The influence of faculty mentors as well as
other social, academic, and professional connections will also be assessed for
effectiveness in retention and STEM persistence. Findings will be disseminated
regarding the effectiveness of support services, social adjustment, and summer
research experience in assisting Pell-eligible students who are provided
financial relief through this S-STEM project.