* 1742170
* Recruitment, Engagement, and Retention: Energizing and Supporting Students with Diverse Backgrounds in Mechanical Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Deepa Madan, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 08/31/2023
* USD 991,618.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project is
providing support to low-income students with demonstrated financial need and
academic promise to succeed in mechanical engineering at University of Maryland,
Baltimore County (UMBC). STEM industries face a looming challenge and
opportunity as skilled baby boomers begin to retire and leave the workforce.
Recognizing current and future needs for a diverse skilled workforce in
mechanical engineering and the rising cost of higher education that acts as a
barrier for many talented students with interests in engineering, this S-STEM
Track 2 (Design and Development: Single Institution) project focuses resources
and research on financial support coupled with curricular and co-curricular
activities designed to facilitate student degree attainment, career development,
and employability in STEM-related jobs. To support student efforts to earn
baccalaureate degrees in mechanical engineering at UMBC, approximately forty-
five academically talented undergraduate students with demonstrated financial
need, including students transferring from Maryland community colleges, will
receive scholarship support of up to $6,000 per year for up to four years.
Scholarship recipients will participate in an integrated set of activities
designed to support their success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recognizing the
potential of engineering to address societal issues, the project engages
students in undergraduate research experiences that apply mechanical and bio-
engineering approaches to solve human problems associated with aging. The
project builds on an established partnership between the UMBC and Maryland
community colleges to improve and investigate the transfer experience of
community college students to four-year programs, student retention at UMBC, and
job placement and pathways to graduate school and employment. A mixed-method
quantitative and qualitative research study will examine the implementation and
outcomes of proactive recruitment; participation in selected high impact
practices, such as orientation, one-to-one faculty mentoring, peer mentoring,
and community building; participation in research-focused activities, such as
research seminars and undergraduate research experiences; and participation in
career and professional development activities. The project will examine and
compare outcomes, such as retention, graduation, and success, of students
participating in project activities to the outcomes of peers not participating
in project supports and activities.