* 1742904
* Development of Functionalized Membranes to Enhance Antibody Sequencing and Screening
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2017,08/31/2018
* Merlin Bruening, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2018
* USD 246,167.00

With with award, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division of
Chemistry is supporting Professors Merlin Bruening and Xuefei Huang at Michigan
State University to create new methods to isolate particular antibodies and
determine their sequences. Antibodies are attractive as therapeutic agents due
to their specificity, but despite their growing medicinal importance,
development and characterization of new antibodies is arduous and expensive.
This work aims to simplify antibody development by capturing only the strongest-
binding natural antibodies from a mixture and then sequencing these antibodies
to enable their synthesis for future investigations or applications. These
studies will also develop methods to identify antibody modifications for quality
control. The project will involve high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students. Additionally, incorporation of research concepts, advanced mass
spectrometry, and surface analysis techniques into the undergraduate and
particularly graduate curricula is planned. A workshop for high school teachers
will focus on protein analysis by MS to further expand the impact of this
effort, while internships for minority undergraduate and high school students
should contribute to increasing the number of underrepresented students entering
the research pipeline.

Technically, this project explores membrane-based antibody digestion to control
the size of proteolytic peptides and enhance both characterization and
sequencing of antibodies using mass spectrometry (MS). Immobilization of
proteases such as pepsin in the pores of membranes creates enzymatic reactors,
and because protease-containing membranes are only 100 microns thick, high flow
rates through membranes give msec digestion times. The research examines whether
combining large peptides from msec digestions and small peptides from longer
digestions facilitates detection of protein modifications, determination of the
location of these modifications, and arrangement of peptides for protein
sequencing. Unlike other digestion methods, membrane-based digestion yields long
and short peptides with the same enzyme so the molecular masses of short
peptides add to give the masses of long peptides. This should lead to a unique
and effective method for arranging peptides in a protein sequence based on the
relationships between masses of these large and small peptides. Subsequent MS/MS
analysis of large and small peptides is expected to give almost complete amino
acid coverage for the antibody sequence. Moreover, the large peptides from
inexpensive digestion with pepsin-modified membranes will facilitate
characterization of antibody oxidation, glycosylation, and deamidation, even in
mixtures. Importantly, digestion in pepsin-containing membranes is inexpensive
and occurs at low pH to minimize antibody degradation. These studies will also
examine whether porous membranes containing antigens can isolate a few tight- or
rapid-binding antibodies from a polyclonal mixture. Compared to bead-based
methods for isolation, membranes offer lower dead volume, less non-specific
adsorption, and finer control of binding times and rinsing to potentially
facilitate rapid identification of a few antibodies from a polyclonal mixture.
Subsequent sequencing will enable antibody synthesis and application. Thus, the
techniques explored in this research may eventually lead to methods for
discovering and sequencing antibodies from immunized or infected animals.