* 1742900
* Advancing and Representing Research Across the Spectrum of Mechanics Nationally and Internationally: The U.S. National Committee on Theoretical and Applied Mechanics
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Aida Sztein, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2022
* USD 384,274.00

This award supports the U.S. Committee on Theoretical and Applied Mechanics
(USNC/TAM), organized and supported by the National Academy of Sciences (NAS).
The committee will represent the U.S. in the International Union of Theoretical
and Applied Mechanics (IUTAM) and serve as a focal point to chart future
priorities in mechanics based research, applications and education. USNC/TAM
promotes new research directions and provides opportunities and experiences for
both practitioners and early career faculty in the field of mechanics. USNC/TAM
will encourage, foster and facilitate activities that engage U.S. scientists and
engineers domestically and internationally. The Committee also advances the
economic competitiveness of the U.S. through a comprehensive series of
activities that focus on diverse groups such as early career researchers.
Interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary research and an improvement in racial
and gender diversity of the committee are additional foci for this effort. Thus,
through these efforts, USNC/TAM will promote the progress of the field of
mechanics; advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare; and secure the
national defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the core functions of
the USNC/TAM including IUTAM dues, travel support to the biannual IUTAM General
Assemblies, and support for an annual USNC/TAM committee meeting. Specific
opportunities to be enabled by the Committee include the U.S. National
Congresses of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics, National Academies' workshops,
IUTAM and AmeriMech symposia, travel experiences, and mentoring breakfasts for
early career researchers. The Committee will also reach out to diverse
communities through videos in YouTube and Vimeo, social media announcements,
professional society newsletters, and livestreaming
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.