* 1742849
* Unlocking Efficiencies in Earthmoving for Future Infrastructure: Modeling Plowing and Cutting Processes in Soils
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Paul Umbanhowar, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2019
* USD 191,205.00

This investigation will advance the understanding of how soils are mechanically
moved and shaped through interaction with earthmoving tools and machinery.
Humans move enormous quantities of soil for civil construction, mining, and
agriculture, but our knowledge of the physical processes by which machines
interact with soils is surprising limited. This project will generate a new
class of computational models for simulating fundamental earthmoving processes.
In parallel, an experimental program completed at small scale in the laboratory
will provide physical insights and the high-quality data necessary to assess the
models. This exploratory research will form the basis for future long-term
studies on the optimization and automation of earthmoving machinery, enabling
new, potentially radical, machine designs and techniques. Considering the scale
at which humans move earth in US and the rest of the world, even the smallest
breakthroughs leading to greater efficiency and increased productivity will have
profound long-term effects with respect to reducing costs, improving production
times, and reducing energy consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
specifically develop and validate mechanics-based models for plowing and cutting
processes in soils. As exploratory research intended to expand into broader
studies examining a wide variety of machine configurations and soils types,
focus is on dry granular materials, elementary tool shapes, and relatively
simple tool motions. Specific research objectives are (1) to formulate a new
class of theoretical models based on the kinematic approach of plasticity theory
and (2) to inform and validate these models by conducting a series of
preliminary experiments in a new facility at Northwestern University utilizing a
fluidized bed for sample preparation and a fully instrumented 6-axis robotic
armature for actuation and force measurement. The theoretical models are
premised on a new paradigm for modeling processes involving large deformation,
and will be the first to predict the complete history of forces and deformations
rigorously and efficiently, potentially achieving the high levels of efficiency
necessary for machine optimization and automation. This research will quantify,
precisely and definitively, complete force and deformation histories for
characteristic geometries and materials, laying the groundwork for a long-term
research program aimed at exploring innovative designs and techniques for
earthmoving in civil construction, mining, and agriculture.