* 1742714
* Group Travel Grant for the Doctoral Consortium of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Adriana Kovashka, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 05/31/2018
* USD 20,000.00

This grant partially supports the participation of students from US institutions
in the Doctoral Consortium at the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR) 2017 in Honolulu, Hawaii. CVPR is the premier annual
conference in computer vision with over 2000 senior, junior and student
participants. It is held in North America and attended by members of the
international research community. The broader impacts of this project include
supporting the career development of some of the brightest junior researchers in
computer vision, contributing to the research community in general by drawing
attention to an important aspect of graduate student development, potentially
increasing the number of active researchers and educators in STEM, and ensuring
that the computer vision community, through its recent graduates, makes fast
advances in solving problems that will benefit society as a whole. The Doctoral
Consortium aims to have representation from a diverse group of participants in
terms of gender, ethnic background, academic institution, and geographic
location. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF support covers some of the costs for 15
selected US-based graduate students to attend the conference. Participants and
recipients of travel support are selected by the 2017 CVPR Doctoral Consortium
co-chairs. The Doctoral Consortium provides opportunities for senior PhD
students to highlight their work, and to discuss their research and career
options with faculty and researchers who have relevant expertise and experience.
The opportunity to receive advice on their research work and career plans from
experts from different institutions, and with potentially different
perspectives, is often not available internally at one's own institution. This
year's Doctoral Consortium features a poster session, one-on-one mentoring, and
panel discussion. The last of these components was introduced in last year's
event and was well-received.