* 1742694
* The Sci-Tech Scholars Enrichment Project
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2023
* Nicholas Luke, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 03/31/2023
* USD 999,995.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (S-STEM) program, the SciTech Scholars Enrichment Project will
support high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial need at
North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, a Historically Black
College &amp; University (HBCU). This S-STEM Track 2 project will focus on
understanding the factors that nurture minority participation in the STEM
workforce. SciTech will award 100 scholarships over five years to undergraduate
students majoring in physics, mathematics, chemistry, and electronics
technology, all of which are areas of national need. This project will address a
persistent challenge in STEM education: understanding which activities and
interventions will produce the most efficient pipeline-building strategies. This
project has the potential to increase and diversify the STEM workforce, deepen
knowledge about the challenges faced by underprivileged STEM students at an
HBCU, and develop the teaching skills of future underrepresented minority
faculty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SciTech Scholars aims to increase the number and
graduation rate of students majoring in physics, mathematics, chemistry, and
electronics technology. It also aims to prepare the students to successfully
embark on graduate studies or enter the STEM workforce. SciTech Scholars will
employ student-centered active learning classroom activities, increased hands-on
curricula, and a focus on positive encouragement rather than on perceived
student deficiencies. The institutional goal of the project has two parts: 1)
develop and test a model for student success that can be used across the
University to mentor underrepresented minority students in STEM; and 2) identify
methods that support the development of students, both minority and non-minority
groups, for STEM-related graduate programs or the STEM workforce. The project
will recruit twenty academically talented low-income students enrolled in
physics, mathematics, chemistry, and electronics technology each year for five
years. It will employ a program model that exposes students to research early in
the curriculum, incorporates study groups, and involves department chairs and
faculty in all aspects of the program, including recruitment, teaching,
mentoring research as well as special events and activities. The model will be
coupled with a living learning community and support for student-centered active
learning. By studying the experiences, challenges, and successes of SciTech
participants, the project aims to advance the knowledge needed to design and
develop solutions to critical gaps from matriculation to
graduation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.