* 1742506
* Developing Intensive Opportunities for Physics, Chemistry and Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Carl Faust, Susquehanna University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 07/31/2023
* USD 958,254.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project will provide scholarships to 20 high-
achieving, low-income students with financial need who are pursuing bachelor's
degrees in Physics, Chemistry, or Biology at Susquehanna University. In addition
to programming that supports the success of these students, the project will
include a series of roundtable discussions between students and industry. The
project will also develop a tele-mentoring program to connect scholarship
recipients with industry mentors, which can positively affect student success
and help align STEM education with STEM workforce needs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will recruit and provide scholarships to 20
STEM students with financial need, and seeks to graduate 20 scholarship
recipients by the end of year five. It is expected that 90% of the students will
either be accepted into a graduate program or enter the workforce in their STEM
major within eight months of graduation. The project will develop specific
programming tailored to the scholarship recipients, including an
interdisciplinary summer bridge program, a dedicated section of the Susquehanna
Perspectives course, access to summer research opportunities, a STEM-based unit
within the Center for Academic Achievement, and an interdisciplinary seminar
course that includes interaction with industry mentors and other invited
speakers. The project will also conduct a series of roundtable discussions with
local and regional workforce organizations, such as the Central Pennsylvania
Workforce Development Board, to better align STEM workforce needs with the
supply of STEM majors. The tele-mentoring program will pair students with
industry mentors in the Pittsburgh and Philadelphia metropolitan areas. Rather
than meeting in person, the mentor and mentee will connect monthly via Skype or
other means once a month to discuss topics including the student's program of
study, research experiences, and strategies the mentor has relied upon for
success in industry. Tele-mentoring programs such as the one proposed are
necessary to connect students at rural institutions, such as Susquehanna
University, with industry partners at more distant locations. The success of the
industry roundtable discussions and tele-mentoring program will be measured with
a combination of open-ended interviews and periodic surveys, both of which will
focus on the students' and industry partners' sense of the quality of
information exchanged and the STEM students' preparedness to enter industry or a
graduate program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.