* 1742366
* Collaborative Research: Institutional Collaboration to Recruit, Retain and Graduate Low-Income Students in Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Tracy Parkinson, Coker College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 12/31/2023
* USD 2,156,977.00

Coker College, College of Saint Elizabeth, Ferrum College, Keuka College, Mercy
College, and Thomas University will partner with the Yes We Must Coalition to
implement a carefully planned and assessed series of activities with the
intention of increasing the persistence of a large and diverse cohort of low-
income students majoring in Biology across these six institutions. This NSF
Scholarship in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) Track 3
project will contribute new information to the knowledge base regarding factors
that affect retention and STEM degree attainment of low-income students. By
creating cross-institutional partnerships between Biology students, faculty,
project coordinators and external scientists, it will create a stronger network
of support and scientific identity for the STEM scholars. This collaborative
project will help increase the recruitment, persistence and graduation rate of
STEM scholars and increase matriculation into a STEM-related graduate program or
field of employment.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This S-STEM project builds on
activities and best practices developed by each of the six collaborating
institutions while implementing and assessing new activities including: (1)
CATALYST, a "Jumpstart"-inspired program with a particular focus on helping
students develop a sense of community and belonging; (2) an integrated first-
year experience including a STEM-based first-year seminar, advising, and peer-
assisted study sessions for gateway science classes; (3) intrusive advising and
a faculty/peer mentors program where each student will be matched with a
dedicated STEM faculty member and peer STEM mentor; (4) continuing hands-on
research or project-based learning under faculty mentorship; (5) seminar series
by scientists during which students will meet working professionals in STEM
fields; (6) graduate school and career preparation through an intensive series
of workshops and cohort activities to educate students about STEM career and
graduate school opportunities; and (7) an annual institute that will bring the
cohort of students and teams from the six collaborating institutions together
organized by the Yes We Must Coalition. This last component will feature
research conducted by the STEM Scholars, in addition to workshops designed to
increase student success. The impact of all these activities on enrollment,
retention, graduation, and post-graduate placement rates at the participating
institutions will be examined. Formative and summative project evaluation and
assessment will employ mixed methods including collection of student data,
surveys, interviews, and focus groups. By addressing the project's central
research question, what factors contribute to success of low-income students in
Biology, new information will be added to the research literature specific to
low-income students. The study will control for mediating effects of race,
ethnicity and first-generation status by comparing the cohort of STEM scholars
to current non-Pell eligible STEM students, in addition to historical data
across the institutions participating in the collaborative research project. An
additional feature of this project is that it will provide a scalable model of a
geographically far-flung, multi-institutional S-STEM collaborative project.