* 1742807
* Electron-Rich Oxide Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Huixin He, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2022
* USD 541,455.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: From catalysis to photovoltaics, metal oxide surfaces
are commonplace elements of materials design. Metal oxides can be used as
supports for catalysts. In photovoltaics, they constitute electrode materials. A
trend in current research efforts is to find inexpensive modifications to metal
oxides so that specific properties of the complex material can be obtained. This
strategy is particularly relevant to the catalysis industry, in which the oxide
support can be orders of magnitude less expensive than the catalyst. Enabled by
state-of-the-art, high-throughput computer simulations and imaging/spectroscopy
techniques, this project aims at finding energy-efficient and inexpensive
modifications to oxides that can alter their electronic behavior to become
electron rich. Electron richness is an interesting property of materials which
can be used to boost catalyst performance as well as photovoltaic function.
Research is carried out by training graduate and undergraduate students under
the supervision of the PI and co-PI. Graduates typically find employment in the
New Jersey chemical industry. This project contributes to a summer outreach
program that trains high school students from low-income backgrounds in
materials modeling and imaging. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The
goal of the project is to devise simplified ceramic engineering processes to
fabricate electron-rich gamma aluminum oxide (alumina) and titanium oxide
(titania) surfaces. The goal is to achieve a high-level, atomistic understanding
of dopants' local environment and stability when it is surrounded by an
environment as complex as a partially hydrated oxide surface. Scientific
investigations will involve a combination of quantum-mechanical calculations
based on periodic density functional theory and materials synthesis, imaging,
and spectroscopy. Alumina and titania nanoparticles of different sizes are being
doped with phosphorus and nitrogen with the aim of placing the dopant in
subsurface sites. In this way, interaction with atmospheric oxygen is inhibited.
The combination of homogenous vs. surface-only doping and varying nanoparticle
size are providing a clearer picture of the role of the bulk on the persistence
of surface states and surface electron richness. On the theory side, high-
throughput calculations are analyzing a large number of possible configurations
of the alumina and titania surfaces, dopant location, and hydration level.