* 1742833
* I-Corps: Development and application of metabolite-based flavor prediction methods
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Matias Kirst, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 11/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to apply
innovative statistical methods of trait prediction to improve flavor in the
agricultural, beverage and food industries. In conjunction with a growing
societal concern about food safety and quality, there has been an increasing
interest in developing food products that have enhanced flavor. Because many of
the compounds that determine flavor are also associated with health benefits,
increasing their content can also have other positive consequences. The
development and commercial application of methods that predict and improve the
flavor properties of food products will have a significant impact in an industry
that is constantly seeking to increase consumer appeal of their products. In
addition, the generation of large databases that relate flavor with the presence
of specific compounds will be used to identify new additives for the food
industry. These favorable compounds can be potentially commercialized as a
flavor enhancing additives.

This I-Corps project aims at determining the commercial potential of new
approaches developed to predict flavor and consumer appeal of food products
using statistical methods, and identify those flavor-related compounds that are
most valuable to the food industry. Food texture, flavor and odor are determined
by chemical (e.g. volatiles) and physical properties, of which many can be
quantified by mass spectrometry. By characterizing these compounds, innovative
statistical Bayesian methods can be used to account for their combined effects
in consumer appeal. As a consequence, it is possible to predict in advance how
new products will perform in the market based on their individual profile.
Despite the clear relevance of flavor to consumer preference and many of their
well-described health benefits, many industries have been largely unable to
incorporate these traits into their products. The approaches developed here will
fill that gap. This innovation permits rapid, low-cost and high-throughput
identification of cultivars that are most probable to be favored by consumers,
without the need to establish costly, low-throughput consumer or expert flavor
panels.