* 1742463
* Retaining and Inspiring students in Science and Engineering (RISE)
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Paul Plotkowski, Grand Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, the Retaining and
Inspiring Students in Science and Engineering (RISE) program at Grand Valley
State University (GVSU) will create a set of progressively increasing four-year
scholarships for at least 50 low-income, academically talented students who have
identified an interest in pursuing a science or engineering major. RISE will
immerse scholarship recipients in a cohort with faculty mentors to provide a
robust support network and experiential learning opportunities, including summer
research and internships, which have been shown to improve retention and
graduation rates through disciplinary socialization. As participation in
research experiences has been shown to increase interest in pursuing graduate
degrees, particularly for underrepresented and low-income students, RISE can
help address the lack of diversity in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) programs. Through an in-depth evaluation, the RISE program
will investigate structures of the program that help support student retention
and graduation as well as career paths for scholars; student perceptions of the
value of various elements of the RISE program (cohort, extracurricular
experiences, co-curricular activities, and research/internship experiences); and
the barriers to graduation for this group of academically talented, low-income
students. Additionally, the project will study the (1) impact of experiential
learning. (2) impact of repeated experiences (co-op) vs. single experience
(summer internship), (3) role of experiential learning experience in
socialization of students into STEM disciplines and careers and transfer from
college to the workplace, and (4) ease of transfer of community college students
into STEM programs at the university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on
a prior successful S-STEM program by incorporating additional evidence-based
curricular and extracurricular student supports including early engagement with
faculty mentors, expanding research-based experiential learning opportunities in
STEM disciplines, and extending the successful GVSU paid industry co-
op/internship experiential learning model in engineering and computing to all
sciences. Required co-curricular seminars and extracurricular activities will
assist RISE scholars in investigating the breadth of career opportunities in
science and engineering and prepare them for research, co-op, or internship
experiences, which will help them make informed decisions about their career
paths. A new Introduction to Research course, analogous to the Co-op Preparation
course currently part of the engineering curriculum, will be developed as part
of this program and will continue to be taught after the program ends. The
project team will collaborate with area community colleges (CC) with 25 total
scholarships designated for students transferring from Grand Rapids Community
College (GRCC), Northwestern Michigan College (NMC) and Ottawa Intermediate
School District (OAISD)/Muskegon Community College (MCC) early college program.
CC students selected as potential RISE Scholars will dual enroll in a 1-credit
prep course and engage in experiential learning opportunities during the summer
before they transfer to GVSU. Faculty at the community colleges will participate
as mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.