* 1742286
* Engineering Technology  Scholars - IMProving REtention and Student Success (ETS-IMPRESS)
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2024
* Lorelle Meadows, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 12/31/2024
* USD 999,483.00

Recognizing a national and regional need for a highly trained engineering
technology STEM workforce with baccalaureate degrees, the Engineering Technology
Scholars - IMProving Retention and Student Success (ETS-IMPRESS) project
provides financial support and an ecosystem of high-impact curricular and co-
curricular activities to increase the success of academically talented students.
With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, ETS-IMPRESS will
support a total of 12 first-time students for four years and 36 students
transferring from community colleges will be supported for two years. The goals
of the project are to (1) increase the number and diversity of students pursuing
degrees in engineering technology (first-generation, underrepresented students,
women, and veterans); (2) add to the body of knowledge regarding best practices
in Engineering Technology and promote employment; and (3) contribute to the
literature on self-efficacy. Located at Michigan Technological University, ETS-
IMPRESS brings together programs in engineering technology that are offered
through the School of Technology and programs in the Pavlis Honors College, an
inclusive and unique college designed around high-impact educational practices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ETS-IMPRESS project provides a unique opportunity to
engage academically talented engineering technology students in activities
designed to foster leadership, technical know-how, and employability skills for
technology fields that actively recruit and employ graduates from diverse
backgrounds and communities. By focusing on a broad range of students, the
project will investigate the relationship between student characteristics and
student success through (1) a mixed-methods pre/post research design that
examines differences in motivation, self-efficacy and professional skills and
(2) a matched cohort comparison study of transfer students that examines
participation/non-participation in engineering technology programs of study with
honors' college elective programming.