* 1742644
* CAREER: Genetic and Molecular Mechanisms of Parasite Infection in Insects
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Jun Li, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 05/31/2021
* USD 391,716.00

Many parasites require obligatory insect hosts as part of their life cycle.
Understanding the biology of host-parasite interactions, particularly at the
genetic and molecular levels of analysis, is an important area of basic research
because we lack an understanding of the principles of these interactions.
Parasites with insect hosts must overcome insect innate immune defenses to be
able to complete their life cycles, including development in the host and
transmission. The molecular mechanisms underlying these interactions, and the
genetic basis for variation in these interactions, are not fully understood.
This project focuses on understanding host-parasite interactions in the mosquito
Anopheles gambiae and the malaria-causing parasite Plasmodium falciparum to gain
improved understanding of fundamental host-parasite interactions. The
investigator has linked some host genetic variation with variation in the number
of parasite life stages in the host, indicating variable immunity among
individual insect hosts and therefore potentially differential ability to
transmit the parasite. This researcher has developed a novel, computational
approach to identify additional host genes associated with parasite infection,
which enables the investigation of such genetic variation in immunity to
parasites in natural populations of An. Gambiae, which can be more informative
than studies in laboratory populations. The investigator will employ modern
genomic, biochemical and computational methods in this study. This project will
improve our knowledge base about the genetic basis of, and the molecular
mechanisms of insect innate immunity against parasites, and more generally host-
parasite interactions. An important broader scientific and societal impact of
this study is improved understanding of the specific mosquito-parasite system
that causes the disease malaria, which causes suffering and death in millions of
people each year.

Genetic analyses have demonstrated that genetic variation in Anopheles gambiae
is associated with the number of Plasmodium oocysts in mosquitoes. Identifying
the genes associated with variation in infection intensity and understanding how
they function are important in decoding the genetic and molecular basis of
insect-parasite interaction. Targeting these genes will lead to novel approaches
in controlling parasite transmission. However, it is difficult to determine
causative mutations from ~300 million base pairs and ~15,000 genes in the
mosquito genome using traditional approaches. In a recent, significant finding,
the Principal Investigator and co-workers used a novel computational approach
and identified approximately 1% of the An. gambiae genome that is enriched with
genes related to P. falciparum infection in mosquitoes. This research project is
aimed at analysis of these newly identified genomic regions to elucidate
molecular mechanisms of insect-parasite interaction using the well-characterized
An. gambiae populations and P. falciparum parasites from western Kenya. Direct
association studies will be systematically conducted to detect genetic
variations associated with P. falciparum infection intensity in wild A. gambiae
populations from Africa. Then the relative role of the candidate mosquito genes
on parasite invasion will be determined under laboratory conditions and in the
wild in Africa. Finally, the molecular mechanisms of candidate genes will be
investigated. The combination of computational approaches, molecular functional
analyses in the laboratory, and field entomology studies is a very powerful set
of tools to address insect-parasite interactions. This CAREER project will
integrate research and education from K-12 to graduate students, locally,
nationally and internationally. K-12 students and teachers will have
opportunities to learn and participate in genomics research with the
investigators in this study. Seminars on insect-parasite interactions will be
provided in local schools and universities. The educational seminars will also
be given to the communities in Kenya where P. falciparum infection is endemic.
While undergraduate and graduate students play important roles in the research,
the research program also provides materials and resources for education in
classrooms. Ultimately, an outstanding research program coupled with an
excellent genomics curriculum will be established.