* 1742837
* Lehigh-Harvard Geometry and Topology Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Huai-Dong Cao, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 04/30/2023
* USD 41,150.00

This award provides partial support for meetings of the Lehigh-Harvard
Conference on Geometry and Topology, to be held during 2017-2018 at Harvard
University (2017) and Lehigh University (2018). The main purpose of the
conference is to bring leading researchers of national and international stature
in geometry and topology to present their latest work, to discuss the forefront
of these fields, and to interact with other mathematicians from the region and
around the country. In this way, it provides a great platform to promote
research and advance knowledge in the fields of geometry and topology. The
Lehigh-Harvard conference also makes it possible for the community of geometers
and topologists from the region and around the country to learn the most recent
developments, to meet with each other and to share mathematics. Through the
participation of the conference, graduate students, post-doctoral scholars and
members of under-represented groups are exposed to exciting research in geometry
and topology and have the chance to interact with experts in the fields. When
the conference is held at Lehigh, in addition to invited talks, considerable
time is set aside for 40-minute contributed talks (in parallel sessions) by the
participants, and a large percentage of such talks in the past have been
presented by graduate students, postdocs and women mathematicians. The invited
speakers and other senior researchers also attend these contributed talks, and
they provide excellent feedback to the speakers, especially for junior faculty
and graduate students. In this way, the Lehigh conference provides an excellent
opportunity for graduate students and recent PhDs to present their own research.

The 2017 Conference on Geometry and Topology will take place at Harvard
University from April 28 to May 2, 2017. It will feature a total of 33 invited
talks by leading experts in many diverse areas of geometry, topology, and
related fields: differential and symplectic geometry, algebraic and complex
geometry, geometric analysis and geometric flows, geometric topology,
mathematical physics, theoretical physics, etc. The conference will highlight
some of the most exciting progress in geometry and topology in recent years. The
scope and the large number of distinguished speakers makes this conference
unique. Participation is open, and there is no registration fee. Graduate
students, recent PhDs, and members from underrepresented groups are especially
encouraged to participate and to apply for support. The 2018 Lehigh Geometry and
Topology Conference will concentrate on geometric flows. More specifically, the
3-4 day conference, in June of 2018, will invite 6 to 8 top experts to give
plenary lectures which will survey recent significant developments in the field
of geometric flows. In addition to contributed talks by participants in
geometric flows, there will also be background lectures for graduate students
and recent PhDs.

More information about the Lehigh-Harvard Conference on Geometry and Topology
can be found at the following websites: http://www.math.harvard.edu/jdg/
http://www.lehigh.edu/~dlj0/geotop.html