* 1742158
* Combining Academic Support and Service Learning to Support Success of Undergraduates in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics Fields
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2024
* David Speckhard, Loras College
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 04/30/2024
* USD 649,065.00

The NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) program supports the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-
income students pursuing STEM degrees. In this project, Loras College will award
scholarships of up to $10,000 per year to high-achieving students with
demonstrated financial need. The awards are renewable up to three times and the
college anticipates supporting two groups of 9-10 students throughout the five
years of the project. To support student success, the principal investigator
(PI) team will coordinate a suite of academic support services together with
community-based service learning opportunities. By building such opportunities
into its curriculum, Loras College seeks to help southern Iowa, and the Nation
more broadly, recruit and graduate additional STEM students. These graduates can
contribute to critical regional and national workforce demands.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to provide financial, academic, career
planning, and social support for students considering STEM degrees, in concert
with creating a cohort model and community-based learning opportunities. The
project's twin pedagogical approaches (academic support services and the
community-based learning model) have proven successful at other institutions.
However, this project is innovative in implementing and assessing this
combination of approaches. Scholarship recipients will enroll in a series of
one-credit courses designed to develop their scientific identities. Through
these courses, students will participate in activities to support two critical
transitions: from high-school to college and from college into the workforce.
Academic support will include mentoring by engaged faculty, peer support, and
training in academic success skills, such as time management, test taking
strategies, and studying approaches. The project will also provide social
support through professional events, shared community events, and bridging
activities. Finally, the investigators will organize tours of local industry and
group community-based research and design projects. Effectiveness of this
program will be evaluated using survey and quantitative data. The educational
resources and research results will be disseminated through regional and
national publications, in presentations at professional meetings, and at annual
reports to NSF and the college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.