* 1742369
* Collaborative Research: Integrating Computational Making Practices in STEM Teaching
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* James Adler, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie Teasley
* 08/31/2022
* USD 621,201.00

This project will create and implement a professional development program for
7th-12th grade teachers to help them integrate computational practice into
physics, biology, and mathematics classes. A design principle of disciplinary
computational making practice is used to create making spaces in which science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) content is linked to
computational thinking though modeling ants (3D paper folding), microbes
(complex systems), and automobile air bags (engineering practices). Students
will be participants in the second phase of project as teachers and students
will co-make projects that address issues in the local community. The project is
funded by the STEM+Computing program, which seeks to address emerging challenges
in computational STEM areas through the applied integration of computational
thinking and computing activities within disciplinary STEM teaching and learning
in early childhood education through high school&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is guided by two research questions about the ways in which mathematics
and science teachers learn about integrating computational practices into their
classrooms. The project will focus on disciplinary computational making
practices: physical computing and digital fabrication activities inherent to
many modern making spaces as a form of computational practice. Computation is
central to disciplinary practices in mathematics and science and the recognition
of the importance of computational thinking in K-12 education is growing with
making emerging as a powerful context for learning. The study will focus on the
degree to which three dimensions of learning for teachers (learning through
disciplinary practice, attention to students' and their own ways of knowing, and
interdisciplinary inquiry into problems of practice) influence the professional
learning of mathematics and science teachers as they incorporate computational
making into teaching.