* 1742760
* EAGER: Deploying the Colorado State University (CSU) SEA-POL Radar to SPURS-2
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2018
* Steven Rutledge, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 06/30/2018
* USD 150,000.00

The goal of this project is to support the deployment of the newly developed
C-band Doppler, polarization radar on the research vessel (R/V) Roger Revelle to
support the SPURS-2 cruise, to be conducted in the eastern tropical Pacific
intertropical convergence zone (ITCZ) near 10N-125W from mid-October to mid-
November 2017. SEA-POL will mark the first deployment of a polarimetric Doppler
radar to study tropical convection from a ship platform. The project seeks to
gain new insights into tropical deep cloud formations including how these deep
clouds (called "convection") respond to sea surface temperature (SST) changes
and the modulation of ITCZ convection by Easterly Waves. Soundings launched from
the ship will be used to characterize the environmental convective available
potential energy (CAPE) and shear to provide important context for the radar
measurements. New ideas will be explored on spectral processing of the received
radar signals to suppress sea clutter.

The most important features of this EAGER project are that: (i) it provides a
seaborne polarimetric radar platform (previously tested on land) deployed on an
ocean field campaign (SPURS-2), (ii) will provide unprecedented observations of
cloud microphysical processes in both tropical convection and stratiform cloud
structures, and (iii) the field study will verify stated goals of the previously
funded NSF MRI project to develop the SEA-POL radar. This project supports the
creation of rain maps to support the science team during the SPURS-2 deployment
at sea. Rainfall data will be used in conjunction with other onboard experiments
from the same research vessel and to validate satellite estimates of ocean
salinity. The results of this field campaign will be of interest to the radar
community and, more broadly, to those interested in the microphysical processes
of clouds and rainfall at sea ? particularly associated with the ITCZ. This
project will also fund the training of one postdoctoral research scientist and a
graduate student.