* 1742845
* EAGER: Collaborative: Understanding and Modeling Rumor Propagation for Vulnerability Assessment of Social Media Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Michael Stefanone, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2020
* USD 230,000.00

As social media becomes a primary news source, rumors can spread widely in a
short time. In recent cases, the rapid spread of misinformation caused social
panic, had a dramatic financial impact, and put individuals and communities at
great risk. Even when correct information is eventually disseminated, large
delays can have devastating consequences. To determine how vulnerable networks
are to misinformation spread, and to develop effective proactive and reactive
counter-measures, it is necessary to study rumor propagation. However, rumor
propagation is challenging to model and capture due to its dynamic complexity
and self-sustaining nature.

The rapid diffusion of rumors across online social networks is influenced by
numerous factors from both local (user forwarding behavior) and global (network
diffusion) perspectives. Diffusion depends on each user's local decision about
whether to propagate the information or not. That decision is related to factors
including trust relationships, information provenance, and content. Diffusion
also depends on the global topology of networks, how users are interconnected,
as well as the rate at which users propagate the content. From this global point
of view, characterizing rumor propagation across networks requires accurate yet
tractable mathematical models of diffusion. This project investigates rumor
diffusion via social media from these two perspectives. The integration of
social psychological and computer science methodologies in this project reveals
propagation patterns in large-scale networks and the psychological motivations
driving user behavior. This project contributes to better monitoring, detection,
and ultimately prevention of the propagation of misinformation that undermines
social stability and national security. Research and training opportunities are
offered to students across multiple fields, including computer science,
engineering, and social science.