* 1742147
* MCC STEM Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Jack Brzezinski, McHenry County College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 03/31/2024
* USD 650,000.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, McHenry County College
(MCC) will provide scholarships and evidence-based support services to
academically talented low-income students pursuing and completing STEM degrees.
Three goals animate the design of this project. The first is to increase the
diversity of students pursuing STEM disciplines. The second is to increase
retention and completion of the MCC STEM Scholars. The third is to generate
knowledge about specific ways project activities and other relevant factors
influence the educational experiences and success of the scholarship recipients.
Towards these goals the project's principal investigators will carry out a
holistic and systematic range of activities. Such activities will include on-
site outreach and recruitment efforts at area high schools with significant
minority and low-income populations, on-going individual and cohort-based
experiences designed to promote retention and student success, and embedded
knowledge-generating efforts guided by a partnership between MCC and university
researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although community colleges possess a large
pool of potential STEM talent, greater supports are needed to ensure that they
can place their students on a promising path toward success, especially low-
income students. Recent evidence has suggested that holistic, rather than
singular approaches to student support offer greater benefits to community
college student retention and completion. At the same time, while research has
demonstrated the positive impact of multiple services and supports on community
college student success, there remains limited evidence on precisely how and why
such approaches work. Exploring such efforts can help identify the most
effective strategies to improve student persistence and completion in STEM. This
project not only integrates a variety of supports to assist community college
students in succeeding in STEM, particularly those who are low-income and
academically talented, but also examines how such efforts work and why. The
empirical knowledge derived from the embedded research, assessment, and
evaluation will inform small (and typically under-resourced) community colleges
on how to reconcile and coordinate various institutional supports, as well as on
how to institutionalize and sustain cost-effective, collaborative efforts to
assist academically talented low-income STEM students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.