* 1742942
* HBCU-DCL EAGER: Virtually Preparing Underrepresented Students for the Engineering and Computer Science Professoriate Using Embodied Conversational Agents
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Kinnis Gosha, Morehouse College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 08/31/2020
* USD 299,882.00

Across the U. S. higher education landscape, African Americans and Hispanics are
significantly underrepresented among the engineering and computer science
faculty. Because of this trend, many African American and Hispanic students are
frequently not afforded the opportunity to develop meaningful mentoring
relationships with African Americans and Hispanics among their engineering and
computer science faculty. The overall goal of this research project is to
develop and evaluate a virtual mentoring system that uses a group of embodied
conversational agents (i.e., think avatars) to mentor underrepresented doctoral
students, majoring in engineering and computer science and who are pursuing a
career as a college professor. The virtual mentoring system will be designed to
expose underrepresented, undergraduate and graduate students in engineering and
computer science to the many opportunities available in the professoriate by
educating them about the professoriate in general and the engineering and
computer professoriate specifically. It will offer concrete guidance on the
different routes to the engineering and computer science professoriate.

In the scientific and theoretical literature, research has shown the
effectiveness of embodied conversational agents in providing career mentoring
functions. The career-related functions typically include sponsorship, exposure,
visibility, coaching, protection, and challenging assignments. With this in
mind, the proposed project will utilize exploratory, sequential mixed methods to
study the overall effectiveness of the virtual mentoring system. Project
effectiveness will be measured by using three factors: content knowledge,
attitude and preliminary indicators (i.e. applying to graduate programs or
summer research opportunities, taking the GRE, etc.). As a part of the research
project, the investigator will compare the virtual mentoring system with other
traditional mentoring programs. The proposed project is potentially
transformative, with immense potential to help diversify the engineering and
computer science professoriate.