* 1742908
* EAGER:  Exploring Cell-Cell Gap as a Critical Parameter in Biological Phase Changes
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Taher Saif, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 07/31/2020
* USD 312,204.00

Biological systems sometimes rapidly change behavior when the number of cells
becomes large enough. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
project is based on preliminary data showing that for one type of mammalian
cell, that it is the distance between the cells that triggers the different
behavior. This was observed for a particular type of muscle cell. When the cells
are 100 micrometers apart, the form into muscle "fibers" automatically. When
they are further than 100 micrometers apart, they do not. This observation will
be further examined in fibroblasts. The compression of extracellular matrix by
fibroblasts is fundamental to the healing of wounds and also to the original
morphogenesis of organs. The project will determine whether this threshold of
100 micrometers is also true for fibroblasts from mice, monkeys and humans. As a
test of the breadth of the observation, the 100 micrometer threshold will also
be tested using the Protista Dictyostelium that has the property of aggregating
into larger structures under some conditions. If the results of the experiments
are comparable among the different cell types, the project will have developed
significant support for the existence of a threshold distance for the activation
of a tissue "phase change" in the aggregation of fibroblasts and of
Dictyostelium. This could improve our understanding of a variety of conditions
where tissues apparently show a phase change in behavior including
embryogenesis, cancer tumorigenesis, in vitro tissue formation, bacterial
biofilm formation and a variety of collective phenomena in the microbial world.
Identification of critical distance conditions will help with predicting the
path of morphogenesis of 3D printed tissues with cells and extracellular matrix.
The research will be carried out by a graduate and two undergraduate students.
One of the UG students will be from the Department of Biology, the others from
Engineering. Thus, the students will be trained in multidisciplinary fields.
Special effort will be made to recruit students from minorities and under-
represented groups to conduct the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
inspired by recent experimental findings suggesting that muscle cells within 100
micrometers of each other in 3D culture compact the ECM and form myotubes (PI's
lab), endothelial cells within 100 micrometers of each other form vasculature,
fibroblasts in collagen within 100 micrometers of each other compact the
collagen. When the cell-cell gap exceeds 100 micrometers, none of these
processes occur. The hypothesis of a critical distance will be tested using
fibroblasts from multiple species (mouse, monkey and human) in a collagen matrix
mixed with fluorescent beads for optically tracking compaction and cluster
formation by slime mold cells (Dictyostelium). In order to gain insight on the
experimental observations of the threshold cell-cell gap, a mathematical model
will be created to simulate the experimental observations. Each cell remodels
the matrix around them by adhering to the matrix and by pulling the fibers as
the cell filopodia generate contractile forces. Each cell forms a zone of
remodeled matrix with higher stiffness under tension. If cells are far apart,
their zones remain independent of each other. In a system with many cells, such
non-interacting zones maintain global symmetry. When the cells are close to each
other, their zones overlap, and symmetry is broken. The stiffness between the
cells becomes higher, and the cells form a stiffer fibrous bridge between them.
More filopodia tend to extend along the bridge compared to other directions, the
cells become polarized and elongated while remaining contractile. This results
in an attractive interaction between the cells that will compact the matrix.
Three types of fibroblasts from mouse (embryonic fibroblast, NIH/3T3), monkey
(kidney fibroblasts) and human (lung) will be used to test hypothesis on matrix
compaction, and slime mold cells (Dictyostelium discoideum) will be used to test
for generality. All of these cell types have comparable size, ~ 10 micrometer in
diameter. Hence, we predict similar critical distances for all cell types.