* 1742548
* Sophomore Fellows: Cultivating New Scientists through Research, Mentoring, and Community
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* David Vanden Bout, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2023
* USD 999,976.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (S-STEM) program, the Sophomore Fellows project will support high-
achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial need at the
University of Texas at Austin. Throughout its five years of funding, this
project will fund 125 annual scholarships of up to $5,000 for sophomore students
who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in Astronomy, Biology, Biochemistry,
Chemistry, Computer Sciences, and Physics. The Sophomore Fellows project will
engage these Scholars in research projects that are situated in a community of
undergraduates, graduate students, and faculty mentors. The goal of the
Sophomore Fellows project is to increase persistence and graduation rates of
low-income students, including those from groups that are underrepresented in
STEM, while better preparing students for graduate school and scientific
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the efficacy of
coupling financial aid with intra-curricular research, faculty mentorship, and
peer mentoring activities to improve student academic growth and persistence.
Sophomore Fellows leverages the Freshman Research Initiative (FRI) in the
College of Natural Sciences at UT Austin. FRI is a community-based curriculum-
integrated program that engages undergraduate students in research. The
Sophomore Fellows project will use the existing FRI program structure, which has
been demonstrated to increase graduation rates in STEM, and will add a financial
incentive to encourage students to persist at the most common attrition point
between their first and second years. Sophomore Fellows will take courses in an
FRI research stream. A research group that includes faculty, graduate students,
and other undergraduates, will form the structure for this research experience.
It is expected that this experience will help students develop skills including
teamwork, research, writing, and oral communication. In their second semester,
Sophomore Fellows will serve as peer mentors for incoming FRI students,
amplifying the impact of these scholarships to dozens of students for every
award given.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.