* 1742159
* Fostering Equity, Support, and Community for Underrepresented STEM Students
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2024
* Rachel Thorsett, Willamette University
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 01/31/2024
* USD 646,986.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, the project entitled,
"Fostering Equity, Support, and Community for Underrepresented STEM students"
will provide support to low-income students with demonstrated financial need and
academic promise to succeed in STEM disciplines at Willamette University. The
project will fund 12 four-year scholarships over five years for STEM Scholars
who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in biology, chemistry, computer science,
pre-engineering, mathematics, or physics. As part of the program, an additional
18 additional STEM Fellows will have access to a series of academic and co-
curricular supports designed to help them achieve academic persistence and
success in STEM. These include cohort-building activities, co-enrollment in
introductory STEM courses, intensive faculty mentoring, near-peer mentoring, a
STEM-themed residential community, on-campus leadership positions, research and
internship opportunities, and targeted exposure, preparation, and planning for
STEM graduate education and career opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objectives of the STEM Scholars program include 1)
increasing the recruitment, retention, success, sense of belonging, and
graduation rates for low-income STEM students; 2) improving low-income and
underrepresented students' persistence and performance in institutionally-
defined STEM barrier courses; 3) reducing the financial burden faced by full-
time, low-income STEM students, and providing meaningful opportunities for them
to gain relevant paid academic and professional experience; 4) ensuring that
STEM students leave with a personalized plan to guide their post-baccalaureate
pursuits; and 5) improving institutional understanding of low-income, first-
generation, and historically under-represented STEM students' needs in order to
determine which evidence-based practices are best suited to be permanently
implemented at Willamette University. In conjunction with academic scholarships
for STEM scholars, targeted academic and student support interventions will be
provided to both STEM Scholars and Fellows throughout their baccalaureate
experience. Findings from this project will be made available publicly, allowing
for the sharing of best practices that will contribute to the education of
future STEM workers and leaders.