* 1742138
* Science and Integrated Language Plus Computational Thinking and Modeling with English Learners
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Eric Klopfer, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 07/31/2022
* USD 2,498,849.00

As computing has become integral to the practice of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM), the STEM + Computing Partnerships program
seeks to address emerging challenges in computational STEM areas through the
applied integration of computational thinking (CT) and computing activities
within STEM teaching and learning in early childhood education through high
school. This project is a research and development effort aimed at developing a
yearlong science curriculum aligned to the Next Generation Science Standards
(NGSS) with a focus on English learners (ELs) that integrates computational
modeling. The project will integrate computational models in online environments
using StarLogo Nova to allow all students, including ELs, to model causal
relationships that explain the studied phenomena. Plans are to enhance and
integrate StarLogo Nova, a block-based programming environment with an agent-
based simulation engine for modeling complex systems. Using the enhanced
StarLogo Nova, the project will embed CT throughout the yearlong NGSS-aligned
curriculum for students and teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
take place in Elizabeth Public Schools in Elizabeth, New Jersey (NJ), and Metro
Nashville Public Schools in Nashville, Tennessee (TN). These are two distinct
sites with diverse student populations. NJ adopted the NGSS and is currently
working out implementation plans, whereas TN represents states that have not
adopted the NGSS. The study has two main goals: (1) to investigate feasibility
of implementation of the curriculum model in classrooms; and (2) to investigate
the extent to which the curriculum promotes student learning outcomes. To
achieve the first goal in terms of feasibility of classroom implementation, the
project will examine the following research questions: (1) To what extent and
how do elementary school teachers support students' engagement in computational
modeling?; (2) To what extent and how do students engage in computational
modeling?; and (3) What design features of the curriculum and software support
students' engagement in computational modeling? Data gathering strategies will
include focus groups, field notes to document teachers' feedback, and classroom
observations, including videotaping. To achieve the second goal in terms of
student learning outcomes, the project will examine the following questions: (4)
How do students' understanding of the causal relationships underlying phenomena
evolve as they engage in physical, diagrammatic, and computational modeling over
the year?; and (5) How do students' understanding of key aspects of CT (e.g.,
abstraction, pattern generalization, representational competence,
modularization, algorithmic notions of flow of control, and conditional logic)
evolve as they engage in computational modeling over the full-year curriculum?
To measure student learning outcomes, the project will use student assessments
of science and CT. A principal outcome of this project will be a field-tested
and research-informed model that integrates (a) science learning, (b) language
learning, and (c) infusion of critical CT constructs and ideas. An external
evaluation will include formative and summative components to provide an
independent perspective on the project's work, contributions, and quality of
outcomes in terms of design critique, research audit, products review, and
collaboration assessment.