* 1742381
* Natural Science Transfer Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Jerry Caldwell, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 12/31/2023
* USD 4,998,113.00

To sustain the nation's global position in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM), institutions of higher education are investing in efforts to
increase the success, retention, and graduation of all students who pursue
baccalaureate degrees in STEM. The goal of this project is to increase the
quality and number of academically talented low-income community college
students who are preparing for STEM graduate study or the STEM workforce by
successfully transferring to a four-year institution and completing
baccalaureate degrees in STEM. Community-college students planning to transfer
to a STEM baccalaureate degree program at Michigan State University (MSU) will
be given financial assistance and will receive enhanced academic support and
professional development while completing their STEM bachelor's degrees. The
project partners Michigan State University (East Lansing, MI) with Mott
Community College (Flint, MI) and Washtenaw Community College (Ann Arbor, MI).
As students progress through their academic programs, an embedded research
component will study the factors influencing their persistence in the natural
sciences, their academic performance in science and math courses, their
graduation rates, and their aspirations to pursue careers in the natural
sciences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;During their time in the program, Natural
Science Transfer Scholars will be supported through activities such as peer and
faculty mentoring and research experiences that promote successful academic and
social integration into the campus STEM culture and enterprise. The research
component will investigate the connections between programmatic activities at
two-year college settings to their impact on students' sense of self-efficacy,
mindset, and identity. To understand the pathway from community college to four-
year programs in STEM, the project will develop a set of longitudinal case
studies of students who transfer from two-year colleges to a four-year college
in the natural sciences. The case studies will be used to inform the future
design of programs supporting students who transfer into natural science
academic programs. Ultimately, this project will increase the number of STEM
graduates and advance our nation's understanding of how to best support the
development of self-efficacy, mindset, and identity as scientists among low-
income students who transfer from two-year colleges into four-year STEM degree
programs.