* 1742815
* EAGER: Digital Inequalities in the Heartland: Exploring the Information Security Experiences of Marginalized Internet Users
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,07/31/2020
* William Staples, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to understand how Internet technology may affect patrons'
privacy and data security when they use public access computers, and to develop
technical solutions that will enable these individuals to go online more safely
and securely. The project concentrates especially on people who are economically
poor and vulnerable to risk, such as very young or old people, people of color,
immigrants, Native people, non-English speakers, and the disabled. Often these
patrons must rely on public libraries for their broadband Internet access. The
research team will study the day-to-day use patterns and security experiences of
users in the public libraries of two diverse communities in northeast Kansas,
and develop a prototype device with built-in security and privacy protections
that can be delivered using an inexpensive, portable USB-style device to help
patrons go online more safely. The researchers' goal is to enable these public-
use patrons to have the same access and protections as those using their own
computers.

Anecdotal evidence suggests that public-use Internet users may be more likely
the targets of online scams, identity theft, differential and predatory pricing,
and discriminatory profiling; the direct impact of these security risks on life
chances can be profound. To understand the security experiences of these
marginalized users, the research team will conduct ethnographic research in the
public libraries of two diverse communities in northeast Kansas. Whereas this
field research will help us develop detailed knowledge of the subjects'
activities and needs and to modify our technical strategy, we will develop, as a
starting point, a prototype with three functions: 1) password and key
protection; 2) browsing privacy and portability; and 3) fine-grained, ubiquitous
control delivered with a USB-style device. This novel and, as of now, untested,
interdisciplinary approach seeks to address fundamental knowledge shortcomings
and practical challenges in the areas of security, privacy, and trust.