* 1742930
* Lightning Initiation and In-Cloud Electromagnetic Activity in Mississippi Thunderstorms
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2022
* Maribeth Stolzenburg, University of Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Yu Gu
* 03/31/2022
* USD 345,060.00

Although much is already known about lightning flashes, we still do not
understand how a flash initiates. Somehow the initiation processes turn the non-
conducting air into a short, thin conductor or initial lightning channel; the
rest of the flash then develops from this initial channel. Researchers do not
yet fully understand exactly what physical mechanisms cause the first sparks of
a lightning flash and how those sparks transform the non-conducting air into the
highly conductive lightning channel. This study will analyze several months of
lightning data to gain new understanding of initiation processes. This project
combines an unusual suite of traditional and state-of-the-art research sensors
to advance the understanding of lightning initiation. This research has strong
societal impact through potentially improved understanding of lighting
initiation and improved lightning warning systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research seeks to analyze lightning data collected in northern Mississippi
during summer 2016 to study cloud discharge events that lead to lightning
initiation. Those events include fast positive breakdown, narrow bipolar events
(NBEs), initial electric field changes (IECs), and initial breakdown pulses
(IBPs). The novelty, and potentially transformative aspect of this new research,
is in the new data, which includes measurements from an electric field
derivative sensor and a very high frequency (VHF) sensor. The VHF sensor is
particularly suitable for studying the lightning initiating events, because
although not well understood, electrical discharges in air are known to produce
HF and VHF radiation.  The analysis will take into consideration the recent
discovery of fast positive breakdown and will investigate how fast positive
breakdown is connected to the events that follow. A similar line of research
will be conducted to study how VHF pulses affect IECs or
IBPs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.