* 1742125
* Assimilating Computational and Mathematical Thinking into Earth and Environmental Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Michelle Zhu, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,147,085.00

As computing has become integral to the practice of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM), the STEM+Computing program seeks to address
emerging challenges in computational STEM areas through the applied integration
of computational thinking and computing activities within STEM teaching and
learning in early childhood education through high school (preK-12). This
project will design, develop, and study the effects of instructional modules
that integrate computational and mathematical thinking with the Earth and
environmental sciences in grades 5-7. Three key elements of computational
thinking (computational concepts, computational practices, and computational
perspectives) will be interleaved with learning objectives in mathematics and
the sciences at a pace that is grade-level appropriate. As instructional modules
are developed and refined, the project will: (1) Monitor effects on student
learning and document changes in student reasoning about Earth and environmental
science; (2) Develop and conduct teacher professional development activities
that support integration of computational and mathematical thinking with the
Earth and environmental sciences; (3) Investigate teacher experiences and
perceptions of integrating computational thinking into instruction in order to
learn how to support teachers in engaging in these instructional practices; and
(5) Build a digital support platform to facilitate the development and use of
the instructional modules, the teacher professional development activities, and
the proposed research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will employ a design-
based research methodology focusing on continuous cycles of design, enactment,
analysis, and redesign to accomplish project objectives. The project will
develop 12 curriculum modules, four at each grade level for grades 5-7, that
will be designed around Earth and environmental themes identified by teachers.
Each module will include a set of tasks and activities for examining the
organizing theme that also engage students with various programming resources,
including Scratch, Molecular Workbench and Netlogo simulations. Project
participants will include 25 teachers and approximately 2,820 students from low-
performing schools, and the project will pursue the following objectives: (1)
Design and implement instructional modules that integrate computational and
mathematical thinking into the Earth and environmental sciences in Grades 5, 6
and 7; (2) Study and refine the instructional modules to monitor effects on
student learning; (3) Develop and conduct teacher professional development
activities that support the integration of computational and mathematical
thinking into the Earth and environmental sciences; (4) Investigate teacher
experiences and perceptions of integrating computational thinking into
instruction for the purpose of learning how to support teachers in implementing
these instructional practices; and (5) Build a digital support platform to
facilitate the development and use of the instructional modules and professional
development and the proposed research. Project research will be guided by
research questions relating to curriculum design and development, and student
outcomes. Multiple level hierarchical linear modeling will be used to analyze
assessment data from multiple treatment and comparison groups of students and
teachers. A range of student demographic data, teacher data, and school data
will be used as predictor variables of test score outcomes.