* 1742234
* Early Engagement for Entering Freshman Science Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Matthew Tarr, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 01/31/2024
* USD 999,156.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, the "Early Engagement
for Entering Freshman Science Majors" project is providing support to low-income
students with demonstrated financial need and academic promise to succeed in
STEM disciplines at the University of New Orleans. The project is funding 18
scholarships over 5 years for students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in
Computer Sciences, Chemistry, and Biological Sciences. This project will explore
learning environments to increase the persistence and graduation rates of STEM
majors at a highly diverse institution in an effort to enhance the US STEM
workforce pool. The project goals are to improve academic outcomes for STEM
students by providing a network of comprehensive support, engagement activities,
and internships/research; to increase career and graduate school success through
mentoring and career training; and to increase student confidence and
preparedness to pursue a career in a scientific field. The unique contribution
of this project arises from the testing of a combination of new and old
interventions implemented on campus that will allow the research team to infer
which work the best for persistence and graduation of students from low-income
but academically talented backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
utilize several strategies to facilitate the success of the student scholars,
including: (1) Providing comprehensive guidance by faculty mentors, peer
mentors, and existing enrollment support staff; (2) Enrolling students in common
sections of student support classes; (3) Providing comprehensive engagement
opportunities in a flexible manner, including academic year enrichment
activities; (4) Following the progress of each student and compare it with the
progress of similar students not in the S-STEM program; and (5) Using the
results of internal and external formative and summative evaluation to develop
future models for improved student success. By recruiting prospective scholars
from Upward Bound participants, local high school students from low income
backgrounds, and other qualified entering freshmen from additional locations,
this project will increase understanding of how components of this program might
have the most effect on student persistence and graduation.