* 1742373
* A Sustainable Computer Modeling Curriculum for Mastery of  Core Biology Concepts and Computational Thinking by Secondary School Students
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* S. Valenti, Hofstra University
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,611,462.00

As computing has become integral to the practice of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM), the STEM+Computing program seeks to address
emerging challenges in computational STEM areas through the applied integration
of computational thinking and computing activities within STEM teaching and
learning in early childhood education through high school (preK-12). This
project will engage high school biology teachers in developing and testing a
novel approach to integrating computational thinking with the disciplinary
content of a high school biology curriculum. The project will create a sequence
of curriculum modules that teach students computer modeling skills using an
intuitive visual programming platform as they produce applications to model
fundamental concepts in biology, such as trophic pyramids, enzyme activity,
ecological webs, genetic ratios, and biochemical cycles. These modules will be
deployed in several school districts to measure the impact of the curriculum
modules on student gains in computational thinking skills, mastery in
understanding of biological systems, and interests in STEM fields and
computation-based careers. The outcomes of this project will provide insights
into effective strategies for encouraging students from groups underrepresented
in STEM fields to succeed in STEM and computer-based education and STEM career
tracks. This project will also provide opportunities for STEM teachers to learn
about computer modeling of natural phenomena and how to integrate computational
thinking into the subjects they teach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 3-year,
design-based research project will engage high school teachers in designing,
deploying, and evaluating a modified, computation-infused high school biology
curriculum. Teachers in seven high schools will work with the project team to
iteratively develop, implement, and revise a set of curriculum modules for
teaching selected components of a general biology curriculum. The modules will
employ computer modeling exercises using MIT App Inventor, an intuitive, visual
programming environment that enables users to build apps for smartphones and
tablets. Validated measurement instruments, classroom surveys, systematic
observations, student-built applications, project team feedback, formal tests
based on in-class and out-of-class learning, and performance on New York state
exams will be used to gauge the effectiveness of the revised curriculum modules
and to test the hypotheses guiding the project. Quantitative analyses of
learning processes and outcomes will be based on longitudinal measures of
student and teacher attitude change, engagement, collaborative process,
conceptual and procedural knowledge in coding and in biology, and student
choices of STEM and computer course electives. Qualitative analyses will include
an examination of pedagogical culture within the classrooms and content analyses
of student artifacts, including in-class and homework assignments and coded
audio records of collaborative activity. The key hypotheses being tested by this
project are: (1) Students will gain greater insights into the nature of real-
world dynamic biological systems as they build abstract models and explore the
properties of these models through visual programming in the App Inventor
environment; and (2) The activity of computer modeling itself will increase
student curiosity and motivation to learn more about computer science approaches
to problem solving.