* 1742806
* Highly Thermally Conductive and Mechanically Strong Graphene Fibers: From Molecular Orientation to Macroscopic Ordering
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Jie Lian, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 387,825.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: A new type of carbon fibers assembled from two-
dimensional graphene sheets was recently developed with higher thermal
conductivity, but with inferior mechanical properties in comparison to
conventional carbon fibers. The internal structure of the graphene fibers is not
well characterized and the concomitant impact on thermal-mechanical properties
are not fully understood. This project targets fundamental understanding of the
inner fiber structure with a focus on molecular orientation and macroscopic
ordering and establishing the process-structure-property correlation. These
insights may enable the development of high performance graphene fibers and
unlock their potential for technology applications, e.g., as structural
components in fiber-reinforced composites. New fiber structures and properties,
cost-effective and environmentally-benign production, and workforce development
are critical for competitiveness in innovation and manufacturing in carbon fiber
industries. This project engages high-school, undergraduate and graduate
students in research. Special efforts are made to involve underrepresented
groups of high-school students through collaborations with local communities and
academic outreach activities (including
Summer@Rensselaer).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The proposed project
is based on the conventional wisdoms for carbon fibers in which the fiber
structure, particularly molecular orientation of graphene sheets, graphitic
domains and their macroscopic ordering determine mechanical strength, Young's
modulus, and thermal/electrical properties. To achieve a fundamental
understanding of the fiber structure and establish the process-structure-
property correlation, molecular orientation of the graphene oxide colloidal
solution and the precursor graphene oxide fiber is investigated during fluid
flow-assisted assembly. Macroscopic ordering of the graphene fibers is
controlled by post fabrication carbonization and graphitization. Their impact on
thermal-mechanical properties are being explored. By controlling the fluid flow-
assisted assembly process and optimizing fiber structures, properties of the
macroscopic graphene fibers can be dramatically improved. The microfluidics-
enabled assembly of two-dimensional graphene sheets may enable new science for
fabricating high performance carbon fibers.