* 1742130
* Transfer Success Co-Design in Engineering Disciplines (TranSCEnD)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Travis Griffin, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project, "Transfer Success Co-Design in Engineering Disciplines," or
TranSCEnD, aims at increasing retention and degree completion of community
college students transferring to the Tickle College of Engineering (TCE) at the
University of Tennessee Knoxville (UTK). Pellissippi State Community College
(PSCC) is the single largest source of engineering transfer students to UTK.
TranSCEnD will recruit and support with scholarships at least 36 academically
talented, low-income (i.e. Pell Grant eligible) transfer students for a total of
at least 104 annual scholarships over the life of the award. TranSCEnD scholars
will also participate in a comprehensive program encompassing a series of
activities which span a five-year process (two years at PSCC, a summer bridge
program, and three years at UTK). At UTK, engineering transfer students
statistically represent a different demographic population than the student body
entering the university as freshmen (i.e., transfer students are more likely to
be first generation college students). Currently the fraction of engineering
transfer students who do not graduate within 5 years at TCE is nearly double
that of traditional engineering students. At the same time, the average unmet
annual financial need of engineering transfer students is more than double that
of TCE students who enter UTK as freshmen. Thus, TranSCEnD will focus on the
development and leveraging of financial and socio-academic support services
offered at both the PSCC and UTK campuses. This program is timely in the state
of Tennessee as the Tennessee Promise program has become a nationwide model for
providing two years of free community college education. In its inaugural 2015
class, about 90% of Tennessee's senior class applied for Tennessee Promise.
Transfer students' applications to engineering alone have greatly increased in
the last few years. Thus the faculty and administration at UTK's TCE anticipate
that transfer students will become an increasingly important fraction of the
student body in the years to come, and increasing the success of low-income
talented transfer students is of great significance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TranSCEnD builds on evidence-based strategies for
mitigating many of the pre-transfer and post-transfer barriers faced by transfer
students. These challenges are both academic (adapting to university coursework
and culture) and social (lacking a well-defined peer-cohort with whom the
adjustment to university life can be shared). The UTK's Materials Science and
Engineering and Civil and Environmental Engineering departments are the main
engineering partners in TranSCEnD. To execute the project, a multidisciplinary
leadership team has been assembled, which includes faculty, staff and
administration from UTK, and faculty from PSCC. The TranSCEnD research team will
investigate the impact of multiple retention strategies including early academic
and social integration on pre-transfer retention, post-transfer retention, and
graduation rate for transfer students interested in engineering. The principle
of co-design, namely the explicit inclusion of input from all constituents, has
been invoked in the creation of the TranSCEnD program. The individual elements
of the program have been chosen to balance two influences: (1) a theoretical
framework of best pedagogy practices and (2) a practical acknowledgment of
demonstrated success at UTK. One novel element is the proposed summer research
experience for TranSCEnD students. The summer projects aim to explore
fundamental engineering concepts, build a cohort of students with similar
academic preparation, and provide them with hands-on engineering design
experience while they investigate alternative energy systems. The outcomes of
TranSCEnD will be widely disseminated to other institutions of higher learning
and in academic publications.