* 1742951
* Collaborative Research: Identifying Sediment Sources and Routing of Transcontinental Drainages During Intraplate Deformation
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Jeffrey Rahl, Washington and Lee University
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 04/30/2024
* USD 98,929.00

The largest rivers in the world often start in mountain ranges on one side of a
continent and bring sediment to deltas on the opposite side of the continent.
The factors that allow these long-lived rivers to maintain or re-establish their
courses in the face of changing geological conditions are largely unexplored.
This project will study how transcontinental rivers change with time in response
to the formation of mountain ranges or basins in the rivers' pathways.
Understanding how rivers respond: whether they find a way through or around the
developing mountains or basins, and how quickly they re-establish their prior
courses, is critical to accurately interpreting the sedimentary record in their
deltas. In addition to providing greater insight into continental-scale rivers,
this project will provide STEM training for graduate and undergraduate students
and support research infrastructure and analytical facilities at a large state
university and a small private university. Further, the project will provide an
opportunity for hands-on STEM training for ~30 middle school students per year
under the guidance of a university professor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
will focus on the "Ancestral Rocky Mountains" (ARM) and associated basins, which
developed primarily in Utah, Colorado, Texas, and New Mexico 320-280 million
years ago. These basins archive changes associated with disruption and
reintegration of a continental-scale river in response to ARM evolution. This
project will combine traditional and cutting-edge methods including field
observations of sedimentary strata, U-Pb radiometric dating, analysis of Hf
isotopes, and (U-Th)/He radiometric dating of zircons and monazite minerals in
sandstones and igneous rocks to determine where sediment came from and how it
changed through time. In addition, (U-Th)/He radiometric dating on zircon
minerals in igneous rocks will be used to determine when the mountain ranges
developed. These data will link changes in sediment sources to mountain and
basin development through time. This will be augmented by development of new
software to help determine the sources, and proportion of each source, for
sediment based on radiometric dating of minerals in
sandstones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.