* 1742083
* Computing with R for Mathematical Modeling
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Benjamin Galluzzo, Concord Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,850,959.00

The depth and complexity of the problems facing the nation and globe
increasingly demand complex, computational solutions. Seeking ways to seamlessly
build computational thinking in to high school curricula is one way to prepare
students for this future. Because computer science courses are unavailable in
most schools, integrating computational thinking into existing high school
courses may be better suited to provide a solution to this gap in students'
preparation. This project will develop a robust infrastructure using the open
source statistical program R to support the infusion of computational thinking
into high school mathematics courses. Three online curriculum modules will be
developed that integrate computational thinking practices: a) interpreting
categorical and quantitative data, b) making inferences and justifying
conclusions, and c) linear, quadratic, and exponential models. The proposed
online learning platform will provide wide access to the computing resources,
learning resources, and teacher supports. The project is funded by the
STEM+Computing program, which seeks to address emerging challenges in
computational STEM areas through the applied integration of computational
thinking and computing activities within disciplinary STEM teaching and learning
in early childhood education through high school
(preK-12).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Linking mathematics to everyday problem solving,
mathematical modeling is an iterative cyclic process that involves identifying
and selecting variables to represent a situation, choosing mathematical
representations to describe the variables and their relationships, performing
mathematical operations to draw conclusions, interpreting and validating the
conclusions against the situation, and iteratively improving the model. In the
same spirit, computational thinking is the process of formulating problems and
solutions in terms of computational steps and algorithms that can be executed by
computers. Both practices aim to connect the real world with the model world,
either mathematical or computational, to create solutions to problems. This
project focuses on the coupling of these two strategies. For example, one focus
of the project is an investigation of how variations of coupling strategies
impact learning. This project will systematically manipulate design patterns and
compare students' learning outcomes and learning processes across three field
tests with Module A. The steps in a computational mathematical modeling cycle
can be grouped into subsets for initial task classes to reduce the complexity of
dealing with the entire cycle; however, doing so may decrease the level of
authenticity and richness of the tasks. Finding a good balance between
engagement and cognitive load control will be the focus of this phase of the
study.