* 1742183
* An Integrated Achievement and Mentoring Model for Student Success
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2023
* Lisa Filippi, Hofstra University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 12/31/2023
* USD 995,335.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, the Integrated
Achievement and Mentoring (iAM) Program for Student Success is providing support
to low-income students with demonstrated financial need and academic promise to
succeed in STEM disciplines at Hofstra University. The project is funding 20
scholarships over 5 years for students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in
Biology and Chemistry. Eligible participants are students who were accepted
initially because of their high achieving performance in high school but then
came to underperform in the first term at Hofstra which is a common occurrence
in STEM disciplines. The significance of the iAM program is that it proposes an
intervention prior to a critical, self-identified attrition point occurring at
the end of the first year to enable these talented students to overcome the
initial difficulties. The iAM program addresses three factors critical to
retention: academic achievement, academic and social integration, and unmet
financial need. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The iAM program has four goals: increase
graduation and career entry of academically talented STEM students who initially
underperform in college; further understand curricular and co-curricular factors
that contribute to student motivation and success; evaluate the adaptability and
transferability of the iAM model across Hofstra and to other institutions;
institutionalize sustainable, high impact practices beyond the term of the
S-STEM award. Core programming elements of the iAM program are: hierarchical
mentoring, integrated student support services, a STEM-focused writing and
metacognition seminar, and STEM professional networking panels. Quantitative and
qualitative methods will be used to understand the characteristics of the
institutional academic and social environment affecting student retention and
success. Data will be gathered using an array of tools including: focus groups
and interviews, surveys, student and faculty reflections, and ePortfolios of
student academic work. A holistic analysis of the overall benefits and
adaptability of the iAM program across institution types and context will also
be performed. Results will be widely disseminated across STEM education forums.