* 1742984
* Workshop/Collaborative Research: Accelerating NSF Research in Additive Manufacturing toward Industrial Applications; Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; August 17-18, 2017
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2019
* Zhijian Pei, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2019
* USD 2,970.00

This award supports a workshop to provide a networking platform bringing
additive manufacturing researchers and industrial partners together. Discussions
among workshop participants will accelerate technology advancement leading to
further market expansion in a large variety of business ventures. The workshop
will help bridge the gap between fundamental research and industrial
applications through strengthening connections between different stakeholders.
This will serve to further advance additive manufacturing techniques through
identifying technical and practical challenges that require more in-depth
fundamental investigations. The outcomes of the workshop will pave the path
forward for a streamlined transition from fundamental research to industrial
applications. This workshop will benefit many industrial sectors, including
aerospace, automotive, biomedical, defense, energy, environmental,
manufacturing, materials, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Pittsburgh
will host the workshop on August 17-18, 2017 in collaboration with Texas A&amp;M
University, to foster the interaction between NSF-funded researchers and
industrial professionals associated with America Makes, the National Additive
Manufacturing Innovation Institute. The workshop will consist of three sessions,
in which about 20 NSF-funded researchers will highlight their additive
manufacturing research progress through presentations and posters, along with
ample opportunity for networking. The workshop will be organized in coordination
with America Makes for broad industrial participation. It will ultimately lead
to the identification of synergistic activities between academic and industrial
stakeholders and facilitate productive academic-industrial partnerships.