* 1743885
* Student Support for the 8th Conference on Bioinformatics, Computational Biology, and Health Informatics (ACM BCB 2017)
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Dongmei Wang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 06/30/2018
* USD 24,056.00

The 8th ACM International Conference on Bioinformatics and Computational Biology
and Health Informatics (ACMBCB2017) is the flagship conference of the ACM SIGBio
(Special Interest Group in Bioinformatics, Computational Biology, and Health
Informatics) to be held in Boston, MA, August 20-23, 2017. It is the premier
dissemination forum for interdisciplinary research linking computer science,
mathematics, statistics, biology, bioinformatics, biomedical informatics, and
health informatics. Its mission is to support advanced research, training, and
outreach. It brings together leading researchers, practitioners, and students
around the world to promote novel scientific findings in bioscience and to
deliver new knowledge for societal impact. The past few decades have seen
tremendous growth in the scale and complexity of biological and medical data
including recent mainstream recognition of big data challenges. However, the
development of synergy in bioinformatics, computational biology, and biomedical
informatics research has been difficult. Thus, it is important to cultivate the
new culture when training younger generations. This NSF grant will provide
support to about 20 top junior U.S.-based professionals (students and recently
graduated post-doctoral fellows) to participate in the conference. In addition,
because women and underrepresented minority groups have relatively low
participation in Bioinformatics and Computational Biology (BCB), ACMBCB2017 will
expand its "Women in Bioinformatics" organization to strongly encourage
participation from women and other underrepresented junior researchers. Two
senior professionals will be invited to share their experience and wisdom in
career development, and to serve as mentors to facilitate young professional
groups with the goal to continually build the community throughout the year. The
goal of these activities is to increase the participation of junior researchers;
train the next generation of researchers and educators in computer science,
biological science, biomedical science and other related areas; broaden the
diversity from underrepresented groups in BCB; and provide mentorship by senior
researchers serve to young professionals to improve bioinformatics,
computational biology, and health informatics community building in ACM SIGBio.

The ACMBCB2017 conference will showcase leading-edge research on new
technologies and techniques around gathering, processing, analyzing, and
modeling of data and information for a variety of scientific, clinical, and
healthcare applications, from bench to bedside. It will provide well planned and
organized activities such as workshops, tutorials, oral sessions, and poster
sessions for researchers from different disciplines to interact, to foster
discussion and collaboration. The ACMBCB2017 materials, including contributions
from the junior researchers (e.g., short research proposals and presentations)
will be shared on website ACMBCB2017 (http://acm-bcb.org/2017/).