* 1743464
* I-Corps: Enforcing genomic stability via encapsulation
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2017,11/30/2018
* Frank Rosenzweig, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 11/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be to
improve the efficiency with which cellulosic ethanol can be produced. Cellulosic
ethanol is produced from agricultural waste products, like corn stalks,
switchgrass, and wheat straw, rather than from corn like traditional ethanol. It
is then used largely as a fuel additive, though other industries use ethanol on
smaller scales. Improving cellulosic ethanol production is part of the United
States' Renewable Fuel Standards Goals set in the Energy Independence and
Security Act of 2007. These improvements are vital since the increased demand
for ethanol from corn has contributed to rises in food prices. In addition,
cellulosic ethanol produces fewer greenhouse gases than corn ethanol production,
and reduces pressure for water use and land change erosion. However, despite
these advantages, the vast majority of ethanol produced in the US is from corn,
simply because cellulosic ethanol is considerably more expensive to produce. The
costs reductions from the process developed here will potentially be of
considerable commercial value to existing cellulosic ethanol producers, as well
as potentially to corn ethanol producers who may switch production methods if
costs become comparable.

This I-Corps project further develops a technology that stabilizes genomes of
metabolically active yeast. A key step in cellulosic ethanol production, co-
metabolism of five- and six-carbon sugars, can be achieved by yeast hybrids
consisting of species that ferment one or the other carbon source. But yeast
hybrids created by protoplast fusion are genetically unstable, being subject to
rapid segregational loss of one or the other parental genome. Preliminary data
indicate that genomic instability can be prevented by encapsulating hybrids in
calcium alginate and can produce ethanol at near-theoretical yields for weeks on
end. This technology has a wide variety of potential applications. It has
already been used to study aging, and could be further used to improve plasmid
retention in the production of diverse synthetic biology products, including
insulin, anti-malarial drugs, and industrially important solvents and
lubricants. Current research is focused on optimizing this method for cellulosic
ethanol production, with plans in place to subsequently address these other
markets.