* 1743981
* EAGER: PPER: Empowering Citizen Scientists to Reduce Sources of Emerging Contaminants
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Heather Preisendanz, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 12/31/2019
* USD 99,995.00

Endocrine disrupting compounds are introduced into the environment during
various stages of the life cycle of certain personal care products including
manufacturing, use, and disposal. Although wastewaters must be treated to meet
permit requirements, endocrine disrupting compounds are currently not regulated
and therefore the extent to which sewage treatment plants remove them prior to
discharge varies widely. Citizen scientists have the potential to play a
significant role in the scientific discovery process, and they can participate
in identifying potential courses of action and desired legislation.  The goal of
this project is to involve citizen scientists in collecting and reporting data
concerning the levels of endocrine-disrupting compounds in the water. This study
eventually could lead to a reduction in the amount of endocrine disrupting
compounds in the Susquehanna River Basin. The methods used in this project have
the potential to be transformative and to be applied to other watersheds across
the United States that are coping with fish population declines and increasing
contaminant concentrations. The project researchers are recruiting approximately
50-60 volunteer citizen scientists to participate in data generation and focus
groups meetings to ultimately identify ways to reduce endocrine disrupting
compounds in the environment.   In this research project, citizen scientists: 1)
employ an endocrine disrupting compound footprint tool developed by the
researchers to estimate the mass of endocrine disrupting compounds in their
personal care, household cleaning, and laundry products; 2) collect water
samples from locations across the Susquehanna River Basin to be be analyzed for
more than 50 endocrine disrupting compounds from pharmaceuticals, personal care
products, and pesticides; 3) participate in focus group meetings to identify
research needs and priorities, potential course of action, and desired
legislation related to reducing endocrine disrupting compounds in the
Susquehanna River Basin. Data generated by the citizen scientists from the
endocrine disrupting compound footprint tool and the water quality data provides
a potentially powerful insight to enable the citizen scientists to link their
usage of common endocrine disrupting compound-containing products to the
presence of endocrine disrupting compounds in surface water. This knowledge will
empower the citizen scientists to actively make personal decisions to reduce
endocrine disrupting compound sources. The inclusion of the Penn State Survey
Research Center brings unique focus group expertise to the team. The analytical
chemistry expertise through Penn State's water quality laboratory facilities and
the USDA ensures that high quality endocrine disrupting compound data is
generated. The methodologies used in this proposal have the potential to be
transformative and to be applied to other watersheds across the United States
that are coping with fish population declines and endocrine disrupting compound
concerns.