* 1743974
* Future Directions in Representation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2018
* Pramod Achar, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 10/31/2018
* USD 20,000.00

This award funds participation by US researchers in an international research
conference entitled Future Directions in Representation Theory, to be held at
the University of Sydney from December 4-8, 2017. Broadly speaking, the field of
representation theory deals with understanding symmetries of linear systems. The
notion of "symmetries" is made precise by the mathematical concept of a group;
given an abstract group, one can ask how that group can be realized via linear
transformations on a vector space. This subject has algebraic origins, but
current developments in representation theory involve input from other areas of
mathematics, such as geometry and topology, as well as ideas from physics. This
conference brings together experts from diverse research backgrounds to report
on new developments and exchange ideas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many current
developments at the frontiers of representation theory rely on a diverse array
of tools whose origins may be geometric, categorical, or homological in nature.
Conversely, questions from representation theory have motivated a number of new
developments in neighboring fields of mathematics and mathematical physics. This
conference features speakers whose work lies at the interface of representation
theory and these neighboring subjects, and whose research programs are
indicative of the directions along which representation theory may develop in
the future. Specific topics include: (i) symplectic duality and mathematical
physics; (ii) categorification and categorical actions; (iii) cohomological
methods in representation theory; (iv) parity sheaves and Soergel bimodules. US
researchers supported by this funding will have the opportunity to interact with
some of the world's leading experts in the representation theory, as well as to
make contacts with peer researchers from Australia and other nations. The
conference webpage is:
https://sites.google.com/site/ausreptheory/conference2017.