* 1743643
* Timing and Spatial Distribution of Antarctic Ice Sheet Growth and Sea-ice Formation across the Eocene-Oligocene Transition
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2023
* Sandra Passchier, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 05/31/2023
* USD 323,113.00

Abstract (non-technical)&lt;br/&gt;Sea level rise is a problem of global
importance and it is increasingly affecting the tens of millions of Americans
living along coastlines. The melting of glaciers in mountain areas worldwide in
response to global warming is a major cause of sea level rise and increases in
nuisance coastal flooding. However, the world's largest land-based ice sheets
are situated in the Polar Regions and their response under continued warming is
very difficult to predict. One reason for this uncertainty is a lack of
observations of ice behavior and melt under conditions of warming, as it is a
relatively new global climate state lasting only a few generations so far.
Researchers will investigate ice growth on Antarctica under past warm conditions
using geological archives embedded in the layers of sand and mud under the sea
floor near Antarctica. By peeling back at the layers beneath the seafloor
investigators can read the history book of past events affecting the ice sheet.
The Antarctic continent on the South Pole, carries the largest ice mass in the
world. The investigator's findings will substantially improve scientists
understanding of the response of ice sheets to global warming and its effect on
sea level rise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract
(technical)&lt;br/&gt;The melt of land based ice is raising global sea levels
with at present only minor contributions from polar ice sheets. However, the
future role of polar ice sheets in climate change is one of the most critical
uncertainties in predictions of sea level rise around the globe. The respective
roles of oceanic and atmospheric greenhouse forcing on ice sheets are poorly
addressed with recent measurements of polar climatology, because of the extreme
rise in greenhouse forcing the earth is experiencing at this time. Data on the
evolution of the West Antarctic ice sheet is particularly sparse. To address the
data gap, researchers will reconstruct the timing and spatial distribution of
Antarctic ice growth through the last greenhouse to icehouse climate transition
around 37 to 33 Ma. They will collect sedimentological and geochemical data on
core samples from a high-latitude paleoarchive to trace the shutdown of the
chemical weathering system, the onset of glacial erosion, ice rafting, and sea
ice development, as East and West Antarctic ice sheets coalesced in the Weddell
Sea sector. Their findings will lead to profound increases in the understanding
of the role of greenhouse forcing in ice sheet development and its effect on the
global climate system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.