* 1743564
* Structural Geology and Tectonics Forum at Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, January 4-9, 2018
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* J Ramon Arrowsmith, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 08/31/2018
* USD 34,599.00

This award will support the fifth biannual Structural Geology and Tectonics
Forum, which will be held in January 2018 at Arizona State University in Tempe,
Arizona. The forum will bring together specialists in structural geology and
tectonics for oral and poster presentations, field trips, and short courses. The
Structural Geology and Tectonics Program provides the framework for the
structural geology and tectonics community to communicate, develop, and advance
teaching and research among educators and investigators. These forums play a key
role in identifying key pedagogical advances and methods applied to structural
geology and tectonics, important science questions in structural geology and
tectonics, while initiating collaborative relationships to address these
questions, and early career geoscientists while supporting them. The meeting
will include three days of presentations that will include technical sessions
that will include topics such as the evolution of crustal shear zones, new
developments in the tectonic evolution of western North America, and effective
teaching methods for structural geology and tectonics. Each session will
highlight an important area of current research and/or education, will be
anchored by a distinguished keynote speaker, and will showcase relevance of work
on the topic. Poster sessions with abundant time for full participant
interaction will accompany each session. The forum will be organized to maximize
the exchange of ideas between participants in open discussions. Sessions will
provide ample opportunity to ask questions of individual presenters, assess the
current state of our knowledge, and consider productive areas for future
research. In addition to the formal meeting, there will be field trips to
examine the geology of selected areas near Tempe, as well as an optional meeting
to examine the geology of the southern San Andreas Fault of California. Short
course topics will include use of high resolution topography and Earth
observation, digital applications to field geology, geostatistics applied to
geological mapping and fieldwork, experimental rock deformation, and structural
geology laboratory exercises and software. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Structural
Geology and Tectonics Forum is designed to facilitate community building and
personal interaction within different segments of the structural geology
community. It will bring together faculty from research universities, liberal
arts colleges, community and two-year colleges, and minority-serving
institutions. Importantly, there will be group discussions on critical
developments in structural geology and tectonics, and what future research
priorities should be. This community building effort will help create a
stronger, more vibrant group of scientists and help introduce graduate students
and advanced undergraduates to the structural geology and tectonics disciplines.
The setting will be particularly useful for graduate students, who will be able
to use the venue and informal nature of the forum to find out what research is
taking place at other institutions, meet a wide range of faculty, and develop
useful contacts which will be of great value to their future careers. Students
will be able to present their own work in a friendly environment where they can
obtain thoughtful and useful feedback, as well as providing opportunity to build
new scientific collaborations. Abstracts, field guides, and short course notes
will be disseminated through a dedicated website that will be publicly
accessible. Continued support for the Structural Geology and Tectonics Forum
contribute to the long-term health, vitality, and infrastructure of the Earth
Science community. The Structural Geology and Tectonics Forum benefits society
and advances desired societal outcomes by its emphasis on STEM (science,
technology, engineering and math) education and educator development at a
variety of levels, by contributing to the training of the next generation of
scientists, by contributing to the broadening of underrepresented groups in
STEM, and by contributing to the advancement of scientific literacy of the
public. These activities contribute to the increased economic and scientific
competitiveness of the United States.