* 1743948
* I-Corps: Resin mini-extruder for additive manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2017,11/30/2018
* Charles Kim, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 11/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project involves
providing significantly lower operating costs, broader material variety, and
faster speeds than currently available with the fused-deposition modeling (FDM)
additive manufacturing process. As additive manufacturing transitions from a
prototyping tool to manufacturing solution, the demand for fast, inexpensive,
and dynamic 3D printing solutions will continue to grow. The Resin Mini-Extruder
is capable of integrating with existing 3D printer electro-mechanical systems
and processing raw plastic pellets (resin) directly into a final part, unlike
existing FDM technologies that require a filament feedstock. Raw pelletized
plastics are typically a tenth to hundredth the cost of comparable filaments,
which allow for significantly lower costs per print. In addition, the proposed
solution is capable of printing a wide variety of plastics that are very
difficult to print with existing extruders, including thermoplastic elastomers
and polymer composites. The Resin Mini-Extruder is capable of significantly
faster production than existing FDM technologies, which will enable high
turnover of design prototypes and production parts.

This I-Corps project is based on prior NSF-funded research involving a design
framework for biomimetic elasto-fluidic systems. The research inspired the
invention of a novel technology for manufacturing elasto-fluidic actuators,
which forms the basis of this I-Corps project. The technology, the Resin Mini-
Extruder for additive manufacturing, is a screw-driven extrusion system, which
includes a novel screw-drive extruder and dynamic control system. The intent is
to implement the extruder with existing 3D printer electro-mechanical systems in
a FDM additive manufacturing process. The invention of the Resin Mini-Extruder
was motivated by the need to print materials that existing FDM technologies are
incapable of processing, namely thermoplastic elastomers. A goal of this I-Corps
project is to determine whether customers demand broader material variety from
FDM and if so, which materials and composites are preferred. The I-Corps process
will also be used to determine the extent at which the other technology
advantages are valued among customers, including cost per print and print speed,
in particular applications.