* 1743871
* LTREB: Evaluating Population Cycles and Spatial Synchrony Using Long-Term Demographic and Genetic Data on Snowshoe Hares
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2016,05/31/2020
* L. Scott Mills, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2020
* USD 326,743.00

Many wildlife populations exhibit massive fluctuations in numbers across
different habitats and through time. Among the most remarkable of these are the
10-year cycles, synchronized across all or parts of continents, shown by some
mammal species in the northern hemisphere. Understanding the mechanisms that
create and dampen these cycles, and synchronize them across a species' range,
can illuminate the fundamental processes that influence population dynamics of
wild species. Snowshoe hares exhibit classic 10-year population cycles across
their northern range in Canada and Alaska, but in the southern part of their
range (the northern continental U.S.) the cycles are thought to dampen or
disappear, possibly due to habitat fragmentation and climate change. This
project extends a long-term study of snowshoe hares across the western US and
Canada to determine whether cycles are dampened in the lower 48 states, the role
that climate change and habitat fragmentation play in cycle dampening, and the
role that animal movement plays in synchronizing population dynamics across
large spatial scales. The resulting data will both improve our understanding of
a fundamental natural phenomenon and test hypotheses about the effects of human-
caused changes on wildlife population dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results
from this project continue to garner widespread interest among policymakers,
forest managers, and the general public, as they have direct implications for
recovery of the threatened Canada lynx, a specialist predator on hares. More
broadly, results will examine how forest fragmentation and climate change affect
population dynamics across continental scales. The project will foster strong
collaborations with hundreds of citizen scientists and involve dozens of
undergraduate and graduate students and international scientists in the
research. The lead investigator will present at least 2 invited lectures or
discussions per year to state and federal agencies, and the research will
continue to attract attention from diverse media outlets.