* 1743357
* Workshop: Third National Energy Education Summit: Engineering Connections for Broad Energy Education
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2017,06/30/2018
* David Blockstein, National Council for Science and the Environment/CEDD
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 06/30/2018
* USD 49,954.00

The need for energy education has never been clearer. Energy services undergird
all modern, industrial societies. Despite the fundamental importance of energy,
problems of sustainability and reliability afflict the energy industries. The
need for a trained workforce and an informed public necessitate improvements in
and expansion of education about energy. The 3rd National Energy Education
Summit will take place in January of 2018 in Washington, DC. The purpose of the
Summit is to engage energy educators, including pre-college, higher education
and public education, in sharing best practices and developing partnerships with
leaders from business, government and civil society. The Summit will cover what
we teach in energy education, how we teach it, how we can collaborate to teach
it better, and how we can overcome critical challenges. The Summit builds on a
report from the 2016 Summit, available at www.EnergyEducationSummit.org, which
presents a vision for energy education in the US.

The emerging meta-field of energy education is in its infancy, but builds on
over a century of experience in engineering disciplines including mechanical,
chemical, biological, electrical, petroleum and natural gas, and others.
Educators who have pioneered the recent expansion of this academic territory
have done so largely in isolation without maps to identify pedagogical,
instructional, or evaluative approaches particularly well-suited to
incorporating energy into the broader landscape of education. Some of the key
questions are: How can we best prepare students to be future energy
professionals? What combinations of technical knowledge (primarily physics and
engineering) and contextual knowledge (economics, societal context,
environmental aspects and entrepreneurial skills) are appropriate for students
at different levels and fields? The 3rd National Energy Education Summit will
serve as a forum for energy, environmental and STEM educators in K-12, higher
education, and informal education to gather with leaders from business,
industry, government and civil society to share best practices and develop new
partnerships in order to expand the scale, impact and effectiveness of energy
education. Outcomes of the Summit include building a community of practice in
energy education identification of critical learning outcomes and effective
practices in key areas of energy education. A report on the Summit will be
widely disseminated to inform future efforts in energy education.