* 1743412
* EAGER:   CITIZEN SCIENCE BASED WATER QUALITY MONITORING IN UTAH LAKE
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Ramesh Goel, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2023
* USD 119,498.00

Cyanobacteria are a type of bacteria that can be found in almost every land and
water environment, including oceans, lakes, and soils, and they are known to
form extensive blooms in both freshwater and saltwater environments.
Cyanobacteria are a growing concern for drinking water utilities, so
understanding why cyanobacteria form blooms is a major focus of lake and
ecological research. These blooms are termed harmful algal blooms (HABs), and in
many cases, the prediction of HABs is not possible because of the unavailability
of good data sets. Involving a large number of citizens in scientific data
collection has the potential to help address this problem. In this project, a
citizen science-based water quality program is being developed with Utah Lake,
Utah as a model water body. The specific objectives of this citizen science
project are to select and train citizen scientists in water quality data
monitoring, to engage trained citizens in water quality data collection, to
gather and validate the data collected by citizen scientists, and finally to
develop a plan for a long term and sustainable citizen science-based water
quality monitoring program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research project, a
citizen science-based water quality monitoring program is being established to
increase public participation in decision making and to enable sustainable
management of surface water quality. The scientific hypotheses are; (1) Utah
Lake is phosphorus limited and the magnitude of internal and external phosphorus
loads are similar over space and time, (2) genetic tools based on DNA sequencing
of environmental samples can provide an improved resolution of cyanobacterial
ecology (including novel species) in the lake under different environmental
factors and elucidate the active role of other flanking bacterial communities
during HABs events, and (3) participatory education and outreach approaches can
be used to develop management strategies that are embraced by stakeholders
throughout the watershed and thus implemented on a broader basis. The most
significant broader impact of this research is the training and involvement of
citizen scientists in water quality research that may aid regulatory decision
making. Graduate and undergraduate students are also being trained in this
project.