* 1743847
* RAPID:  Emotion Regulation, Attitudes, and the Consequences for Political Behavior in a Polarized Political Environment
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Sara Levens, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 05/31/2021
* USD 198,205.00

Overview and Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;Transitions of power in democracies from
one party to another create unique political contexts. The prospect of
substantial and sometimes unexpected changes in economic, social, or foreign
policy stimulates heated debate and strong emotions in the public. This evolving
context allows for scholars to assess how emotion regulation shapes political
behavior and attitudes. The activation of emotion in the face of unexpected
events may manifest in a number of forms: posting on social media, attending
town hall meetings, contacting elected officials, signing petitions, and/or
participating in social movements. This knowledge helps to explain when and why
emotions fuel broad-scale political participation and competition. The data
generated from this project enables the investigators to assess theories about
the influence of emotion regulation on political participation, i.e. how
different types of emotion regulation strategies lead to different types of
political behavior. The project will also provide valuable data for the social
science community more broadly. In particular, the study will produce the first
multi-wave panel survey tracking how individual attitudes and behavior change
over time in response to political events during the first year of a party
transition in the United States. The survey is the first in political science to
study how emotion regulation habits vary across individuals in society and
considers whether, over time, these habits lead to more consensus or greater
polarization. The study utilizes established practices from psychology to
measure emotion regulation habits in political contexts. The project also trains
graduate and undergraduate students in machine learning, automated text coding,
and text-analytics of open-ended survey responses. These are emerging as
critical skills in the field of survey research as computing power opens new
opportunities for understanding public attitudes through more free-form,
naturalistic responses compared to traditional surveys.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific Merit&lt;br/&gt;This study contributes to a
growing body of research exploring the importance of socio-political emotions in
fueling public attitudes and behavior. We develop new theory to explain how
individual-level emotion regulation habits a) moderate the affective processing
of information and b) influence expressive and social political behavior. Pilot
tests indicate individuals adept at regulating their emotions through
reappraising emotion-provoking stimuli were more likely to become politically
active compared to those who use suppressive or avoidance regulation habits.
Reappraisers are more likely to transmit their views to others, thus serving as
a source of social contagion. This project uses a three-wave panel survey design
to conduct a broader test of how emotion regulation shapes issue engagement,
changes in perceptions of political responsibility, and changes in levels and
forms of political participation. We draw our panel sample from a pool of
respondents to a large online national survey conducted just prior to the 2016
elections to obtain pre-election baseline opinions on key policy topics like
healthcare, the environment, tax reform, and military use. Subsequent waves of
the panel study are timed to survey respondents during critical moments of
policy change, or will follow an unexpected extraordinary event, should one
arise. The design permits the investigators to observe individual-level change
in the use of emotion regulation habits over time, and to test whether different
emotion regulation habits make individuals more prone to reexamine their
beliefs. If that is the case, these individuals could potentially change
beliefs, or reject new information and maintain rigidity in attitudes. The
research also allows the investigators to examine how emotion regulation
influences or hinders political activism in response to emotionally provocative
moments in society.