* 1743891
* EAGER: PPER: GOALI: Down the drain - using citizen science to inventory titanium dioxide in personal care products
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2017,06/30/2019
* Matthew Seib, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 06/30/2019
* USD 99,709.00

Good water quality from municipal wastewater treatment plants is critical to
public health and safety.  A growing concern is the increasing use of additives
to food and personal care products that ultimately enter the sewage systems and
may affect these treatment plants.  One of the more common of these additives is
titanium dioxide (TiO2), which is often added as tiny particles to whiten foods,
toothpastes, sunscreen, and skin care products.  The estimated global annual
production of TiO2 is about 85,000 tons. The ubiquity of TiO2 in personal care
products means that a significant portion is washed down the drain (for example,
using toothpaste to clean teeth or washing lotions off through showering). This
Citizen Science project is a partnership with the Madison Metropolitan Sewerage
District and the University of Wisconsin - Madison to study TiO2 entering the
wastewater treatment plant through personal care product usage.  Information is
being collected from citizen scientists to inventory the amounts of TiO2 in
consumer products by household. This information is then being used to model
TiO2 entry into the wastewater treatment plant and to determine how detrimental
this may be to water quality and the environment.

This research project is generating the first household level inventory of TiO2
enabled consumer products and determining whether the quantity of TiO2 entering
the wastewater treatment plant is sufficient to cause concern and potential
treatment disruptions. This research integrates citizen scientists in a two-way
flow of information and will determine potential solutions for the entry of TiO2
into the treatment plant and eventually the environment (through effluent from
the treatment plant and agriculturally utilized biosolids). This work is
determining if TiO2 from personal care products is a major route of TiO2
entering the environment. This research also has implications from a policy
standpoint, in particular with respect to future regulation of TiO2. The
specific objectives of the proposed work are: 1) Create a household relevant
inventory of TiO2 containing personal care products based on citizen scientist
responses, 2) Model the TiO2 entering the treatment plant and eventually
discharged to receiving waters as a function of the household profiles, and, 3)
Hold a citizen scientist roundtable meeting, to present the results of the
study, and gain insight from the citizens into future solutions. The Citizen
Scientist Roundtable meeting will be held after the completion of the inventory
and modeling stages of the proposed work. The residents of the Madison
Metropolitan Sewerage District service area who complete the survey will be
invited to the roundtable discussion. A version of the model will be available
for the citizen scientists to use.