* 1743680
* I-Corps: Materials for Organic Light Emitting Diodes
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2017,11/30/2018
* Thedford Hollis, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 11/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is in the arena
of energy-efficient solid state lighting. It has been estimated that 20% of all
electricity generated in the US is for lighting purposes. Solid state lighting
uses far less energy to produce the same amount of effective lighting than
incandescent or fluorescent bulbs. Additionally, it neither poses the
environmental risk of releasing elemental mercury, nor does it require
restricted disposal as do compact fluorescent bulbs. Organic Light Emitting
Diodes (OLEDs) are more energy efficient and flexible than simple Light Emitting
Diodes (LEDs), which are made of brittle inorganic materials. OLEDs are &gt;90%
more efficient than incandescent light bulbs, and have the potential to be
&gt;98% more efficient. Therefore, OLED technology has the potential to
dramatically reduce lighting costs and the associated electrical generation
preventing the release of billions of tons of carbon dioxide into the
atmosphere. OLED screens are steadily displacing other technologies used in
portable, battery-operated devices such as cell phones, laptops, and tablets,
and in TV's, airplane cockpits, and cars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project addresses a technological bottleneck for current OLED devices in the
materials used for the generation of blue light. The materials currently in use
have a fluorescent emission, which requires higher voltages resulting in greater
energy consumption, more heat generation, and faster breakdown of the material
in the device. Current manufacturers have adapted by using a layer of blue
material that is twice the thickness of that in the red and green diode, which
poses challenges for engineering the device structurally. The red and green
diodes use a phosphorescent material requiring less voltage for generating the
emission, thus, reducing energy consumption and heat generation. This project
will evaluate the market potential of a new phosphorescent, true-blue emitting
material for commercial applications that has greater thermal and chemical
stability and is highly quantum efficient. During the project period, the team
will gather information from OLED manufacturers to device makers to discern the
need, cost-point, and interest for new raw materials, and how to fine tune the
materials to better suit applications.