* 1743983
* Conference Grant for MINDS Workshop
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2017,03/31/2019
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 03/31/2019
* USD 16,200.00

This award will fund the 2017 MINDS (Mentoring for Innovative Design Solutions)
Workshop organized by Alpha Eta Mu Beta, the National Biomedical Engineering
Honors Society. The workshop will be held October 11-14 in Phoenix, AZ, in
parallel with the BMES 2017 Annual Meeting. This will allow the students
selected for the MINDS Scholar Program to also participate in the BMES Annual
Meeting. The MINDS Scholar Program is an innovative approach that provides
students with the opportunity to collaborate and network with peers and mentors
across the country for a 5-month period, while building necessary engineering
design skills, including three key considerations that are not usually stressed
in coursework projects. The three key considerations are: (1) market
considerations for commercialization (unmet need, size of market reimbursement
potential, etc.), (2) regulatory strategy, and (3) evaluating prospects for
intellectual property protection. The program begins with an initial workshop
where students meet their team members, drawn from other universities across the
US, and mentors. The team then selects a central design idea that will be
developed over the subsequent 5 months. Students will be selected through a
competitive process, with junior undergraduates preferred. Students will then
work with their teams and mentors to develop a design solution that takes into
account issues such as market evaluation, intellectual property issues, and
regulation. Subject matter experts will provide support to the teams during this
5 month design period. Teams will be encouraged to submit their designs to
various design contests, investment opportunities, and grant programs. This
program will develop a core group of engineers who will better understand the
importance of considering human needs before attempting to design devices, and
who will be more likely to engage in a variety of activities that improve the
human condition. Moreover, the participants will learn how to assess human needs
and will effectively use the key design considerations that are of paramount
importance for successful translation of ideas to the marketplace so that they
can truly help people. Additionally, the collaborative and long-distance
communication skills that they develop in this project will better equip them to
work in an environment that is increasingly dependent on communication between
distant facilities and customers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The majority
of design courses in the US, particularly in biomedical engineering programs, do
not have sufficient time to provide students with a strong experience in the
non-technical aspects that are key to design success: market potential,
intellectual property, and regulation. This program will provide seven teams of
three students, selected through a competitive process from across the US, with
key experience related to real world design processes for medical systems. It
will also provide students with significant experience in working on a
geographically separated team and with peers from varied backgrounds, both of
which are strongly valued by industry.