* 1743821
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2017 IEEE International  Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS)
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2018
* Tinoosh Mohsenin, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 04/30/2018
* USD 30,000.00

This proposal requests funding to a number of US-based students for attending
the 35-th IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS) with the
intention of exposing them to the discipline and to encourage them to pursue
careers in emerging issues in the area of Circuits and Systems research.
Participation in this symposium is considered an important part of the graduate
school experience of students in the field of computer engineering, providing
the opportunity to interact with senior researchers and to be exposed to leading
edge work in the field. The support will enable dissemination of scientific
knowledge to students who would otherwise not have the experience. This student
travel support will also facilitate the development of promising graduate
students, and will thus indirectly also help train the workforce of the future
in the important area of computer engineering. Women and underrepresented groups
will be given due consideration for receiving support through this grant.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Symposium on Circuits and
Systems (ISCAS) for the past 49 years has been the premier conference, where
emerging trends and novel concepts of Circuits and Systems research have been
explored. The 50-th edition of this conference will addresses key trends and
challenges in the area that includes Keynote and Plenary Talks, Technical Paper
Sessions, Tutorials, Panels, Special Sessions. The conference committee has set
up an adequate evaluation criteria to select the qualified students from a pool
of applicants formed via open advertisement. While the requested funds will
primarily be sued for supporting graduate students, the committee may also
consider a small number of undergraduate applicants in order to better reach a
diverse population of potential researchers in this field.