* 1743000
* The 15th International Conference on Nanochannels, Microchannels and Minichannels; August 27-31, 2017 in Cambridge, MA
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Amy Betz, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 12/31/2017
* USD 9,000.00

This small and interdisciplinary conference is already an established,
traditional meeting focused on transport phenomena in nanochannels,
microchannels and minichannels. Recent advances and future trends in heat and
mass transfer and fluid flow in the focused areas are to be presented and
discussed during the conference. The conference is intended to provide a
platform for researchers to exchange information and identify research needs in
this emerging area encompassing many engineering, basic sciences, and bio-
medical disciplines. Both fundamental aspects including transport studies at the
nano, micro, and mini scales as well as practical applications including thermal
management, energy conversion, lab on a chip, and biomedical devices will be
covered. The broad range of applications covered by the conference has been an
additional attractive point, especially to young researchers interested in
thermal transport processes in channels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The support will
allow US undergraduate and graduate students, to attend the symposium. Special
consideration to encourage the participation of minorities and women from
underrepresented groups, who are interested or may become interested in research
efforts in the broad area of channel thermal transport, will be accomplished by
announcing the support over list serves such as the Women in Engineering
Proactive Network (WEPAN). ICNMM provides an opportunity for students to give
technical talks and poster presentations. The small size and broad scope of the
conference make it ideal for networking. It is also a great forum for students
to present and publish their research. Plenary and keynote presentations will
review existing information, present the current state-of-the-art and discuss
future needs in different areas, providing an excellent mechanism to guide
future improvements in existing and new academic programs. The presentations
will be disseminated broadly, not only through the preparation of a proceedings
submitted for indexing to Scopus, Compendex, ISI Conference Proceedings Citation
Index, and other major indexers, but also making the conference papers
discoverable through Google Scholar search and all other major search engines.