* 1743310
* Satellite Observations and Modelling of Surface Meltwater Flow and its Impact on Ice Shelves
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Jonathan Kingslake, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 07/31/2023
* USD 535,885.00

Ice shelves slow the movement of the grounded ice sheets that feed them. This
reduces the rate at which ice sheets lose mass to the oceans and contribute to
sea-level rise. But ice shelves can be susceptible to collapse, particularly
when surface meltwater accumulates in vulnerable areas. Meltwater lakes can
create and enlarge fractures within the ice shelves, thereby triggering or
hastening ice-shelf collapse. Also, water refreezing within ice shelves warms
the ice and could affect the flow of the ice by changing its viscosity, which
depends on temperature. The drainage of water across the surface of Antarctica
and where it accumulates has received little attention. This drainage was
assumed to be insignificant, but recent work shows that meltwater can drain for
tens of kilometers across ice-shelf surfaces and access areas that would
otherwise not accumulate meltwater. Surface meltwater drainage could play a
major role in the future stability of ice sheets. This drainage is the focus of
this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will develop and test physics-based
mathematical models of water flow and ice-shelf flow, closely informed by remote
sensing observations, to ask (1) how drainage systems will grow in response to
the increased melt rates that are predicted for this century, (2) how this
drainage is influenced by ice dynamics and (3) whether enlarged drainage systems
could deliver meltwater to areas of ice shelves that are vulnerable to water-
driven collapse. The team hypothesizes that refreezing of meltwater in snow and
firn will prove important for hydrology by impacting the permeability of the
snow/firn and for ice-shelf dynamics by releasing latent heat within the ice and
lowering ice viscosity. The project will examine these issues by (1) conducting
a remote sensing survey of the structure and temporal evolution of meltwater
systems around Antarctica, (2) developing and analyzing mathematical models of
water flow across ice shelves, and (3) examining idealized and realistic models
of ice-shelf flow. This project will support a first-time NSF PI, a post-
doctoral researcher and a graduate student. An outreach activity will make use
of the emerging technology of Augmented Reality to visualize the dynamics of ice
sheets in three dimensions to excite the public about glaciology at outreach
events around New York City. This approach will be made publicly available for
wider use as Augmented Reality continues to grow in
popularity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.