* 1743041
* EAGER: Control of Ion Complexation of Neutral Polymers with Inorganic Macroions to Enhance Polymer Mechanical and Ion-Transport Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Yingxi (Elaine) Zhu, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2020
* USD 242,953.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Binding of electrically charged
submolecular groups (ions) to polymers commonly occurs with charged polymers in
water solution to produce ion-polymer complexes due to strong electrostatic
interactions. In some cases ions can also bind with uncharged polymers in non-
water-based media to greatly modify the structure and material properties of the
polymers. For instance, poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO), an uncharged water-soluble
polymer with extensive commercial applications, can dissolve salts, such as
lithium chloride, in non-aqueous solvents to produce PEO-ion complex with high
ion conductivity as solid polymer electrolyte for Li-ion rechargeable battery
applications. Despite enormous technical implications of ion binding with
neutral polymers the charging mechanism of neutral polymers in organic solvents
and in the solid state remains poorly understood. This project aims to control
and quantify the electrical charge density and complex formation of PEO polymers
with inorganic nanometer-sized ions (macroions) of varied electrical charges and
concentration by ultrafast laser spectroscopic methods. With this knowledge,
ion-containing polymers with enhanced mechanical and ion transport properties
can be developed (including earth-abundant or conventional synthetic polymers in
various solvents and in the solid state) into novel functional materials that
may be relevant for energy and environmental aspects. This project also combines
multifaceted STEM education, where classroom and video demonstrations and hand-
on experiences will be developed to engage graduate, undergraduate, and high-
school students in fundamental materials design and advanced materials-
characterization tools. Broader impacts of this project will also include the
recruitment, retention, and mentoring of underrepresented students, including
women students, in the STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ion-polymer complexes are commonly formed between
ions and charged polymers or polyelectrolytes in aqueous solution due to strong
electrostatic interaction. However, electrical charges can be also introduced to
neutral polymers, such as poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO), upon ion binding in non-
aqueous solvents and in the solid state, resulting in unusual polyelectrolyte-
like behaviors of the neutral polymers. This is a much less studied area, and
this project aims to elucidate the process of effectively charging neutral
polymers by multivalent macroions, leading to the formation of polymer-macroion
complexes with enhanced solid-like mechanical strength and fast ion transport.
In particular, the electric potential and complex formation of PEO polymers upon
binding with hydrophilic inorganic macroions of varied multi-valence and
concentration will be quantified by ultrafast laser spectroscopy to
fundamentally understand the electrical charging process of neutral polymers in
organic solvents and the solid state. The relationship among phase structure,
viscoelasticity, and ion conductivity of PEO-macroion complexes will be
established and exploited to enhance the mechanical strength and ion transport
of the complexes with optimal macroion content. The success of this project
could have implications toward a versatile and sustainable material process of
earth-abundant or conventional synthetic neutral polymers into advanced
functional ion-containing polymers with enhanced ion transport and mechanical
integrity.