* 1743942
* USENIX Security Symposium '17 Vancouver
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Emmanouil Antonakakis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Indrajit Ray
* 06/30/2018
* USD 25,000.00

This grant funds approximately 20 U.S.-based graduate students to attend the
2017 USENIX Security Symposium, a leading forum for advanced professionals from
academic and industrial backgrounds to meet and discuss the newest advances in
the security and privacy of computer systems and networks. Participation in
USENIX Security and similar conferences is a valuable and important part of the
graduate school experience. It provides students with the opportunity to
interact with more senior researchers in the field, and exposes students to
leading work in the field. The support enables the participation of students who
would otherwise be unable to attend the conference.

USENIX Security will be held in Vancouver, B.C., in August 2017. The conference
consists of a three-day technical program, with numerous workshops co-located.
The goal of the conference is to bring together researchers, practitioners,
system administrators, system programmers, and others interested in the latest
advances in the security of computer systems and networks. This cross-
disciplinary emphasis makes it well suited as a target for student
participation, and this event has always drawn a large proportion of student
attendees. This venue provides an excellent vehicle for students to learn about
the latest advances in computer security and privacy research, and participate
in engaging discussions on a wide variety of sub-topics including network and
system security, techniques for developing secure systems, technologies for
trustworthy computing, hardware security, applied cryptography, etc.