* 1743743
* SBP:  Workshop:  Expanding Linguistic Science By Broadening Native American Participation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Wesley Leonard, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 06/30/2020
* USD 150,000.00

The Native American Languages Act, passed by the U.S. Congress in 1990, enacted
into policy the recognition of the unique status and importance of Native
American languages. Similarly, the field of linguistics emphasizes the
importance of Native American languages, not only because of languages'
intrinsic value as bearers of culture and identity, but also with reference to
scientific questions whose answers lie in the diverse grammatical features,
vocabularies, and usage patterns of these languages. Less recognized, however,
is that there is an equally important and similarly diverse set of ideas held in
Native American communities about their languages -- ideas that reflect Native
American intellectual traditions, cultural norms, and contemporary needs. This
project focuses on identifying, disseminating, and applying Native American
ideas about language in linguistic science through a workshop at which American
Indian and Alaska Native language practitioners (e.g., citizen scientists,
language program coordinators, educators, language activists) and professional
linguists will engage in dialogue about these issues. This project will thus
test a model of expanding science through the participation of an
underrepresented group in a way that emphasizes the intellectual tools and
cultural values of that group, contributing to the science of broadening
participation. The ideas from this project will be widely disseminated, with
project presentations and other materials shared online and archived for others'
use. Broader impacts also include the increased participation of Native
Americans in the language sciences, the development and training of non-Native
graduate students, and the online dissemination of workshop outcomes, videos and
content through the Linguistic Society of America, the largest professional
society in the world dedicated to the scientific study of language.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-chaired by two Native American linguists, this workshop
will improve linguistic science by fostering a scholarly space to explore and to
expand the intellectual lens through which the goals, questions and methods of
linguistics are framed. Through a collaborative model in which people who have
shared interests but different types of expertise train each other, this project
seeks to increase the representation of Native Americans in language sciences
through an approach that puts Native American colleagues on equal footing with
colleagues from other backgrounds. Motivating this project is a general question
of how to apply linguistic diversity, broadly defined to include views about
language, as a base to guide and expand scientific inquiry. Its specific focus
on Native American ideas about language emerges from the shared commitment of
the U.S. Congress, the field of linguistics, and Native American communities to
promoting Native American languages. The workshop will occur immediately prior
to the 2018 annual meeting of the Linguistic Society of America, the premier
professional conference of American linguists. The project team will select
workshop participants through a competitive application process; selection
criteria will include documented expertise in, and commitment to, project
themes. The workshop will include a lecture to contextualize the history of
linguistics and its current areas of focus, a session in which participants
share their personal definitions of "language," and several collaborative
discussions on core project themes. Workshop participants will then attend the
rest of the Linguistic Society of America annual meeting, which will include a
symposium to share the ideas that emerge from the workshop with a large audience
of linguists.