* 1743490
* CRII: CPS: Design of Secure and Dependable Next Generation Automotive Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Arslan Munir, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 03/31/2019
* USD 159,234.00

The next generation of automobiles will further escalate the proliferation of
electronic control units (ECUs) to enable new and exciting control and
infotainment applications. Although the use of electronic embedded systems
improves performance, driving comfort, safety, and economy for the customer;
this electronic control of automotive systems makes these systems susceptible to
permanent, transient, and intermittent electronic failures, which can
significantly reduce the reliability and availability of these systems. In
addition, recent work has demonstrated vulnerability of modern car control
systems to security attacks that directly impact the automobile's physical
safety and dependability. The novel aspect of this research program is the
simultaneous integration of security and dependability while minimizing energy
consumption and ensuring that real-time constraints of the application are not
violated. The dependability and security approaches proposed in this project are
also applicable to other CPS, such as transit vehicles, industrial automation,
manned and unmanned air vehicles, and medical monitoring. Energy-efficient
security and dependability integration, as pursued in this research program,
further implies greater fuel-efficiency for combustion engine vehicles (in
particular, aerial vehicles) and longer battery lifer for hybrid and electric
vehicles.

To address the research challenge of simultaneous security and dependability
integration while minimizing energy consumption, this research program proposes
to leverage multicore ECUs to achieve high reliability with low energy-overhead
for automotive safety-critical functions. The research program consists of two
modular but inter-linked thrusts. In the first thrust, the project aims to
develop a novel dependability methodology that would enable quick error
detection and correction (QEDC) via an optimized combination of comparison-
points and lightweight checkpointing to better meet the application's real-time
constraints even in the presence of faults. The proposed dependability
methodology aspires to attain energy-efficient fault tolerance by an intelligent
use of dynamic voltage and frequency scaling (DVFS). The second thrust aims to
develop an integrated safety and security methodology that would integrate
security primitives: confidentiality, integrity, and authentication over
vehicular networks in an energy-efficient manner without violating the real-time
constraints imposed by the maximum tolerable response time of cyber-physical
applications. The project further aims to adapt safety and security parameters
(e.g., number of comparison points for QEDC, number of checkpoints, key lengths
for cryptographic algorithms and message authentication codes) to meet the
application's real-time requirements under changing environmental stimuli (e.g.,
transient fault rate and vehicular bus load).