* 1743449
* Constant Scalar Curvature Metrics in Sasaki and Kahler Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Hongnian Huang, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 12/31/2018
* USD 12,600.00

This award supports participation of US based researchers in a one week long
international conference in pure mathematics to be held at the CIRM (France),
Jan 15, 2018 - Jan 19, 2018. The title of the conference is "Constant Scalar
Curvature Metrics in Sasaki and Kahler Geometry." The conference aims at
presenting and further developing the latest achievements in the Yau-Tian-
Donaldson conjecture, which is one of the most fundamental conjectures in
complex geometry. The conjecture is at the intersection of two different domains
that have deep impact in pure mathematics and modern physics: differential
geometry and algebraic geometry. The goal of the meeting is to gather some of
the world experts in the several aspects of the Y-T-D conjecture and have them
exchange ideas among themselves as well as interact with junior researchers with
fresh ideas so as to make progress in the solution of the most general version
of the conjecture. The conference will serve as a learning opportunity as well
as a way to help make connections and open the way to mathematical
collaborations. The participants will come from diverse backgrounds and
countries and the organizing committee will promote attendance of
underrepresented groups in the mathematical sciences.

Since the conjecture of Yau-Tian-Donaldson stating the equivalence between the
existence of Kahler-Einstein and K-polystability has been proved in 2012, Kahler
geometers are turning to the extension of this conjecture to existence of
constant scalar curvature (csc) Kahler/Sasaki metrics. This extension is far
from being a trivial question since the csc equation is by far more difficult
(non-linear 4th order PDE). Nevertheless, this topic is now booming and in the
last few years many related results have been proved. The determination of the
organizers is to make the conference an opportunity to present and further
develop the latest achievements of the subject and to promote interaction
between researchers of the domain. The topics of the conference lie at the
crossroads of the following research fields: complex/CR geometry,
symplectic/contact geometry, complex algebraic geometry, Geometric Invariant
Theory and algebraic stability, moduli spaces, complex analysis, geometric
quantization, heat kernels asymptotics, geometric flows and partial differential
equations, mathematical physics. Consequently, one can hope that the techniques
developed and the unveiled relations will have an impact on other areas of
Geometry, as the study of Einstein metrics, special holonomy geometries, moduli
spaces of Kahler metrics and moduli of algebraic varieties, just to name a few.
The stimulating interaction of the different sub-fields above has always been
fruitful in the past and it is natural to hope that some of these sub-fields can
benefit from the advances on the Yau-Tian-Donaldson conjecture in a long range.

The website of the conference is located at: http://scientific-
events.weebly.com/1750.html