* 1743475
* PIRE: Bio-Inspired Materials and Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Gary Wnek, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 09/30/2018
* USD 1,119,024.00

LaShanda Korley, Jonathan Pokorski, Gary Wnek (Case Western Reserve University),
Stuart Rowan (University of Chicago)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials that are
found in Nature display a wide range of properties including responsiveness to
the environment, signal transmission, and the ability to adapt to support life.
Learning from Nature or biomimicry can be a powerful tool in designing,
developing and accessing the next generation of synthetic materials and systems.
Furthermore, biomimetic concepts will account for an estimated $1.2 trillion in
global economic development, and have already contributed to familiar products
like Velcro and wind turbines. Thus, there is a critical need for the US to
educate the next generation of internationally-minded biomimicry thinkers to
develop a new wave of innovative materials. As such, this PIRE brings together
an interdisciplinary team of US and Swiss collaborators to carry out research
and education in the area of Bio-Inspired Materials &amp; Systems. Specifically,
the PIRE will utilize inspiration from Nature to design new materials that can
change toughness in response to their environment, are safer and more effective
biological implants, will transmit nerve-like electrical signals, and can
respond to the environment to initiate biological processes, all for use in soft
robotic applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A range of innovative educational
and outreach activities will train US students in learning from Nature and in a
bio-inspired philosophy. This training will happen in an international context
with Swiss collaborators, world leaders in biomimetic concepts and research.
Students will gain exposure to themes cutting across chemistry, polymers,
physics, biology, and engineering in the development of multi-functional, active
materials. Mentoring, diversity, cultural competency, globalization, and
effective scientific communication are emphasized as critical elements of the
PIRE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nature has a multitude of examples of complex
materials and systems that go well beyond the current capabilities of synthetic
systems. The innovation potential in this domain is vast and a large-scale
interdisciplinary effort is required to realize paradigm-changing scientific
breakthroughs. To that end, an international partnership between biomimicry
experts at Case Western Reserve University (CWRU), the University of Chicago
(UoC), and the University of Fribourg/Adolphe Merkle Institute in Switzerland in
Bio-inspired Materials and Systems is established. Building upon collaborative
strengths in polymer synthesis, computational modeling, mechanical
characterization, robotics, imaging, manufacturing, biology, biomedical
engineering, physics, and molecular engineering, five Bio-inspired Materials and
Systems projects are envisioned: (1) Silk-inspired Nanocomposites:
Spider/Caddisfly Silk Mimics; (2) Sea Cucumber, Squid Beak and Pine Cone
Inspired Adaptive Composites; (3) Excitable Polyelectrolyte Fiber Networks/Gels:
Toward Artificial Neurons; (4) Dynamic and Functional Fibers Inspired by the
Extracellular Matrix; and (5) Soft Robotics Inspired by Worm Locomotion. These
research thrusts are directed toward the development of functional,
programmable, and responsive materials for deployment in soft robotic systems.
Faculty, graduate, and undergraduate students will spend time in Switzerland
engaging in synergistic research/educational activities. An educational and
innovation partnership with local thought leaders in biomimicry will guide the
training of the next-generation of global scientists and engineers in this
interdisciplinary endeavor. Effective science communication will be highlighted
via existing programming with the Museum of Science and Industry (MSI) of
Chicago. Community outreach activities include research opportunities at CWRU
and UoC for underrepresented high school students in STEM as part of an expanded
Biomimetic Envoys program and the development of biomimetic hands-on
demonstrations for annual participation in the Martin Luther King Jr. (MLK)
Discovery Day at the Cleveland Museum of Natural History.