* 1743988
* EAGER:  PPER Citizen Science-Based Monitoring Framework for Contaminants of Emerging Concern in New York State Lakes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Sharon Moran, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2019
* USD 111,938.00

A number of chemicals found in pharmaceuticals and personal care products find
their way into waste streams and are becoming contaminants of emerging concern.
This Citizen Science research project aims to develop an educational and
training-based framework to facilitate citizen monitors to investigate the
prevalence of contaminants of emerging concerns in aquatic environments. The
project researchers are working collaboratively with the Statewide Lake
Assessment Program in New York to recruit and train citizens to participate in
on-site monitoring a class of chemicals found on the list of contaminants. The
team is also exploring how participation in the citizen science project enhances
citizen understanding and engagement with local water quality problems, and the
project provides interdisciplinary training and education for citizens and
undergraduate and graduate students as well as with other forms of outreach
activities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project integrates citizen science
into contaminants of emerging concern research in order to collect needed data
on the occurrence of these contaminants in New York lakes. This research offers
two important insights into citizen science research: 1) answering how
established citizen science water-monitoring programs can be scaled up to
integrate more challenging forms of data collection and analysis, as in the case
of contaminants of emerging concerns, and, 2) a scalable framework for citizen-
based contaminant monitoring that can be adopted by other water quality
monitoring programs. Overall, this project not only collects vital information
on contaminants of emerging concerns but also creates a monitoring methodology
that can be used widely to improve lake and watershed management. Results of
contaminants of emerging concerns monitoring and risk assessment are being
communicated to citizen monitors and project partners in a timely manner to
promote effective participation and enable knowledge sharing.