* 1743050
* EAGER: Parallel Semi-supervised Machine Learning for Volumetric Datasets
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2019
* Sanjay Ranka, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 11/30/2019
* USD 99,998.00

Machine learning and parallel computing have come of age. Rapid advances have
been made in this decade in the automated recognition of objects and faces in
images with "deep learning" almost becoming a household term at the present
time. However, a clear limitation in most of the present work is the restriction
to two dimensional datasets such as images and the like. When the focus shifts
to large three dimensional datasets such as 3D medical imaging, fluid dynamics
simulations, remote sensing and electron microscopy, the problems become more
difficult by several orders of magnitude. The automatic labeling of three
dimensional structures in large datasets requires a comprehensive integration of
machine learning and parallel computing with a "from the ground up redesign" to
be efficient, accurate and capable of scaling to ever larger volumes. The
benefits to the engineering communities and society at large are clear.
Successful execution of this project will enable experts in a variety of
disciplines in which three dimensional data are generated to efficiently perform
large scale automated labeling of structures of interest like the hippocampus in
brain images or vortices in fluid dynamics simulations. Students trained in this
nexus of machine learning and parallel computing will be capable of making their
own contributions ranging from academic research to commercialization. Finally,
the software suites generated by this project should play a role in the
formation of vertically integrated enterprises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Volumetric
applications require the development of novel, efficient and scalable machine
learning algorithms as existing approaches are computationally intensive and are
limited to small size images/video. Volumetric data require that approaches
classify homogeneous regions into single categories while maintaining clear-cut
region boundaries between classes (urban versus forest for example in terrain
classification). To this end, new methods are developed for extracting
supervoxels from volumetric datasets, using three dimensional filters, nonlinear
dimensionality reduction and Hamilton-Jacobi or Schrodinger geodesic solvers.
Next, deep learning principles which have resulted in automated feature
extraction and discriminative convolutional filters must be adapted to work on
volumetric data. Consequently, the integration of supervoxels and deep learning
is central to the proposed work. Very limited expert interaction is permitted
since the volume of the datasets is too large, therefore calling for semi-
supervised learning approaches. The integrated machine learning and parallel
processing software suite created by this project will be disseminated using
software management repositories and open source licensing. In summary, the
intellectual merit lies in the careful integration of semi-supervised learning,
volumetric supervoxel driven segmentation, deep learning and parallel
processing.