* 1743747
* PIRE: Black Hole Astrophysics in the Era of Distributed Resources and Expertise
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Feryal Ozel, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2023
* USD 5,678,833.00

PI: Dimitrios Psaltis (University of Arizona)&lt;br/&gt;co-PIs: Sheperd Doeleman
(Harvard University)&lt;br/&gt;Charles Gammie (University of
Illinois)&lt;br/&gt;Daniel Marrone (University of Arizona)&lt;br/&gt;Feryal Ozel
(University of Arizona)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Explanation:&lt;br/&gt;The Event Horizon Telescope (EHT) is an Earth-sized array
of telescopes that aims to obtain the first ever images of astrophysical black
holes and test Einstein's theory of general relativity in extreme conditions.
The project is inherently international and multidisciplinary, involving
telescopes and institutions on five continents and requiring expertise in areas
ranging from detector development to high-performance computing and theoretical
physics. The PIRE project team will integrate researchers in the U.S., Germany,
Mexico, and Taiwan and usher astronomical projects, such as the EHT, into the
era of big and distributed data science. The PIRE award will fund activities in
detector development, in mounting coordinated observations, in fast data
transfer between partner institutions, and in cloud computing that will realize
the scientific potential of the observations. The project activities, summer
schools, and webinars will enable the education of students and early career
researchers with internationally collaborative, hands-on experience in state-of-
the-art instrumentation technology, high-performance computing, and big data
science. The PIRE will also provide critical experience to young researchers in
navigating large, complex international collaborations. The tools developed
under this PIRE award will be openly available to the broader community to
directly benefit all other projects that rely on distributed resources and
expertise. The compelling combination of the first images of black holes, the
visually stunning results of computer simulations, and the use of virtual
reality tools will engage the public in the fascinating astrophysics of black
holes and inspire aspiring and future STEM
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The EHT
generates data and computational products distributed on a global scale at a
rate that pushes the limits of the current infrastructure for sharing and
analysis. The proposed PIRE award will support the goal of studying black holes
with the EHT at unprecedented angular resolution by funding activities to
develop: (i) advanced technologies to increase the efficiency of observations;
(ii) algorithms for optimizing the scheduling and triggering of world-wide
campaigns; (iii) infrastructure to facilitate fast transfer and sharing large
volumes of data among participating institutions; and (iv) cloud computing
frameworks to realize the scientific potential of the observations by supporting
advanced modeling and analysis efforts. The unique opportunities that the
international partners bring to the PIRE project include developing the
infrastructure that accelerates the worldwide sharing of data, tools, and
resources in order to fundamentally transform the way international and
multifaceted collaborations, such as the EHT, are utilized. The proposed PIRE
award will engage undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral associates
in a three-continent project with annual summer schools alternating between the
four member countries. This will be augmented by monthly webinars, hackathons,
and regular exchange visits among partner institutions. The educational outcome
of this collaboration will be monitored and continuously improved by using
advanced assessment tools.