* 1743724
* WORKSHOP:  NSF Frontiers of Experimental Condensed Matter Physics (CMP) Principal Investigators Workshop on Materials for the Quantum Revolution
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Amir Yacoby, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 04/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

Abstracts are a public record of active and expired awards and are an important
source of information on NSF activities. The purpose of the Abstract is to
describe the project and justify the expenditure of Federal funds. Abstracts
must not contain inappropriate or confidential information, and because they are
available to such a wide audience, high standards of quality must be maintained
in preparing them.

The NSF award abstract has two parts, which should appear in the following
order:

-Part 1: A nontechnical description of the project, which explains the
project's significance and importance. This description also serves as a public
justification for NSF funding by articulating how the project serves the
national interest, as stated by NSF's mission: to promote the progress of
science; to advance the national health, prosperity and welfare; or to secure
the national defense. This part of the abstract should describe the fundamental
issues the project seeks to address, as well as other potential benefits, such
as how the project advances the field, supports education and diversity, or
benefits society. This part should be understandable by a broad audience.

-Part 2: A technical description of the project that states its goals and
scope, the methods and approaches to be used, and its potential contribution. In
many cases, the technical project description may be a modified version of the
project summary that is submitted with the proposal. However, the technical
description should reflect any changes in the project's goals made after the
review process.

Upon award of a proposal, the Abstract is available in the Award Search
application and via FastLane.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
This workshop brings together researchers to discuss current topics and needs in
quantum science and technology which include fundamental aspects of topological
phases of matter, quantum sensors and systems, quantum technology and the
quantum workforce. The talks are setup to review progress that has been
accomplished in the last few years and set out new challenges and exciting
opportunities in developing materials and applications for the quantum
revolution. Discussions at this meeting are designed to identify key questions
within the field and promote brainstorming on future directions. Specific areas
to be highlighted include: Fundamental Topics, Quantum Sensors and Systems,
Quantum Technology, Quantum Workforce. Furthermore, panel discussions on the
current state of research and funding in the &#64257;eld of ?materials for the
quantum revolution? are planned to elucidate new trends and exciting areas of
development.