* 1743611
* Collaborative Research: Computer-Supported Math Discourse Among Teachers and Students
* EHR,DRL
* 05/15/2017,05/31/2018
* Stephen Weimar, National Council of Teachers of Mathematics
* Continuing Grant
* Ferdinand Rivera
* 05/31/2018
* USD 518,963.00

This full research and development project is to design, develop, and test a
cutting-edge online collaborative learning environment where students and
teachers solve mathematical problems and communicate their thinking with others.
The major focus is to increase the quality and quantity of significant math
discourse among mathematics teachers and their students by using this online
collaborative learning environment. This online collaborative learning
environment is based on PIs' prior work called Virtual Math Teams that
integrates synchronous and asynchronous media with the first multi-user dynamic-
math-visualization application. The researchers will test the usability of the
online ollaborative learning environment for engaging students in high quality
discourse. The researchers will also examine the impact of the online
ollaborative learning environment on students' significant mathematical
discourse and achievement.

The project uses a design research method as well as summative evaluations to
achieve research and development goals. Discourse analysis and regression models
will be used to examine the impact of the online collaborative learning
environment on student significant mathematical discourse and achievement.

The findings of the project contribute to the field in three ways: (1) The
online collanorative learning environment can be both an effective pedagogical
tool and a research tool in mathematics education; (2) It will contribute to our
understanding about the nature of mathematical discourse online as well as about
ways to foster the quality and quantity of significant math discourse among
teachers and their students; and (3) This project can provide insights into
effective online deliveries of courses.