* 1743270
* Workshop: Dawn III: What's next for Gravitational Wave Astronomy?  workshop to be held in Syracuse, NY, July 6-7 2017
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Manuela Campanelli, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2018
* USD 10,000.00

With the observation of the first two confirmed gravitational-wave events by
LIGO during its first observation run, and with the second observation run
ongoing, gravitational-wave astronomy has become a reality. The workshop
supported by this award, entitled "DAWN III - What's Next for Gravitational Wave
Astronomy?" aims at forging a global strategy on how to proceed with the next
generation gravitational wave detectors and host facilities. This workshop, the
third in the annual DAWN series, also follows the 8th Einstein Telescope
Symposium: "Toward a global 3G GW network", held at the University of Birmingham
on March 27/28 2017, which highlighted the need for further international
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will be held in Syracuse, NY,
at the Marriott Syracuse Downtown hotel on July 6-7, 2017. The two-day program
will focus on the global strategy for third-generation (3G) gravitational wave
observatories and detectors, and their science case. Of particular interest is
the proper coordination between the European effort proposing to build an
observatory detailed by the "Einstein Telescope" design study, and the U.S.
proposal of a similar class observatory, named "Cosmic Explorer". About 60
participants from around the world are expected. As in the case of the previous
DAWN workshops, the outcome of the meeting will be summarized in a report that
will be made publicly available.