* 1743367
* Collaborative Research: Bioprocess development for the generation of functional pancreatic islet cells from human pluripotent stem cells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Emmanouhl Tzanakakis, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2021
* USD 420,002.00

More than 9% of the US population suffers from diabetes, and the associated
healthcare costs are among the highest of the major diseases. There is currently
no cure for diabetes, and treatment to control blood sugar entails frequent
insulin injections but does not prevent long-term complications such as
blindness and heart disease. Pancreatic cell transplantation to restore the
production of insulin is severely limited by the scarcity of donor tissue.
Converting stem cells to insulin-producing cells may provide an answer, but
there are still many challenges that prevent the production of sufficient
numbers of these cells. Using experiments and computational modeling, this
project is systematically developing an improved biomanufacturing system that
will increase the production rate of pancreatic cells while at a lower cost. The
planned work is providing interdisciplinary training for undergraduate and
graduate students in STEM fields with an emphasis on biomanufacturing.
Educational and outreach activities include summer workshops for high school
students, featuring laboratory research, and lectures relevant to stem cell
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this interdisciplinary project, a process
is being engineered using automated stirred-suspension bioreactor cultivation
for the conversion of human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) to functional beta-
cells and further maturation to enhanced beta-cells (eBCs). Computational
modeling, based on population balance equations, is being combined with
bioreactor experimentation to screen and select conditions in a systematic and
rational fashion for optimal beta-cell yields with lower costs. Efficiency and
reproducibility in the biomanufacturing process are key goals in this process
engineering approach. In particular, the following specific aims are being
pursued: 1) differentiating hPSCs to immature beta-cells in stirred suspension
bioreactors; 2) inducing the maturation of hPSC-derived beta-cells to functional
eBCs in bioreactor culture; and 3) producing beta-cells from hPSCs and driving
their maturation to eBCs in a fully automated bioprocess. The utilization of
quantitative models will result in a rule-based design for hPSC differentiation
and bioprocessing and is compatible with quality-by-design concepts in
pharmaceutical development.