* 1743214
* EAGER: Myriad: a new architecture for parallel multiscale simulation on CPU/GPU
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Thomas Cleland, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 05/31/2021
* USD 299,577.00

The expansion of scientific knowledge is continually improving human
understanding of the brain and other biological systems. Increasingly, however,
it is becoming clear that many of the capacities of the brain arise from rich
and complex interactions among its many regions. Conversely, disorders of the
brain and body often arise from subtle deficits that gradually impair the
coordinated function of these interacting neural and biological systems until,
at last, they begin to collapse and major symptoms are expressed. Because these
networks of interactions are too complex to simply intuit, scientists construct
computer models so that the work of many different scientific studies can be
brought together and gradually constructed into a unified understanding of the
intricate systems under study. This leads to broader understandings of our
complex brains and bodies that would not be possible without such quantitative
models. The goal of the Myriad project is to provide a software platform for
biological modeling that makes it much easier to harness the power of modern
parallel-processing computer systems. A second goal is to implement a simulator
that uses this platform to create detailed models of neurons and neural
networks. Myriad is a compartmental simulator platform based on a shared-memory
architecture and designed for computational speed based on NVIDIA GPU (CUDA) or
parallel CPU execution. Its transformative potential arises from its capacity to
automatically parallelize any compartmental model, including those with dense
analogue interactions that presently cannot be effectively parallelized, and
without requiring the end user to write special, platform-specific
parallelization code. Myriad's shared-memory design eschews message-passing, and
utilizes a radically granular design approach that flattens hierarchically
defined cellular models and can even break up individual isometric compartments
by state variable. Specifically, all models that can be represented as
isometric, stateful nodes (compartments) connected by any number of arbitrary
mechanisms can be simulated with a high degree of parallelism, automatically
thread-scaled to the number of available threads and load-balanced with very
fine granularity to maximize the utilization of available CPU or GPU cores.
Programmatically, end-user models are defined in a Python-based environment and
converted into fully-specified C99 code (for CPU or GPU) via code generation
techniques that are enhanced by a custom abstract syntax tree (AST) translator
and, for NVIDIA GPUs, a custom object specification for CUDA enabling fully on-
card execution. The first applications of Myriad will be to simulate
biophysically realistic computational models of neurons and networks.
Importantly, however, Myriad's generic compartmental solver will be able in
principle to parallelize any model framework that can be represented as stateful
nodes coupled pairwise by arbitrary mechanisms. Accordingly, to extend Myriad
into new scientific areas of study (e.g., gene regulatory networks,
epidemiological models, host-virus interactions, ecological systems) will
require development only at the higher Python-based software layer, presumably
by experts in the relevant field. Finally, as present parallelization strategies
are only able to accelerate sparselycoupled models, computational modeling
recently has been drawn towards that subset of scientific questions capable of
being addressed by these methods. The release of Myriad may reopen the full
breadth of quantitative biological questions that can be effectively addressed
by parallel simulation. Updates on the Myriad project can be found at
http://cplab.net/myriad.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.