* 1743044
* RR: Workshop on Promoting Robust and Reliable Research Practice in Science of Organizations
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Gwendolyn Lee, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Tara Behrend
* 08/31/2021
* USD 49,960.00

The research community of Science of Organizations and other social, behavioral,
and economic sciences face a number of challenges related to promoting
robustness and reliability in our research. The workshop aims to address these
challenges and offer an opportunity to discuss best practices regarding how to
improve (1) reproducibility; (2) replicability; (3) generalizability; and (4)
the rigor of peer review with an explicit focus on robustness and reliability.
Each of the four aims for improvement has intellectual merits in theory
development, methodology, as well as publishing and reviewing. The workshop will
promote the awareness about and the standards of robust and reliable science. It
serves educational purposes globally by allowing researchers at all locations to
access the online video library that will be generated by this workshop.
Participants will gain a deeper understanding about the best research practice
and transmit the learning to their network. Results from this workshop can help
develop insights into and awareness about issues related to robust and reliable
research, and improve researcher abilities to conduct and publish robust and
reliable science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the workshop is to
promote and develop robust and reliable research practice in Science of
Organizations and other social, behavioral, and economic sciences by focusing on
three aspects of research activities. First, in theory development, the
discussion aims to focus on good practices for achieving rigor, transparency and
exactness; adding replication to the research trajectory; good practices for
testing existing theories in new contexts; as well as examining the cause,
practice, and consequence of irresponsible research practices. Second, in
methodology, the discussion aims to address transparency concerning the data
gathered, the design, the analysis methods, and the results; the collection of
new data for a fair test of the original study; useful methodologies to uncover
the conditions under which a theory may not be applicable; as well as registered
trials. Finally, in publishing and reviewing, the discussion aims to address the
debates about requiring data availability as a part of the peer review process;
debunking studies and theories that failed to survive attempted refutations; as
well as evaluating studies that demonstrate a lack of statistical support. The
workshop will include participants sampled from thought leaders and major
journal editors from a variety of disciplines, and scholars at different career
stages to participate in the discussion. Results of the workshop will be
archived and disseminated to reach a wide audience.