* 1743666
* Collaborative Research: EAGER - Developing a Consortium Model for the Successful Implementation of the Rising Engineering Education Faculty Experience (REEFE)
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Rachel Ellestad, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 09/30/2021
* USD 286,136.00

Within the STEM community, experts call for improving the way we educate future
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics leaders. Therefore, we need
intentional ways to connect cutting-edge scientific research on learning and
pedagogy to teaching practice. To bridge this gap in the research-practice
cycle, we propose the Rising Engineering Education Faculty Experience (REEFE), a
semester long, immersive program for future engineering education professionals
(graduate students). The benefits of the program are two-fold in that it
provides graduate students in engineering education research the opportunity to
apply their skills in a practical setting and develop collaborations and
professional identity while also exposing experienced education practitioners to
the benefits of engineering education research. During each semester, a graduate
student (currently enrolled in an engineering education PhD program) works with
faculty members at a host institution on selected projects or problems
identified at the school. Host institutions have high levels of practical
engineering education experience, but limited engineering education research
experience. Through this program, graduate students learn how to apply their
knowledge of educational theory, assessment, research methods, and skills at
being a change agent while gaining practical knowledge about teaching
engineering from experienced engineering educators. In exchange, faculty members
at the host institution collaborate with engineering education research experts
(late-stage graduate students) and discover how research can benefit their
teaching and classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project will support an
extended pilot program ultimately leading to the development of a full,
sustainable model for a larger Rising Engineering Education Faculty Experience
Consortium. In this pilot program, graduate students will be recruited from
Virginia Tech and Purdue's Engineering Education programs and collaborate with
faculty at Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology and Cal Poly San Luis Obispo. Two
prior tests of the program produced positive collaborations between researchers
and practitioners and evidence of participants' professional development. These
results, expressions of interest from peer schools, and affirmations from
independent stakeholders indicated a need to explore a larger, sustainable
consortium model. This program focuses on integrating future engineering
education experts (engineering education graduate students) into traditional
engineering programs in order to provide support for implementing and sustaining
educational interventions developed by researchers. By infusing late-stage
graduate students into traditional engineering departments, this program seeks
to broaden the engineering community's understanding of the benefits to and
ability to incorporate and sustain research-based practices into courses and
departments. Overall, the Consortium will facilitate the following activities:
1) recruit and match engineering education graduate students to partner
institutions where they will work closely with engineering faculty on
engineering education research activities, 2) provide developmental coaching for
graduate students and faculty before, during, and after the program experience,
and 3) conduct research on the impact to the research-practice cycle. Through
these efforts, we seek to positively impact engineering education practices and
graduate student development.