* 1743749
* PIRE-Sustainable Communities &amp; Gold Supply Chains: Integrating Responsible Engineering &amp; Local Knowledge to Design, Implement &amp; Evaluate Sustainable Artisanal Mining in
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Juan Lucena, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 12/31/2023
* USD 3,878,858.00

Juan Lucena (PI), Elizabeth Holley, Jessica Smith, Nicole Smith, Kathleen Smits
(Colorado School of Mines)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together
cutting edge engineering, social science scholarship, and community development
to make artisanal and small scale gold mining (ASGM) more sustainable. ASGM is
common in mineral rich developing countries. This type of mining produces about
30% of the gold in the world used in jewelry, finances, electronics, aerospace,
and medicine. ASGM causes large-scale deforestation, air/water contamination,
and chronic human diseases, especially from the mercury used to process the ore.
Despite these impacts, ASGM is a critical livelihood strategy for millions of
people worldwide. Existing efforts to introduce sustainable ASGM practices,
primarily through mercury-free processing technologies, have not achieved long-
term sustainability because they are believed by miners to be inefficient or
uneconomical. This project will break this trend by educating US engineers to
co-design, implement and evaluate sustainable and culturally appropriate ASGM
technologies and practices with miners and affected communities in Colombia and
Peru. For the first time, US engineering faculty and students will work with
Colombian and Peruvian faculty, students, and mining communities to develop
improved technologies and techniques, coupled with social organizations, to make
ASGM cleaner, safer, and more sustainable. While tackling this complex
international problem, this project will contribute to developing a global US
engineering workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ASGM systems are simultaneously
social, technical, and ecological, involving miners and communities, geologic
deposits, ecosystems, technologies, and scientific and engineering expertise.
This project will break new scholarly ground by developing an integrated,
community-centered approach to discovering how the multiple dimensions of ASGM
production systems influence one another, in order to design, implement,
evaluate, and ensure long-term sustainability of ASGM practices. Using a
combination of social science, human-centered design, and engineering methods,
this project will make at least 4 key scholarly contributions: 1) identifying
the local knowledge that miners and affected communities hold on mercury
exposure, on techniques for minimizing this exposure, and on environmental
remediation strategies; 2) advancing engineering and social science research on
the role of local knowledge in participatory environmental monitoring; 3)
widening the ASGM social science and engineering literatures to include
remediation; 4) testing criteria for Engineering for Sustainable Community
Development in the real world. This project will also test how engineering
students from two different educational models (training in humanitarian
engineering vs. expanded curriculum in the humanities &amp; social sciences)
compare in how they understand the social context of engineering and how they
work with non-US peers and communities. Through the project's affiliation with
the Alliance for Responsible Mining, the Governors' Climate and Forests Task
Force, and the networks of its Advisory Board, the project can expand its impact
beyond Colombia and Peru into other countries as well as beyond gold mining into
other minerals like cobalt.