* 1743790
* PIRE: Advanced Germanium Detectors and Technologies for Underground Physics
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2024
* John Wilkerson, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 09/30/2024
* USD 4,351,979.00

PI: Dongming Mei (University of South Dakota)&lt;br/&gt;co-PIs: Harlan Harris
(Texas A&amp;M University)&lt;br/&gt;John Wilkerson (University of North
Carolina)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Understanding
how the Universe works at its fundamental level is key to harnessing its power
here on Earth. Observations of gravitational phenomena indicate that 80% of the
matter in the Universe is dark matter (DM). Novel direct-detection strategies to
probe non-gravitational interactions between DM and ordinary matter are needed
to discover DM. In addition to DM, neutrinos also play an important role in
understanding the Universe. The discovery of neutrino mass has created a
potential tantalizing connection between the observed asymmetry of matter over
antimatter in our Universe and postulated neutrino properties. If neutrinos are
their own anti-particles, this might offer an explanation of the prevalence of
matter over anti-matter. The only experimentally feasible way to answer this
question is to look for neutrinoless double-beta
(0&amp;#957;&amp;#946;&amp;#946;) decay, a proposed form of nuclear decay.
Observation of coherent elastic neutrino-nucleus scattering (CE&amp;#957;NS)
indicates several important properties of neutrinos. Testing these properties
could lead to a better understanding of the origin and evolution of the
Universe. Therefore, the nature of dark matter and key properties of neutrinos
are two of the most important questions in fundamental physics. PIRE-GErmanium
Materials And Detectors Advancement Research Consortium (PIRE- GEMADARC) is a
global partnership created to accelerate the germanium (Ge) material platform
used in research and development for ton-scale DM and
0&amp;#957;&amp;#946;&amp;#946; decay experiments while educating the next
generation of scientists. PIRE-GEMADARC also develops innovative approaches to
constructing new types of low threshold and high-resolution Ge detectors with
applications in homeland security, environmental monitoring, and medical
imaging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;PIRE-GEMADARC
leverages the research expertise, training capabilities, and world-renowned
facilities of eleven institutions in the United States, Canada, China, Germany,
and Taiwan. Specifically, PIRE-GEMADARC will: (1) advance techniques in zone
refinement and crystal growth to guarantee the purity and appropriate gradient
of large-size Ge (LGe) detector-grade crystals; (2) develop LGe detectors to
achieve low energy thresholds for DM and CE&amp;#957;NS detection and better
particle discrimination for 0&amp;#957;&amp;#946;&amp;#946; decay; (3) improve
detector performance by gaining a better understanding of charge collection
efficiency, background reduction methods, and systematic uncertainties; and (4)
enhance education and training for young scientists in the field. Direct
detection of DM and observation of 0&amp;#957;&amp;#946;&amp;#946; decay
requires deep underground laboratories, extremely pure detectors, and well-
established expertise in crystal growth. This Consortium provides access to the
deepest underground laboratories - SNOLAB (Canada) and China Jinping Underground
Laboratory (China), and includes world-class international expertise in
developing Ge detectors from Max-Planck-Institut f√ºr Physik (Germany) and the
Institute of Physics, Academia Sinica (Taiwan). Equally important is the work of
the Consortium to develop the next generation of diverse scientists and
engineers through its integrated research and education program. At the end of
this five-year award, the Consortium will have trained more than 170
undergraduate and graduate students and K-12 teachers, plus 5 postdoctoral
fellows - a majority of whom will have practical international research
experiences, and a significant fraction of which will be from underrepresented
groups. The Consortium's comprehensive Junior Faculty Development plan will
prepare six early career faculty members for academic leadership.