* 1743144
* 2018 NSF-CBMS Conference on Mathematical Biology: Modeling and Analysis at Howard University
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Abdul-Aziz Yakubu, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 12/31/2018
* USD 35,000.00

This National Science Foundation award supports the 2018 NSF - CBMS conference,
on "Mathematical Biology: Modeling and Analysis," hosted by Howard University in
Washington D.C. during May 21-25, 2018. The conference will feature
Distinguished University Professor Avner Friedman of The Ohio State University
as the Principal Lecturer. Through a series of ten lectures, Professor Friedman
will introduce participants to the fast-growing field of mathematical biology
beginning with preliminary material in modeling of simple biological processes,
and including topics such as infectious diseases, chemostat, predator-prey, and
chemotaxis. This will be followed by presentations of more advanced and current
research topics modeled by partial differential equations, including cancer,
vascular diseases, and autoimmune diseases. Professor Friedman's lectures will
be supported by eight invited speakers who will discuss mathematical biology
models and their analysis. There will be three panel discussions on (1) how to
attract undergraduate students to mathematical biology, (2) how to train PhD
students in mathematical biology, and (3) future directions in mathematical
biology. In addition, there will be a conference banquet lecture on views from
the biology and medical communities by Professor Michael Reed of Duke
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical models and analysis provide
unique approaches to representing and studying the integrated behaviors of
complex biological systems that enable us to compare and contrast existing
theories of the dynamic interactions in a complex system. To get the maximum
benefit out of mathematical models and analysis, one needs to specialize them,
test assumptions in specific contexts and populations, gather local data to help
define key parameters, and validate models. The NSF-CBMS Regional Conference at
Howard University, with Professor Friedman of The Ohio State University, will
introduce the participants to basic concepts and knowledge of biology, and
demonstrate by examples how to formulate interesting biological research
questions, and how to address these questions using mathematics. The models will
be formulated in terms of dynamical systems. The conference website is at
http://humathbio.weebly.com/nsf-cbms-conference.html.