* 1743395
* RAPID:   Collaborative Research:  Evolution and variability of modern human sleep patterns
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Eduardo Fernandez-Duque, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2018
* USD 14,500.00

In this RAPID project, the investigators will measure melatonin levels and
timing of sleep in two non-industrialized populations that are similar except
for access to electricity, to understand how sleep is affected by artificial
light and the interaction of artificial and natural light exposures. Because
power lines are quickly being extended in the research area, this experimental
design is possible during a limited window of time before electricity reaches
all communities. The research will contribute to our understanding of underlying
biological mechanisms and variability of human sleep patterns. The project will
support student training, international research collaborations, and public and
community science outreach activities, and has potential relevance for
understanding sleep problems in industrialized
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will collect data on melatonin
levels and sleep timing for individuals in each of two Toba/Qom communities.
Participants will wear activity watches and keep diaries to document sleep
patterns and quality. Saliva samples will be assayed to determine each
individual's daily melatonin onset. The main predictions are that individuals in
the community with artificial light will have a later time of daily melatonin
onset, that differences will be greatest during the winter, and that any effect
of moonlight would be to decrease sleep quality, more so in the population
without artificial light. The project will expand our understanding of the
spectrum of sleep patterns and sleep-regulatory pressures that may have played
distinct roles in human history and evolution, and the ways in which modern
societies have modified human sleep patterns.