* 1743285
* Workshop Support to Encourage Student Investigation of Gesture and Dialog
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Richard Voyles, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 05/31/2022
* USD 14,345.00

The connection between humans and their machines has never been more significant
or more fundamental to our culture and our activities of daily living. While
more prevalent in younger generations, humans of all ages are becoming
increasingly dependent and engaged by devices and the human/machine relationship
is in a state of extremely rapid change and growing importance to the national
economy. Smartphones, robotic vacuum cleaners, web-enabled kitchen appliances,
and virtual personal assistants are all around us and competing for our
attention and our discretionary spending. In fact, we are engaging much more in
a dialog with our machines, than ever before, eschewing the prior modalities of
one-way command/response. Gestural interfaces have become so commonplace that
many toddlers have begun to expect bi-directional interaction from inanimate
objects. Much of this advancement has been driven by technological prowess and
the race toward what is possible, rather than careful human-centric analysis and
design. This is largely due to the complex interdisciplinary issues that are
raised and the difficulties in bringing together the right collection of
expertise to address them. The Workshop on Adaptive-Shot Learning for Gesture
Understanding and Production, a scientific workshop on the intersection of
gesture, machine learning and embodied intelligence, seeks to increase interest
and activities in the interdisciplinary study of gesture and dialog for
human/machine interaction through technical exchange and interaction which can
lead to scientific advancements with high economic payoff and deep impact on
well-being. Advancing the theoretical bases of these fields and their
intersection can have enormous societal impact and will stimulate careful,
multi-dimensional study of the field, promoting a diversity of thought and,
ultimately, greater satisfaction for human users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals
of the Workshop include several things. First, increasing interest in the
intersection of the fields of gesture recognition, verbal and non-verbal dialog,
and embodied intelligence is key. This will result in a richer body of knowledge
which, in turn, will result in more responsive, natural, and effective
human/machine interfaces. Second, increasing the engagement of this younger
generation of device users in the research and teaching of how these fields
overlap is important. Familiar devices are important tools to engage new
potential scientists and philosophers in the excitement of new discoveries.
Finally, attracting a broad audience that cross-cuts the diverse fields of study
of relevance to these new interaction modalities to enable outside-the-box
thinking. The Workshop is organized by a diverse group of researchers from
computer science, engineering, technology, psychology, and design and is held in
Washington, DC, in connection to the IEEE Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition
Conference, May 30-June 3, 2017. Travel grants supported by this grant are being
offered, specifically targeting junior grad students with novel ideas, to join
the established researchers to present their ideas in an informal setting. The
diverse panel of organizers will recruit applicants to a gentle competition for
these travel awards to encourage excellent submissions. This will achieve the
goals, further educational attainment, and advance diversity of thought.