* 1743497
* The Sixth International Conference on Mathematical Modeling and Analysis of Populations in Biological Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Joceline Lega, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 18,000.00

The Sixth International Conference on Mathematical Modeling and Analysis of
Populations in Biological Systems will take place at the University of Arizona,
Tucson, AZ, on October 20-22, 2017. This project support the participation of
students (undergraduate and graduate) and early career participants (junior
faculty and post-doc fellows) in the conference. This conference will bring
together researchers in the mathematical and biological sciences to share their
latest findings in the use of mathematical models to study problems arising in
population, ecological, and evolutionary dynamics, with a focus on the effects
of environmental change. The participants will range from internationally
recognized senior researchers to early career researchers and students
(postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate). Participants will hear the latest
research and findings from their colleagues and have opportunities to present
their own research, in both formal and informal settings. During the two and one
half days of the conference, there will be five plenary talks by senior
researchers and approximate 80 other invited and contributed talks by other
participants, including early career participants. It will be a time to
establish new collaborations and to refresh established collaborations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad theme of the conference is the analysis of
mathematical models for the temporal dynamics of biological populations. A
special emphasis will be placed on the effects of environmental/climate change.
Specific topics include: population and ecological dynamics; adaptation and
evolutionary dynamics; dynamics of infectious diseases and epidemics; dispersal
and distribution of populations; invasions and endangered species; management of
natural resources. Mathematical models play a central role in population biology
where the contribute towards an understanding of the consequences of climate
change and of actions that can be taken to mitigate deleterious effects, such as
species extinction and loss of biological diversity, habitat disruption and
species dispersal, threatened managed systems of renewable natural resources,
spread of infectious diseases, evolution of pathogen drug immunity. For this
effort to be effective, modelers and biologists need to work in close
collaborations. A major contribution of the conference will be to provide a
venue for such interdisciplinary collaboration. The PI will invite participants
whose research involves model derivation, the mathematical analysis of models,
the use of model simulations, and interfacing models with data and observations.
The plenary speakers will be encouraged to reach a broader audience, to give
surveys of the current state of the research in their field of study, and to
suggest new directions of research. The conference website is
https://math.la.asu.edu/~icma2017/index.html