* 1743701
* PIRE: High Temperature Ceramic Fibers: Polymer-Based Manufacturing, Nanostructure, and Performance
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Alexandra Navrotsky, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 09/30/2024
* USD 4,694,233.00

Gurpreet Singh (Kansas State University), Himanshu Jain (Lehigh University),
Peter Kroll (University of Texas at Arlington), Alexandra Navrotsky (University
of California - Davis), Rishi Raj (University of Colorado
Boulder)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The single crystal superalloy blade for gas
turbines may have been the most significant development in energy and
transportation sectors in the last century. It empowered our military prowess,
and enabled civilian aircraft to fly half way around the world. Further
advancement in the operating temperature of gas turbines made with metallic
materials, however, is limited by their melting points. So the next phase must
be based upon high-temperature ceramics. These high-tech materials for gas
turbine engines are composites of ceramic fibers infiltrated with a ceramic
matrix, both made of non-oxide ceramics such as silicon carbide. The fibers,
which are the foundation of this ceramic matrix composite (CMC) technology, are
generally derived through thermal decomposition of organosilicon polymers. The
CMCs hold the promise of quantum leaps in the operating temperature of gas
turbines, which may increase engine thrust by 25% while decreasing fuel
consumption by 10% just within the next few years. Unfortunately, the United
States is far behind Japan and Europe that lead the science and technology of
processing and innovation in non-oxide fiber fabrication. To make the US
competitive this PIRE program will expand research in the basic science and
technology and train professionals with expertise in fiber processing and
properties. The program will leverage the relationships that researchers in the
US have established with their counterparts overseas. Specifically, the US PIRE
team members will bring expertise in structure and thermo-chemo-mechanical
property characterization of polymer-derived ceramics (PDC), whereas
international partners will offer expertise in pre-ceramic polymers and non-
oxide ceramic fibers. Together they will train the next generation of students
in this crucial area of materials science and engineering. Seven to ten doctoral
and twenty undergraduate research scholars from the US will receive training on
ceramic fiber research via dual degree programs and exchange visits to PIRE
member institutions in Japan and Europe (UK, France, Germany, Italy). The
community built under this program will include young researchers comprising of
at least 50% female, underrepresented and first-generation-to-attend-college
students. They will serve as the backbone for continued innovation and
scientific research on ceramic fibers far into the future. The research team
foresees that the fiber program will evolve into a full-fledged CMC program,
where the matrix and the fibers are manufactured from polymers in the United
States, within a decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research component of this
PIRE project will focus on developing the next generation multi-component PDC
fibers of carefully selected compositions within the Si/C/N/O systems through
systematic understanding of structure-property-processing correlations, leading
to superior properties. Key aspects of the project are: (a) design of new pre-
ceramic polymers suitable for drawing fibers, (b) thermolysis of pre-ceramic
polymers to obtain multi-component ceramic fibers with desired morphology,
chemical stability and microstructure, (c) measurements of creep and
thermochemical properties, and (d) modeling of the oxidation behavior of ceramic
fibers. Ab-initio calculations will be performed to correlate experimental
measurements, such as from high temperature calorimetry, to the nanostructure of
ceramic fibers. Further, economic evaluation and the impact of PDC fiber
manufacture on resources will be assessed to determine the implications and
viability of new, science-based technologies at the earliest stages. Successful
completion of the project will thus lead to: (i) the creation of new US-based
CMC science and technology, (ii) a cadre of undergraduate and graduate students
who will implement this know-how in US academia, industry and national
laboratories, and (iii) a vibrant international community that through its
diversity will greatly accelerate progress in this critical field.