* 1743521
* Brain Bases of Reading and Math in Children with Learning Disability
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Guinevere Eden, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,786,135.00

Math and reading disabilities (MD and RD) are prevalent learning disabilities
(LDs) that often interfere with academic, social, and vocational success.
Children with these LDs often struggle in STEM related subjects due to the
importance of numerical and written materials in these fields. These LDs often
co-occur together (MD+RD), and even children with RD-only show impaired
performance on some aspects of mathematics. To date, it is unclear how these
disorders are related to each other and whether they have similar or distinct
neurobiological underpinnings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project intends to
uncover the neural bases of these LDs using an intervention (tutoring) approach
combined with brain imaging. The investigators will collect behavioral,
structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data from 32 children
with MD. These children will be scanned prior to and following separate math and
reading interventions, to examine the neural correlates of performance gains.
The MD children will also be compared with existing data from RD and MD+RD
children to understand the shared and distinguishing features of activity
underlying reading and arithmetic in these respective groups. Together this work
will inform brain-based models of LDs and shed light on the interactive nature
of math and reading in the context of instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program
emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational
knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that are
essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development. The program
supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform efforts to understand,
build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and innovations to address
persistent challenges in STEM interest, education, learning and
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.