* 1743748
* PIRE: Computationally-Based Imaging of Structure in Materials (CuBISM)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Aggelos Katsaggelos, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2024
* USD 4,246,213.00

PI: Kenneth Shull (Northwestern University)&lt;br/&gt;co-PIs: Francesca Casadio
(Art Institute of Chicago)&lt;br/&gt;Oliver Cossairt (Northwestern
University)&lt;br/&gt;Aggelos Katsaggelos (Northwestern
University)&lt;br/&gt;Marc Walton (Northwestern
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Historic art
objects provide a collection of materials that have been naturally aged for
decades or even centuries. In addition to the intrinsic archival value of these
materials, they are also models for understanding property degradation over long
periods of time. This project aims to develop computational and experimental
tools needed to understand how these changes take place. To accomplish this task
a research network has been established between Northwestern University and
leaders in cultural heritage science from the Rijksmuseum and the University of
Amsterdam in the Netherlands, the National Research Council in Italy, and the
Synchrotron Soleil in France. This new infrastructure promises to deliver a
significant enhancement of research and education resources (networks,
partnership and increased access to facilities and instrumentation) to a diverse
group of users. The art objects central to the project provide a series of well-
defined case studies for investigating complex materials systems that are both
applicable to materials education and push the limits of the existing analytical
tools, thus inspiring instrumental innovations across broad sectors of the
physical sciences. Further development of these tools will enable art
conservators to more effectively make informed decisions about treatments of
works of art, and to understand long-term materials degradation more generally.
The project will also deliver a significant enhancement of research and
education infrastructure by a diverse group of users and will provide
meaningful, international research experience to 50 participants, with a strong
emphasis on scientists at the beginning of their careers. In addition, the
connections between science and art will illustrate the creative aspects of both
disciplines to a very broad audience, attracting a more representative cross
section of people into science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the proposed program is to probe the
properties of heterogeneous material composites at multiple length scales, with
a focus on the materials used in creating works of art. The grand challenge is
to understand the coupling of material structures from nano- to macro- length
scales to the visual appearance, and to use this coupling as a probe of material
properties. This coupling will be addressed by incorporating light/matter
interactions into computational chemistry approaches, which will also be
developed to understand the physical-chemical changes that occur in materials
over long periods of time. This information can be used to reconstruct the
appearance of an object as originally created, and project the appearance into
the future. This methodology is of primary importance to the art conservation
community, which has developed advanced research infrastructures in Europe that
are rare or nonexistent in the U.S. These European resources are essential for
the completion of the project goals, which are to provide a greater
understanding of the way in which chemical and physical changes within a
material gradually distort its visual perception, and to develop a mechanistic
understanding of these alteration pathways. The proposed PIRE project integrates
teams from leading cultural heritage science institutes in France, the
Netherlands and Italy with their American Counterparts. While the tools will be
applicable to modern engineered materials as well, examples from art provide a
much broader educational impact. A combination of individual and cohort visits
to the three primary international sites will provide students with an
international perspective on science and research, while building skills in
communicating the role of science in society.