* 1743997
* EAGER:  PPER:  Development of a Contest-based Crowdsourcing Scheme for Public Water Quality Monitoring
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2020
* James Malley, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2020
* USD 100,000.00

1743997 (Mo). This project aims to design, assess, and understand a
generalizable contest-based crowdsourcing scheme to engage the public in
continuous water quality monitoring activities at the consumer tap. The approach
is intended to allow early response, risk management, and harm reduction in a
public water quality crisis like Flint, MI. Two contests with different public
recognition reward schemes will be developed, one that focuses on rewarding
participants for the number of samples collected at different locations and
another that focuses on rewarding participants for the number of new recruits to
the program. The experimental design of each contest includes online pre-contest
surveys, sample collection by the participants, paper-based post-contest surveys
and interviews, and centralized sample analysis at one lab facility. Two
different contaminants (i.e., lead and copper) will be tested in the two
contests to reduce the potential fatigue effect from multiple contests. Social
media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter) and word-of-mouth promotion will be used to
recruit participants. The survey instruments will be used to collect information
regarding participants' motivation, socioeconomic characteristics, and
perceptions of the proposed scheme. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project should
facilitate identification and understanding of optimal program design features
and demographic factors that influence outcomes related to data quality, use of
science in decision-making, scientific literacy, and networking changes from
contest-based crowdsourcing efforts. The project is targeted to result in
creation of a generalizable framework to engage the public in water quality
monitoring at the consumer taps. This work will generate new knowledge in: 1)
effective design of crowdsourcing schemes to engage the public in household
water quality monitoring activities; 2) major motivators to engage the public in
household water quality monitoring activities and barriers that prevent people
from participating in such activities; 3) an understanding of the influence of
people's socioeconomic status, job confidence, and environmental awareness on
their participation in water quality monitoring activities; 4) the potential
benefits of using crowdsourcing to improve public scientific literacy, social
network, and environmental decision-making; 5) the potential changes in property
values and social equity resulting from a water quality red flag; and, 6)
enhanced understanding of the factors that influence household water quality.
This project is also targeted to result in the development of a cost-effective
and public engaged approach of household water quality monitoring, and
initiation and identification of a community that could be engaged in future
water quality monitoring efforts.