* 1743950
* I-Corps: Nipple regeneration for breast cancer survivors
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2018
* Cory Hallam, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 05/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a process technology that provides patients with a naturally
pigmented donor skin scaffold (allograft) for recovery from surgeries, burns,
and other procedures that require tissue regeneration. The availability of a
natural scaffold helps improve patient physiological outcomes, and the use of
similar pigmentation can improve natural integration with the recipient's
existing skin, easing their emotional recovery and self-image. There is a
growing demand for such engineered allografts in surgeries, including breast
reconstruction. The incidence of breast cancer diagnosis has been increasing
rapidly in the united states. Furthermore, the last few decades have seen an
increasing trend for women to undergo a double mastectomy for preventative
measures, even if breast cancer was only detected in one breast. Such procedures
require complete reconstruction of both breasts. In 2015, there were 176,308
breast reconstructions and this number is expected to continue rising. This
process technology will help meet some of this demand by improving the
production of scaffolds, and may lead to new methods by which individuals
planning surgeries can have their own tissue processed and reused in their
procedures (autograft).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will develop a
scaffold for nipple regeneration derived from human nipple areolar complex
tissue. Currently, the best option for nipple reconstruction required in breast
reconstruction is cutting and suturing the skin on the breast to create a scar
mound with a subsequent tattoo for desired pigmentation that recreates the
appearance of a nipple. Unfortunately, this method results in nipple flattening
due to retraction forces of the underlying tissue and contraction of scar
tissue. Instead of just recreating the appearance of a nipple, like current
reconstruction methods, our engineering process technology allows the patient to
have a scaffold assist in the regeneration of a nipple made from her own cells.
Portions of the scaffold processing we are developing have been demonstrated in
a laboratory setting. Advantages of this technology include improved cell
proliferation, differentiation, and migration when the scaffold is repopulated
with cells from the patient. It is highly desirable to maintain native tissue
composition when engineering tissue scaffolds for regenerative medicine
applications, and recent studies have demonstrated that superior function and
complex tissue formation occurred when such scaffolds were derived from site-
specific homologous tissues.