* 1743300
* Workshop - Acoustics: New Fundamentals and Applications; Alexandria, Virginia; October 2017
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Massimo Ruzzene, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 07/31/2018
* USD 49,945.00

The goal of this workshop is to bring together researchers from the dynamics
&amp; control, acoustics, and metamaterials communities with the purpose of
identifying promising future research directions focusing on the use of
dynamical systems and control theory to address problems at the nexus of
acoustic metamaterials and system theory. The workshop will be held in
Alexandria, Virginia, in October 2017.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acoustics permeates
our daily life in far more ways than we normally think, and the related research
is far from having achieved maturity. Several emerging concepts hold significant
promise for practical application, and have the potential for important societal
impact. Progress in these topics would greatly benefit from exposure to, and
interaction with, disciplines that traditionally do not focus on acoustics as an
application area. The goal of the workshop is to bring together experts from
selected, emerging topics in acoustics and metamaterials with researchers from
the controls community in order to identify opportunities for collaboration, new
research questions, specific needs, and, most of all, promising applications
that may be enabled by the control of new properties of acoustic systems. The
workshop is expected to define promising investigation areas and their path to
application.