* 1743188
* SI2-S2I2 Conceptualization: Conceptualizing a US Research Software Sustainability Institute (URSSI)
* CSE,OAC
* 12/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Jeffrey Carver, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 06/30/2021
* USD 499,999.00

Many science advances have been possible thanks to use of software. This
software, also known as "research software", has become essential to progress in
science and engineering. The scientists who develop the software are experts in
their discipline, but do not have sufficient understanding of the practices that
make software development easier, and the software more robust, reliable,
maintainable and sustainable. This project will work with these scientists to
understand how the research community can best work together to design and
maintain better software with lower effort, so that they and others can continue
to use it over long periods of time. This project will conduct several workshops
and a survey in order to gather and understand the community's needs and the
software expertise of its members. These needs will be widely disseminated via
newsletters and via a website. The primary deliverable of this project will be a
design and strategic plan for a US Research Software Sustainability Institute
(URSSI) which will serve as a community hub and provide services to scientists
that will help them create improved, more sustainable software. This software in
turn will accelerate the progress of science, thus serving NSF's
mission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern research is inescapably digital, with data
and publications most often created, analyzed, and stored electronically, using
tools and methods expressed in software. This "research software" is essential
to progress in science, engineering, and all other fields, but it is not
developed in an efficient or sustainable way. The researchers who develop this
software, while well-versed in their discipline, generally do not have
sufficient training and understanding of best practices that ease development
and maintainability and that encourage sustainability and reproducibility. In
response, this project is conceptualizing a US Research Software Sustainability
Institute that will validate and address at least three classes of concerns
(functioning of the individual and team, the research software, and the research
field itself), impacting all software development and maintenance projects
across all of NSF. URSSI conceptualization includes workshops and a widely-
distributed survey that engages important stakeholder communities to learn about
the software they produce and use, and the ways they contemplate sustaining it,
following the paths blazed by other successful software institutes.
Communication is a key component of this project, with newsletters, a web site,
survey outputs, and social media used to provide broad dissemination and
engagement. The workshops, survey, and community management approach allow the
conceptualization project to iteratively build on existing, extensive
understanding of the challenges for sustainable software and its developers. The
project also addresses how URSSI could formalize, diversify, and improve the
pipeline under which students enter universities, learn about and contribute to
software, then graduate to full-time positions where they make use of their
software skills, to increase the diversity of those entering research software
development and to retain diversity over their university careers. The
conceptualization team has accumulated hundreds of person-years of combined
experience by thinking, researching, and living scientific software; this will
be combined with feedback from the broader community. It leverages existing
collaborations to expand both the community and the project's knowledge of its
needs, to plan the best possible URSSI. The results will create an eager
supportive community, a concrete institute plan configured to offer valued
services, and a published survey and data that demonstrates community need.