* 1743234
* Educating Skillful Visualizers
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2018
* Sean Fox, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Karen King
* 04/30/2018
* USD 49,935.00

A team of researchers from Temple University and Carleton College will convene a
workshop focused on educating students to be skillful users and creators of
modern scientific visualizations, such as data graphs, maps, charts and
diagrams. Such visualizations are now abundant in science textbooks, newspaper
and magazine articles, and in scientific journal articles. In many cases, the
article or chapter simply cannot be understood by reading the text alone; the
visualizations carry essential elements of the message and many students find
them challenging to understand. The workshop will bring together a multi-
disciplinary group of researchers, developers, and educators drawn from a
variety of fields where using scientific visualizations is a key competency,
including the full range of STEM disciplines. The workshop will focus on both
social and cognitive processes and strategies that underlie learning with
visualizations. Conveners and participants will work to synthesize what is known
about fostering and assessing students' visualization proficiency, and will
identify outstanding research questions. The main product of the workshop for
the broader community will be a compilation of instructional and assessment
strategies that are independent of discipline and show promise for helping to
build students' proficiency with visualizations. The compilation will be made
accessible through a widely used and freely-available website. The project is
funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances
the fundamental research literature on STEM
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers from Temple University and Carleton
College will convene a workshop focused on educating students to be skillful
users and creators of modern scientific visualizations, such as data graphs,
maps, charts and diagrams. The goal of the workshop is to construct a set of
visualization competencies that builds across the educational trajectory, is
grounded in human perceptual and cognitive systems, is not tied to specific
disciplinary visualization practices, and produces graduates who can develop and
interpret visualizations of types that have not been explicitly taught. Learners
who acquire this kind of trans-disciplinary visualization competency will find
it easier to move between and collaborate across disciplines. They will increase
their capacity to communicate about science, and thus help to bridge between
science and the rest of society. To move towards these goals, this workshop will
bring together a multi-disciplinary group including faculty, doctoral students,
curriculum developers, professional development providers, visualization
creators, and education researchers, working in a variety of fields where using
scientific visualizations is a key competency. The workshop will have two
strands: one focused on fostering learners' visualization competencies and the
second on assessing those competencies and evaluating the effectiveness of
visualizations and their use in education based on those competencies. For each
strand, the conveners have cast a broad net for ideas that have been shown to
work in some context and are potentially suitable for expansion across multiple
contexts. Drawing on the participants' experience and expertise, the group will
produce a compilation of instructional strategies that are independent of
discipline and show promise for helping to build students' proficiency with
data-based and concept-based visualizations. The compilation will be fleshed out
with examples from multiple fields. In parallel with this gathering and cross-
fertilization of existing knowledge, the group will identify key research
questions about visualization learning that have recurred across multiple
visualization-using disciplines.