* 1743886
* RAPID:  Addressing Geographic Disparities in the National Organ Transplant Network
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2019
* Sanjay Mehrotra, Northwestern University at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 06/30/2019
* USD 100,000.00

Liver transplantation is currently the only known medical treatment for End-
stage Liver Disease with established survival benefits. In the United States,
current allocation policies continue to result in geographical disparities for
donor organs on several metrics. Disparities include the fraction of waitlisted
patients dying on the waitlist, and the sickness level at which patients are
transplanted in different areas of the country. This Rapid Response Research
(RAPID) award supports refinements and enhancements to a novel neighborhood-
based organ allocation approach currently being considered for adoption by
policy makers on the United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) Liver and Intestine
Committee. The refinements specifically address reducing geographic disparities
by better matching donor organs with transplant beneficiaries. This award will
provide decision support to UNOS and the broader transplantation community in
the U.S.

This RAPID award will support activities to take to scale the previously
developed optimization model by utilizing national datasets. Because the model
involves a highly complex multi-objective optimization, a refinement of the
existing model is highly challenging, as identifying acceptable solutions
involves lengthy simulations and manipulation of several parameters and
structural linkages between organ procurement organizations. The simulation
tools will be publicly available, and the data collected from an improved model
is expected to have an impact on a broad population segment. Researchers in
operations research, management science, transplant surgery, and the hepatology
communities will be educated through presentation at national conferences. A
graduate student will be trained as part of the research, and clinicians will
also be educated as to the role of a scientific modeling approach when
considering public health challenges.