* 1743392
* RAISE: Dendritic spine mechano-biology and the process of memory formation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Herbert Levine, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 07/31/2023
* USD 996,778.00

This RAISE project is jointly funded by the Chemistry of Life Processes Program
in the Division of Chemistry, the Physics of Living Systems Program in the
Division of Physics, the Cellular Dynamics and Function and the Molecular
Biophysics Clusters in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, the
Neural Systems Cluster in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems, the
Division of Emerging Frontiers, the RAISE Program and the Office of Integrative
Activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funding Professors Peter
Wolynes, Margaret Cheung, Michael Diehl and Herbert Levine at Rice University
and M. Neal Waxham at University of Texas (UT) Health-Houston to investigate the
molecular mechanisms of learning and memory. The initiation of learning begins
with changes at neuronal synapses that can strengthen (or weaken) the response
of the synapse. This process is termed synaptic plasticity. Stimuli that produce
learning lead to structural changes of the post-synaptic dendritic spine. The
initial events of memory and learning include a temporary rise in calcium
concentrations and activation of a protein called calmodulin. The next step is
activation of calmodulin-dependent enzyme, kinase II (CaMKII). At the same time,
structural rearrangements occur in the actin cytoskeleton leading to an
enlargement of the spine compartment. How these initial events lead to
remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton is largely unknown. This project focuses on
the events that lead to the changes in actin cytoskeleton. The research also
addresses the question of how these structural changes in the actin cytoskeleton
are used to maintain memory. State-of-the-art computational modeling is used to
answer these questions. Modeling is applied at molecular and supra-molecular
scales. The models examine molecular changes that bridge the time scales between
the initial steps and start of synaptic plasticity. The computational modeling
goes hand in hand with state-of-the-art structural and functional imaging and
biochemical pathway analyses. The research allows graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows to acquire specialized training in computer simulations and
mathematical modeling of a subcellular system. The students and fellows acquire
an understanding of the brain starting from a molecular level. The team of
theoreticians and experimentalists working cooperatively on this problem
strengthens the training process. This project is integrated into an outreach
program to introduce undergraduate students from underrepresented groups to
science by participating in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project quantitatively characterizes the relevant molecular processes involved
in the dynamical "tectonic" reorganization inside a dendritic spine involved in
forming memories. It focuses on the actin cytoskeleton using computer
simulations and experimental analyses at both molecular and supra-molecular
scales. This study therefore contributes directly to understanding the role of
mechanics and structure in synaptic plasticity and learning and memory.
Explicitly, the hypothesis is that the transient effects from calcium influx
create, in a CaMKII-dependent manner, changes in the spatial patterning of the
actin structure. Such changes may be be stabilized by feedback loops with prion-
like proteins. These stabilized structures may be a type of "structural engram"
which then serves as long-term reservoir for maintaining enhanced synaptic
strength in the postsynaptic neuron. Testing, modifying, and verifying this
hypothesis may help point the way towards a more quantitatively-sophisticated
approach to the first stages of learning and memory in the brain.