* 1743807
* Community for Advancing Discovery Research Education (CADRE) 2018
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Catherine McCulloch, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 12/31/2018
* USD 985,487.00

This project from the Community for Advancing Discovery Research in Education
(CADRE) will provide assistance to Discovery Research K-12 (DRK-12) projects in
areas such as research and development methods, implementation, and analysis
procedures; synthesis of findings across the portfolio of projects; and national
dissemination of the R&amp;D contributions of the DRK-12 program. This Design
and Development project will strengthen the capacity, advance the research, and
amplify the impact of DRK-12 projects and researchers working in the assessment,
learning, and teaching strands. Through this effort, CADRE will advance the
goals of the DRK-12 program in preK-12 formal STEM education by responding to
the continuing need for communication, collaboration, and innovations among
DRK-12 awardees and between awardees and the education system. The DRK-12
program seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)by preK-12 students and teachers
through research and development of innovative resources, models and tools.
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education
and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and
empirical justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CADRE's
goals to strengthen the capacity, advance the research, and amplify the
influence of over 300 active DRK-12 projects and associated researchers are
designed to contribute to improvements in preK-12 STEM education. During this
project, CADRE will continue its work in three main areas: (1) building the
DRK-12 community, (2) connecting awardees in support of knowledge generation,
and (3) connecting to the larger community of education research, policy, and
practice. CADRE seeks to bring together (virtually and in-person) diverse
audiences to contribute to and benefit from the work of DRK-12 projects, thereby
further increasing engagement in evidence-based STEM education. CADRE will work
to ensure that the knowledge and products produced by and with DRK-12 projects
are broadly accessible to a varied group of stakeholders. CADRE will disseminate
the research, models, resources, and technologies--both within the program and
outside--to the broader education practitioner, research, and policymaking
communities. In addition, CADRE, through its early career program, actively
seeks to support next generation scholars and increase the capacity of a diverse
group of researchers to participate in and contribute to improving education.