* 1743069
* Convergence QL: NSF/DOE Quantum Science Summer School
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2021
* Natalia Drichko, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2021
* USD 138,341.00

Non-technical Abstract:

The invention of quantum mechanics in the early decades of 20th century
introduced strangeness and spookiness to the seemingly complete classical world.
This first quantum revolution enabled the amazing technological developments of
the 20th century, resulting e.g. in modern electronics and immense societal
impact. Today the world is witnessing the early days of the second quantum
revolution, where the convergent elements of quantum mechanics like quantum
superposition or quantum entanglement will lead to widespread practical
applications in quantum computing, quantum cryptography or quantum sensing. One
of the major obstacles in achieving this goal is lack of specialized workforce.
The required qualifications comprise deep understanding of quantum mechanics,
but also include practical knowledge of the convergent fields of microwave
electronics, cryogenic and ultra-high vacuum technologies, quantum materials,
advanced computer programming and algorithm optimization, with elements of
device and system engineering. Existing educational programs usually specialize
in only one or two of the above areas. This project helps fill the void in
educating the future cadre for quantum revolution by putting together a
transdisciplinary group of practitioners experienced in various aspects of
quantum science with a group of select graduate students from across the US in
the form of an annually recurring Summer School. The cultural and intellectual
challenge comes from a need to equip students with practical knowledge of
multiple fields relevant to quantum revolution, but also from the desire to
foster their ability to learn and maintain the curiosity needed for future
progress. The interactions of students with leaders in the field are based on a
mixture of direct presentations, tutorials and talks, with interactive
activities including round table discussions, student presentations, and courses
in practical use of quantum technology. Interactions between speakers from
various disciplines, from condensed matter physics through quantum chemistry and
engineering, are expected to generate new ideas at the boundaries of fields.

Technical Abstract: As the first quantum revolution of the 1920s led to the
modern digital and telecommunications age of the present day, the current
position of quantum science suggests that a second quantum revolution is at hand
which is expected to have wide reaching implications not only for our
fundamental understanding of the natural world but also for computing, energy,
and global connectivity. A critical component of this development is the
education of the next generation of scientists in the principles, methods, and
goals of this "Quantum Leap". This is motivated by the observation that the
rapidly growing quantum industry is facing an acute shortage of uniquely
qualified workforce. New approaches to education in quantum science are
particularly important given the breadth of disciplines brought together in this
area- reaching across mathematics, chemistry, physics, materials science, and
engineering. As part of initiating this educational effort, this project puts
forth a summer school for graduate students as a direct tool to provide an in-
depth immersion in the emerging field of convergent quantum science and
technology. The approach of this gathering is a summer school wherein students
are exposed to education in science and technology beyond what they could be
exposed to in traditional classroom settings or typical conferences/workshops.
Lecturers focus on pedagogical lectures on these topics rather than seminar
style research presentations. Afternoon sessions are aimed at interactive
activities involving students and presenters. Themed panels with speakers and
organizers serving as panel members for both scientific and career related
sessions are planned. The lecturers are encouraged to participate in several
days rather than one or two days, to include the additional benefit of cross-
disciplinary "pollination" of ideas between lecturers from different
disciplines. The program combines aspects of classroom style education, research
seminars, multitude of interactive forms and an active discussion forum. The two
week duration for the school encourages both formal and informal discussion
between students and lecturers as well as among the students themselves.