* 1743477
* I-Corps: Patient Leg-Powered Wheelchair Mobility to Promote Wellness
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2017,11/30/2017
* John McCarthy, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* cindy walkerpeach
* 11/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project derives from
robotics innovations that are applied to the health needs of over 17 million
individuals in the United States of all ages who have walking related
disabilities. An innovative wheelchair attachment called Gait Rehab Adaptive
Machine guides the user's legs through a therapeutic walking movement and drives
the wheelchair. This converts therapy into movement of the chair to give
patients the opportunity to work on their own rehabilitation in a compelling
way, all from a safely seated position. The support of natural leg movement
without the additional demand of load bearing and balance promotes muscle tone
and blood circulation that are critical to organ health. The connection to
mobility promotes patient involvement, fitness, independence and well-being. The
system is instrumented to monitor daily performance. This extends the reach of
therapists to assist recovery from sports injuries, strokes and accidents. It
also provides basic mobility for the elderly and walking disabled that promotes
leg movement and exercise and it can provide valuable leg exercise in confined
spaces such as during long distance airline flights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project explores commercialization of robotics technology that has
resulted from new capabilities in computer-aided invention. Given the
requirements of the natural movement of the foot and leg of a patient, an
articulated six-bar linkage skeleton that guides this movement was computed by
evaluation of millions of alternatives and optimized to provide an effective
mechanical system. The result is low-cost versatile wheelchair attachment that
connects to a patients legs and guides them through a therapeutic walking
movement. This movement is coupled to the drive wheels of the wheelchair and
converts their therapy into movement of the chair in all ways needed for daily
life (forwards, backwards, and turning). Mobility motivates increased
therapeutic movement which increases its effectiveness. The technology of
computer-aided invention also ensures that the six-bar skeleton can be matched
to the specific needs of individual users of various sizes as well as adjusted
to provide specialized rehabilitation needs.