* 1743420
* Predictive Optimization of T cell Expansion
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Lance Kam, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2023
* USD 682,840.00

PI: Kam, Lance C.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 1743420&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adaptive
immunity provides our bodies with a powerful and robust means to neutralize a
wide range of ever-changing challenges, such as viruses and bacteria in the
environment. This system has been re-engineered to treatment of human diseases,
as seen in the field of immunotherapy. In particular, training T cells, key
agents of the immune system, to target cancer is on the cusp of being developed
into practical therapies. Current research focuses largely on designing and even
personalizing the ways in which cells recognize their targets. This project
focuses on growth and production of T cells, which is essential to future
therapies and complementary to that of improving targeting. This project focuses
on the systems used to grow cells, developing and optimizing a new biomaterial
platform. Recent studies show that in addition to molecular factors presented on
materials, cell growth is dependent on the mechanical rigidity of these
materials. Moreover, additional results suggest that the precise conditions used
to optimally grow cells, including molecular factors and rigidity, may change as
a function of individual and disease progression. This project seeks to develop
a systematic way to identifying parameters that promote optimal expansion of
cells based on properties of an individual's cells. Successful completion of
this project has the potential to improve the reliability and efficacy of
cellular immunotherapy, which will reduce the burden of cancer on society. While
the direct impact of this work will be on T cell expansion, the methods and
concepts to be developed will be widely applicable to other cell expansion
systems and to other aspects of biomaterial design. Given the remarkable
opportunities for custom manufacturing that are becoming available, the concept
that a biomaterial can be optimized for an individual's therapy is compelling.
In addition, this project will provide training in the process of converting
academic discoveries into practical solutions, developing a workforce capable of
commercializing new ways of improving human health. Additional education and
outreach opportunities will accelerate interdisciplinary studies between
immunology and biomedical engineering, greatly enhancing both underlying
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expansion of a starting population of T cells
into a therapeutically relevant product is a vital step in emerging forms of
adoptive cellular immunotherapy. This project focuses on development and
optimization of a new platform for cell expansion, consisting of electrospun
fibers of elastomer coated with antibodies to CD3 and CD28, receptors on the T
cell surface that when engaged provide function activation of cells, initiating
expansion. Previous studies from the PI's group showed that reducing the
mechanical rigidity of activating substrates corresponds with improved T cell
expansion, even rescuing cells from patients undergoing care for CLL which
typically show signs of unresponsiveness and exhaustion. Furthermore,
preliminary results suggest that the specific set of conditions that best expand
a population of T cells depends on the individual and disease progression. The
concept inspiring this project is that having a systematic means for identifying
optimal conditions for expansion, based on readily obtainable biomarkers or
clinical history of a patient, will improve the reliability of cell production
for cellular immunotherapy, making these treatments effective for an increasing
number of patients. The first stage will be carried out with cells from healthy
donors, investigating the effect of fiber coating, culture conditions, and, in
particular, mechanical rigidity of the fibers that make up our system on cell
expansion. Two commercially available platforms will be included in these
experiments for comparison. Markers associated with clinical efficacy, including
cell proliferative potential and the phenotypic makeup of the resultant
population, will be analyzed as a function of the design parameters. In the
second stage, this knowledge will be used to understand expansion of cells from
patients undergoing care for Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL), including data
of clinical history and both protein and genomic markers that are currently
collected as part of treatment. If successful, the data generated by this study
will provide a way to personalize and optimize T cell expansion for
immunotherapy by bringing together two underlying fields of research: 1) the
emerging field of immune mechanobiology, specifically that T cells can respond
to the rigidity of their environment and 2) the personalization of biomaterials
to an individual's cell response. This strategic union of fields represents a
new approach to making T cell manufacturing more reliable and available to a
wider range of patients.