* 1743445
* Data-Driven Model Development for Cost-Effective, Reliable Cardiac Tissue Manufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Elizabeth Lipke, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2022
* USD 681,642.00

U.S. mortality rates from heart disease are increasing, driven particularly by
deaths in younger adults. Limited availability of native human heart tissue
impedes research, drug discovery, and clinical cardiac regeneration efforts.
Treatment with stem cell-derived heart tissues, composed of functional
contracting heart cells called cardiomyocytes, has high potential to achieve
clinically meaningful outcomes. However, the number of cells required for
therapeutic benefit has been estimated to be 1-10 billion per patient. Technical
challenges and limited scalability of current processes for manufacturing
engineered heart tissues hinder progress toward clinical use. The primary goal
of this research project is to design reliable and cost-effective manufacturing
processes for producing engineered heart tissues. The project employs a novel
scalable, one-step heart tissue production platform, combines experimental and
modeling studies, and leverages their integration to understand how different
operating conditions impact the heart tissue manufacturing process. The research
has the potential to transform the ability to manufacture engineered heart
tissue for drug testing and heart regeneration applications. Workforce
development aspects of the project include engagement of undergraduate and
graduate students and practicing engineers through joint upper level curriculum
development, teaming with ongoing efforts to support local industry, including
establishing a biomanufacturing track for the new cross-disciplinary Advanced
Manufacturing engineering specialization, and collaborating with Alabama State
University's Life Sciences Department to train students in fundamentals
important to biomanufacturing, tissue engineering and bioprinting. To support
long-term workforce development, this interdisciplinary research is being
incorporated into multiple K-12 outreach efforts. Undergraduate researchers and
Alabama State University summer interns will be key members of the research
team. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical challenges and limited scalability of
current processes for manufacturing engineered cardiac tissues, including the
ubiquitous use of pre-differentiated cardiomyocytes (CMs), has hindered progress
toward clinical use. Lack of CM maturation and variable outcomes in scalable
stirred flask bioreactors are critical barriers in therapeutic CM production.
Professor Lipke has recently established a novel platform to directly
differentiate hydrogel-encapsulated human induced pluripotent stem cells
(hiPSCs) into engineered cardiac tissues. The research employs a custom
microfluidic system to rapidly encapsulate hiPSCs in highly uniform
microspheroids with controllable size and shape. By modifying tissue axial
ratio, differentiating CMs will experience anisotropic mechanical stimulation
during spontaneous contraction; this has been typically impossible to achieve in
scalable, suspension cultures and has the unique potential to drive CM
maturation. To leverage this potentially transformative approach for single-
stage cardiac tissue production, a robust manufacturing process is needed. Thus,
the overarching goal of this project is to design reliable and cost-effective
manufacturing processes for reproducible, cost-effective, and high-quality
production of cardiac tissues. To achieve this goal, the project pursues 3 aims:
(1) Investigate the characteristics of engineered cardiac tissues formed using a
single-stage process of human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC) hydrogel
microspheroid encapsulation and direct differentiation in suspension culture,
(2) Identify regions of optimal or near-optimal parameter ranges to manufacture
engineered cardiac tissues reliably in suspension culture and spinner flask
bioreactor systems using data-driven models, and (3) Test the ability of
hydrogel microspheres to support single-stage engineered cardiac tissue
manufacturing in a more readily scalable, spinner flask bioreactor system.
Guided by data-driven models, the project investigates the effects of hydrogel
microspheroid shape and size, polymer precursor concentration, crosslinking time
and light intensity, and applied shear stress, on safety and efficacy attributes
of single-stage manufactured cardiac tissues. Real-time functional monitoring
and in-depth initial and end-point characterization are being performed to
assess initial and resulting cell phenotypes. The approach integrates
experimental studies and data-driven models through design of adaptive
experimental campaigns for manufacturing cardiac tissue in a single-stage
process directly from hydrogel encapsulated hiPSCs. Using inverse analysis on
the data-driven models, the range of process parameters is being determined to
minimize variability in electrophysiological and mechanical contraction
attributes of engineered cardiac tissues, which is essential for their reliable
manufacturing. Fundamentals of tissue engineering, polymer science, and
microfluidics will be drawn upon to manufacture cardiac tissue microspheres
directly from hiPSCs, rather than employing pre-differentiated cardiac cells.
This approach is unique and, by eliminating multiple cell handling steps and
employing a polyethyleneglycol-fibrinogen photocrosslinkable matrix, it has the
potential to provide a transformative advance in the ability to manufacture
engineered heart tissue for drug testing and cardiac regeneration applications.