* 1743738
* PIRE: Climate Research Education in the Americas Using Tree-Ring and Cave Sediment Examples (PIRE-CREATE)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Rosanne D'Arrigo, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2024
* USD 4,997,208.00

PI: Mathias Vuille (SUNY Albany)&lt;br/&gt;co-PIs: Rosanne D'Arrigo (Columbia
University)&lt;br/&gt;Aiguo Dai (SUNY Albany)&lt;br/&gt;Catherine Lawson (SUNY
Albany)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;The future climate of the
Americas is uncertain and presents a challenge as countries strive to prepare
for droughts, floods, or wildfires. Future preparation may be guided by a better
understanding of how climate varied naturally over the past millennium -
preceding the start of the industrial revolution and significant human impact on
the environment. Our PIRE brings together a team of international experts from
five research institutions in the United States, Brazil and Argentina. By
improving our understanding of past climate variations over North and South
America, we will place future climate projections within a longer-term framework
to better inform international policymakers and stakeholders. PIRE researchers
will investigate the nature of extreme events over the two continents during the
last one thousand years by merging data from the two largest tree-ring and cave
sediment (stalagmite) archives in South America with new, unpublished records.
Our research will enlarge our understanding of the underlying causes of past
climate perturbations, many of which were associated with large societal impacts
(famine, disease and warfare). We will prepare a new generation of students and
postdoctoral scholars through the interdisciplinary research training. Results
will be translated into visualization models and toolkits of policy-relevant
climate information for the scientific community, government and civil society.
The international partners are from Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia and Peru. This
award is co-funded by the Paleoclimate program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Narrowing the range of
possible future outcomes from climate change projections over North and South
America demands enhanced scientific understanding of the natural continuum of
climate variability. The goal of the PIRE-CREATE is to advance our knowledge of
paleoclimate over the Americas to identify drivers of climate change from a
paleo-perspective. By combining new tree-ring chronologies and speleothem
records, the PIRE's research team will investigate the characteristics and
causes of climate extremes spanning North and South America during the last
millennium. Specifically, the PIRE will advance the following scientific
objectives: 1) document the sensitivity of the South American monsoon to
external forcing; 2) create a new reconstruction of the El Ni√±o - Southern
Oscillation and the Interdecadal Pacific Oscillation; 3) identify past extreme
events and analyze their causes and societal response; 4) merge tree-ring and
speleothem records over tropical South America into a new blended product that
serves as the basis for a spatiotemporal climate reconstruction over tropical
South America; and 5) reduce the uncertainty of future projections by
constraining past model performance with observed variability from proxies. This
PIRE will produce new climate reconstructions, detect and analyze past climate
extremes (droughts, wildfires, floods) and their societal response, create a new
paleo-product by synergistically blending different proxies, and better
constrain regional-scale future projections based on past model-data
comparisons, which will serve as an ideal testbed for model assessment. In
addition, this PIRE will prepare a globally competent, interdisciplinary
trained, scientific workforce by a) immersing graduate and undergraduate
students in research activities involving data collection in the field, analysis
of lab observations and models, and dissemination of data and findings; b)
strengthening cultural literacy and the enrichment of students, postdocs and
faculty through scholarly collaboration with PIRE colleagues, visiting early-
career fellowships, and international online courses; c) enhancing the global
competence of undergraduate and graduate students with a semester abroad at
partner institutions facilitated through PIRE Offices of International
Education, mentorship through an international committee, and graduate research
activities; d) providing experiential learning opportunities for undergraduate
students through international summer schools and hands-on training; and e)
broadening participation in STEM by hosting six PIRE Academies aimed at
undergraduate students across SUNY - particularly, SUNY's 125,000 minority and
225,000 female students. Further, the PIRE will serve to enhance awareness and
knowledge of the future risks associated with climate change across the Americas
by translating its research findings into novel, easy-to-use visualization tools
to increase comprehension of complex paleoclimate data, model projections, and
impacts of climate change over the two continents. The PIRE's partners will also
co-host two International Forums bringing together scientists, government
officials, legislators, ministry staff and other key stakeholders from the
Americas to learn about the PIRE's research findings, to disseminate
visualization models and toolkits, and to transform the scientific results into
actionable planning options and policy considerations for North and South
America, as well as the wider global community.