* 1743925
* 2017 Animal Microbe Symbioses GRC &amp; GRS Mount Snow, West Dover, VT
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Edward Ruby, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 05/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

We are entering an era in which the critical functions of microbes in the
biological world are increasingly recognized. One of the largest roles
microorganisms play is in their associations with multicellular hosts and, while
the history of microbiology has to this point concentrated on pathogenic
interactions, both scientists and the public are now aware of the even greater
impact that microbes have on the health of their animal and plant partners, and
of the environments in which they live. The 2017 Gordon Research Conference
(GRC), and associated Gordon Research Seminar (GRS), on Animal-Microbe Symbioses
seek to promote the presentation and discussion of the most important and timely
research in this exciting area of biology. The range of topics is broad,
covering theoretical to the applied approaches, using examples involving
viruses, fungi and bacteria, found in marine, freshwater and terrestrial
environments. The conference and seminar invite scientists to attend, present
and participate fully in the examination of these topics, and to return to their
own work with new insights, ideas and
collaborations.Â &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on the beneficial microbiomes of
animals has recently become highly active, due in part to major advances in
methods for studying uncultivable organisms, such as molecular biological
techniques (e.g., the 'omics') and imaging methods that combine information
about identity and function at the single-cell level. These and other new
approaches are providing novel and unexpected insights into mutualistic
associations between animals and their microbiota. There is an unusually young
and enthusiastic demographic for this field that has been strengthened by the
attraction of established investigators from areas like immunology, behavior and
developmental biology. A vital factor helping to drive the impact of microbiome
research is a recurring, high-quality conference combining the best of both
mammalian and non-mammalian model systems, with an eye to applying the newest
technological advances in bioinformatics, sequencing, mathematical modeling and
imaging approaches to understanding the mechanisms underlying them. Such a
conference, while focusing on animal-microbe symbioses, should also including
allied fields like plant symbioses and pathogenic microbiology whose different
viewpoints can inspire novel ideas. The 2017 GRC/GRS are designed to develop new
interactions that will drive this kind of intellectual synthesis. These two
meetings play the critical role of enhancing and assuring the participation and
visibility of both early career and senior scientists by showcasing short oral
presentations along with lectures by invited speakers. This is an exciting time
to be part of such a biological adventure, and the perfect opportunity for the
GRC/GRS in Animal-Microbe Symbioses to have a significant impact.