* 1743101
* ABI Innovation: EAGER: Towards an optimal experimental design framework with Omics data
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Ilias Tagkopoulos, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

The goal of this project is to create novel methods that help researchers gather
and integrate existing data sets in order to better inform the design of future
experiments. Ideally new experiments include some replication, fill in gaps and
produce new knowledge, but this balance is hard to achieve when existing data
sets are in different locations or organized in very different ways. Thus to
achieve the goal, two aims are proposed: 1) develop methods for creating
cohesive biological datasets from public experiments such that they are suitable
for training computational models; 2) develop methods that indicate what
experimental conditions should be used to collect new datasets so that are the
most likely to yield important information about the study organism's biological
properties, like structure and behavior. Achieving this goal will enable an
understanding of important rules of life for organisms more efficiently and
economically, by focusing on the experiments that give us the most value for the
funds spent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This exploratory project will focus on data
arising from genome-wide transcriptional profiling methods (e.g. microarrays,
RNA-Seq), building a computational foundation for later expansion. First,
optimal data processing techniques for creating integrated compendia will be
assessed, in order to select the best method for building training datasets for
machine learning methods. Second, data-driven computational models will be
trained on the data compendia and evaluated for success in describing and
microbial behavior. Third, given the normalized compendia (in the
transcriptomics data space) an optimal experimental design methodology will be
prototyped, to recommend the best set of experiments to perform to yield the
complete set of data needed to fit and test the biological model. The
experimental design methodology will be benchmarked using synthetic data, and
then evaluated by exploring the effect of design- recommended combinations of
antibiotics and antiseptics (10 in all) on microbial behavior. This will be
compared to the outcomes of experiments designed by methods currently used.
Success metrics will focus on how quickly the required information in the
experimental space is gathered and what level of uncertainty in a model remains
after each experiment is completed.