* 1743651
* I-Corps: Training and Evaluation
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2019
* Philip Weilerstein, National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators Alliance
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 11/30/2019
* USD 2,579,021.00

This project, from The National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators Alliance,
Inc. (VentureWell), coordinates, convenes, and evaluates the National Innovation
Network and its Innovation Corps (I-Corps) programs.

Through this project, VentureWell connects national programs to form the
"National Innovation Network" (NIN). This emerging community of innovators
represents a key component of NSF's I-Corps programs. With the NIN, NSF
accelerates the development of a national innovation ecosystem that reaches
deeply and broadly across the country to engage the most creative and
consequential research discoveries and talents in the process of
entrepreneurship. The NIN is composed of clusters of universities that support
the I-Corps Nodes -- the primary training group for the I-Corps national course
teams; the I-Corps Sites -- that include the individual institutions dedicated
to spurring on very early stage teams; the Teams -- that focus on market
validation of technology innovations; and organizational stakeholders such as
mentors who support the teams, and venture development partners such as angel
investors, venture capitalists and other types of investors.

The role of VentureWell in the advancing of the NIN involves seven primary
activities: 1. Commission teaching teams for eleven NSF I-Corps National Team
Trainings 2. Implement I-Corps Faculty Training 3. Convene an I-Corps Faculty
Summit 4. Design and implement Teaching Assistant Training 5. Organize and
implement the annual National Innovation Network conference that brings together
all of the Nodes and Sites 6. Prepare, disseminate and archive the curriculum
and curate best practices for pedagogical improvements 7. Conduct Ongoing Course
Evaluation

A particular focus of this project is VentureWell's research and assessment of
formative and summative evaluation of I-Corps Team experiences in cohorts as
well as related dissemination activity. The formative evaluation is designed to
understand participants' satisfaction with the cohort and course and perspective
on the course environment, to understand the quality of instruction, and to
assess knowledge gains. The evaluation involves the administration, response
rate monitoring, data collection, and cleaning of four surveys: (i) pre-course,
(ii) after kickoff, (iii) after week-3 of course weekly webinars, and (iv) post-
course. The summative evaluation is designed to track individual and team
outcomes of interest to NSF and assess the impact of the course at approximately
one year and 3.5 years after formal participation in the program ends. Finally,
dissemination activities are designed to ensure that key program information is
shared with appropriate audiences. In addition, VentureWell is creating public-
use datasets. These datasets contain de-identified data from the pre-course,
post-course and longitudinal outcomes surveys in order to disseminate
information about the program to the I-Corps research community and allow others
to use these data in their research.