* 1743232
* 2018 Protein Folding Dynamics: Order, Disorder, and Aggregation GRC in Galveston, TX
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Margaret Cheung, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 06/30/2018
* USD 10,000.00

The Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Protein Folding Dynamics "Order,
Disorder, and Aggregation" will be held at the Hotel Galvez in Galveston, Texas,
January 7-12, 2018. A main purpose of this conference is to bring together
experiment, theory, and simulation. Many of the key challenges in the field of
protein folding dynamics can only be resolved in close collaboration between
these disciplines, and this conference is an ideal forum for discussion between
experts in experimental biophysics and experts in theory and computer
simulation. This meeting will bring together senior scientists, postdoctoral
researchers and graduate students from a wide range of interests and approaches
to protein folding dynamics. The nature of the conference allows close
interaction among participants, who can share their ideas and results
unpublished and published, officially and off-the-record. By bringing together
researchers from chemistry, physics and biology to explore recent exciting
developments in this field in a concrete forum that encourages open discussions
from researchers working on different systems, the new paradigm of cross-
disciplinary research is strengthened. The program covers a range of topics, not
restricted to, in vitro and in vivo folding, protein aggregation, and cellular
phase separation mediated by proteins. The program creates a "Power Hour"
platform for senior investigators to mentor graduate students and postdoctoral
students on career development in round table discussions and will encourage
partnerships between early career and established scientists and cross-
pollinates new ideas in research. Particular care will be taken for the
inclusion of diversity in ethnicity, gender and age, disability, and
geographical location. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The areas covered range from rapid
and elementary processes, such as the early stages of folding and the behavior
of unfolded proteins to much slower processes involving large molecular
machinery, such as folding on the ribosome, and even reaching mesoscopic
processes, including protein aggregation, and cellular phase transitions and
regulatory processes. For the first time, the 2018 conference is expanding to
include complete formal sessions on protein folding, unfolding, and aggregation,
and liquid-liquid phase separation mediated by proteins and nucleic acids within
a cell.