* 1743448
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Community Growth and Sustainability in Unstable Times
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Keith Prufer, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2020
* USD 30,273.00

The goal of this research is to better understand the development of
geopolitical centers in the Maya Lowlands during the Terminal Classic period, a
time of general decline and abandonment across the Maya region. Researchers have
previously identified a handful of centers that developed during this time, but
the mechanisms for economic and political growth during a period of social
upheaval, increasing conflict, and recurrent droughts remain poorly studied. To
address these issues doctoral student Rafael. Guerra under the direction of Dr.
Keith Prufer, will conduct archaeology fieldwork at the Maya city-state of Lower
Dover located in the Belize River Valley, Belize Central America. In this
region, most large Maya centers developed over many centuries following their
initial foundation and are geographically evenly spaced at ~10 km apart.
Preliminary research at Lower Dover suggests it developed rapidly between two of
these long-established centers and at a time when neighboring sites were
declining and engaged in significant interpolity conflict described in
hieroglyphic texts. While Lower Dover lacks a hieroglyphic record, it may be an
example of an economic "boom town" which flourished economically and politically
in the power vacuum created by the abandonment of well-established Belize Valley
polities. The success of Lower Dover at that time may be linked to its strategic
location, along the Belize River giving it direct access to important long-
distance trade routes and the ability to act as gateway between the upper and
lower Belize River valley. It remains that by the end of the Terminal Classic
Period (ca. AD 950) Lower Dover too was abandoned. In a region where the growth
of major centers occurred over long periods of time, this research has potential
to inform on the changes in political, social and economic structures during an
interval of massive upheaval. The resulting dissertation will contribute to
understanding of how the declining fortunes of some polities can foster
opportunities for others, and to explore the stability of these "boom town"
economies. The results of this research will be of interest to social scientists
studying the resilience of complex geopolitical systems, and will contribute to
the development of a promising young scholar. Fieldwork at Lower Dover consists
of excavations and geochemical testing of soils and will focus on investigating
a possible marketplace and riverside docking facility identified in preliminary
studies by the co-PI., as well as investigations in the site core and
settlements to develop a high-resolution chronology for the development and
decline of the community. This precise AMS 14C chronology will allow
determination of whether there was an existing local population prior to the
development of the monumental core, or if the founders colonized previously
unoccupied space between two declining polities. Preparations of radiocarbon
samples with be undertaken by the co-PI at the University of New Mexico Center
for Stable Isotopes. Detailed ceramic studies and analysis by pXRF of obsidian
will illustrate economic interactions between Lower Dover and potential regional
and long distance trade networks.