* 1743432
* RAISE: Design of co-assembling peptides as recombinant protein fusion tags for integrating enzymes  into supramolecular hydrogels
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Carol Hall, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,100,000.00

This RAISE project is jointly funded by the Biological and Environmental
Interactions of Nanoscale Materials program in CBET Division in the Engineering
Directorate, the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences in the Biological Sciences Directorate, and the Office of
Integrative Activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this multi-disciplinary
project, nanomaterial scaffolds, or hydrogels, with immobilized enzymes will be
produced using proteins as a design template. The proposed method provides a
novel alternative to conventional immobilization techniques which are more
difficult and time consuming. This novel assembly technique is designed so that
it selectively self-assembles into nano fiber structures. This targeted design
and assembly of proteins into nanofibers is an exciting new research frontier
that is largely unexplored with regard to both fundamental protein assembly and
design of functional nanomaterials. A multi-disciplinary team of investigators
will combine their expertise in modeling, imaging and characterization methods
in order to demonstrate novel protein assembly and to advance fundamental
understanding of protein assembly. The proposed technique will be an
extraordinary improvement over the current state-of-the-art in protein assembly
methods. Successful implementation of the proposed technique is anticipated to
have a long-term broad impact on the engineering of novel functional materials
for various biomedical and biotechnological applications. A variety of
educational activities will be developed, including an iPad app on protein
folding, and a video describing how computational methods can be used to design
new biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed method bypasses conventional
immobilization techniques in which the nanostructured scaffold is functionalized
post-assembly via reactions at its surface. Instead, enzymes are expressed by
bacteria from recombinant DNA with peptide fusion tags that mediate their
assembly into nanostructured materials. The key to the method is the use of
fusion tags that co-assemble into fibrillar structures when mixed with a
complementary peptide, but remain unassembled when pure. Co-assembling peptides
are an exciting research frontier that is virtually unexplored in both protein
biophysics and functional nanomaterials. The goals of the project are to
demonstrate novel enzyme-functionalized supramolecular hydrogels, and to advance
fundamental biophysical understanding necessary to predict peptide co-assembly.
Three specific aims are proposed: (1) characterize the assembly process and
resultant structure for known Ã¢-sheet nanofiber-forming co-assembling peptide
pairs, (2) design and test new pairs of selectively co-assembling peptides and,
(3) test co-assembling peptides as tags to immobilize proteins in nanostructured
biomaterials. Each aim will leverage the computational modeling expertise of PI
Hall, with expertise in spectroscopic and microscopic characterization of
peptide nanofibers provided by Co-PI Hudalla and solid-state nuclear magnetic
resonance expertise provide by Co-PI Paravastu. The proposed enzyme
immobilization method will be an extraordinary improvement over the current
state-of-the-art in protein immobilization methods and hence opens the door to
addressing long-standing challenges in installing biologically-active, folded
proteins into biomaterials. A variety of educational activities will be
developed, including an iPad app on protein folding, and a video describing how
computational methods can be used to design new biomaterials.