* 1743641
* Vessel Rupture Thresholds for Microbubble-Assisted High-Intensity Therapeutic Ultrasound - Renewal Application
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Damir Khismatullin, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 06/30/2019
* USD 46,391.00

PI: Khismatullin, Damir

High-intensity focused ultrasound (HITU) has recently gained recognition as a
noninvasive ionizing radiation-free therapeutic method. It is being explored for
treatment of cancer, neurological diseases, and circulatory system-related
cardiovascular diseases. To avoid permanent damage and to identify vessel
rupture thresholds for HITU devices experiments and modeling of bubble dynamics
in blood vessels will be performed. This project will lead to a computational
tool and a new formula for HITU safety threshold assessment that will give
patients in the U.S. faster access to safe devices for treating severely
debilitating diseases. It will directly support the research work of a minority
graduate student. The student will receive training in computational fluid
dynamics and experimental techniques for stimulation of ex vivo tissues by
focused ultrasound.

The outcomes of high-intensity therapeutic focused ultrasound (HITU)
significantly depend on the presence of micrometer-size bubbles that can be
formed in tissues as a result of acoustic cavitation. The oscillation of
microbubbles in an ultrasound field generates mechanical stresses on nearby
cells and tissues, leading, for example, to thrombolysis or transient opening of
the blood-brain barrier (BBB) for drug delivery to brain tissue. The PI will
develop a state-of-the-art computational model of cavitation of lipid-coated
microbubbles in blood vessels and tissues exposed to focused ultrasound. The
model will account for tissue viscoelasticity and inhomogeneity and be validated
against HITU experiments on rupture of explanted vessels, to determine the
critical pressure and stresses on the vessel wall above which the vessel
ruptures.