* 1743336
* Researching Equity, Access, &amp; Learning in CS Education (REAL-CS): Scaling and Sustainability in High School Computer Science
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Jean Ryoo, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,100,000.00

The University of California Los Angeles, in collaboration with the University
of Oregon, is working to assure that equity remains central to the growing
Exploring Computer Science (ECS) program and larger CSforAll movement. Over the
last five years, broadening participation in computing efforts have ignited a
national movement to bring computer science (CS) education to schools across the
U.S. As school districts and entire states rush to get CS teachers and curricula
in place, it is critically important to retain the focus on
equity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project -- Researching Equity, Access, &amp;
Learning in CS Education (REAL-CS) -- has three principal strands of work, each
guided by an overarching research agenda that focuses on the experiences and
perspectives of students, teachers, and grassroots and policy makers across
varied settings. The three strands are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) ECS Program
Support, Outreach, and Research Nationwide which will continue to scale the ECS
program, increasing the number and capacity of inquiry and equity-based ECS
teachers, and deepening the learning and collaboration between ECS projects in
varied settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Sustaining and Building Capacity for
Computer Science Education Through Public Engagement which will support active
public engagement from the grassroots, such as parent organizations, to policy
and governing bodies that have jurisdiction over issues of issues of equity and
CS education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(3) CS Educational Equity Research which will
do qualitative research (interviews, classroom observations, focus groups)
across a set of different educational contexts (e.g., urban vs. rural
classrooms) and CSforAll professional development opportunities in order to
document the impacts of recent CS reform efforts on broadening participation.
The engagement, learning, and sense of belonging (or not) of students of color
and females -- groups traditionally marginalized by the CS field -- will be
given special emphasis.