* 1743711
* PIRE: Centennial Genetic and Species Transformations in the Epicenter of Marine Biodiversity
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Kent Carpenter, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 09/30/2023
* USD 4,653,918.00

Kent Carpenter (PI), Daniel Barshis (Old Dominion University), Christopher Bird
(Texas A&amp;M University - Corpus Christi), Malin Pinsky (Rutgers University),
Beth Polidoro (Arizona State University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the
greatest challenges facing humanity today is our ability to understand the
impacts humans have on the natural resources we rely on for our existence.
Understanding the impacts to date will allow us to better conserve and protect
vital resources for future use. Choosing a successful resource management
strategy ensures sustainability of resources for present and future generations.
Exponential human population growth over the past century has been accompanied
by unprecedented demands on the earth's resources, particularly marine fisheries
resources. Fortunately, there exists a large collection of fishes at the
Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History that offers a unique window into
the human impacts on marine fishes over the past century. In 1907-1909, not long
after the U.S. colonized the Philippines, our government sent an expedition
there to take stock of their natural resources. This was at a time when natural
history collections were stored solely in alcohol which preserves DNA over long
periods (compared to most museum collections preserved in formalin that alters
DNA). Extensive collections were made that will allow us to examine the changes
in the dynamics of populations over a period of extreme human population growth
and exploitation of these resources. We will do this by comparing historical and
contemporary collections using cutting-edge advanced genomics methods initially
developed for human medicine. No work of this scale has ever been accomplished
on heavily exploited fisheries and not only will it give us insights valuable
for Philippine resource management, but it will also help us understand impacts
in other parts of the world. Results will be made available to relevant
institutions and the public through extensive outreach activities. This project
will integrate field and laboratory research objectives with annual semester-
long academic activities in the Philippines. These activities will train a
significant number of American and Filipino undergraduate and graduate students
and early career professionals in advanced genomic methodology and marine
ecology. It will also foster long term collaborative ties and good will between
our countries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An opportunity to dramatically increase the
knowledge of genome-scale evolution in marine fishes over the past century of
intense human impacts is possible through a unique and extensive collection from
the Philippines that took place from 1907 to 1909 on board the US Research
Vessel Albatross, maintained at the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural
History. The overarching research question in this study is: what genetic and
species-level changes have taken place over the past century of intense
fisheries exploitation and habitat degradation in the Philippine global
epicenter of marine biodiversity? This project takes advantage of the extensive
historical collections unique to the Philippines and essential collaborations
with Philippine scientists to address the following novel scientific questions:
1. To what extent has genetic diversity been lost from marine species in the
Philippines? 2. Have overfishing and habitat loss reduced gene flow between
marine populations? 3. To what extent do genetic diversity and species diversity
reveal similar changes over a century of human impacts? This will be
accomplished by measuring the centennial scale changes in the evolutionary
potential of at least 20 species of marine fishes by comparing the genetic
makeup of historical and contemporary populations from the same localities using
advanced genomic methodologies. The genomic impacts will be compared to larger
scale biodiversity changes using 1970's collections of Philippine marine fishes
that will be replicated to directly measure species and community scale changes.
Together, these investigations will give unprecedented insight into
anthropogenic impacts on marine biodiversity and evolution.