* 1743772
* PIRE: Science of Design for Societal-Scale Cyber-Physical Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Sosale Sastry, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 09/30/2023
* USD 4,000,000.00

PI: Janos Sztipanovits, Vanderbilt University&lt;br/&gt;Co-PIs: Shankar Sastry,
UC Berkeley, Alexanmder Pretschner, Technical University of Munich and Werner
Damm, University of Oldenburg&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop
a new Science of Design for societal-scale Cyber- Physical Systems (CPS).
Emerging industrial platforms such as the Internet of Things (IoT), Industrial
Internet (II) in the US and Industrie 4.0 in Europe have tremendously
accelerated the development of new generations of CPS that integrate humans and
human organizations with physical and computation processes (H-CPS) and extend
to societal-scale systems such as traffic networks, electric grids, or networks
of autonomous systems (self-driving cars, unmanned air vehicles) where control
is dynamically shifted between humans and machines. Societal-scale systems are
motivated by societal needs, but must conform to social norms and respond to
expectations. If these systems evolve independently in the US and other
countries, they will "hard-wire" the social context in which they are created,
making interoperation hard or impossible, decreasing reusability of results, and
narrowing markets for products and services. While impacts of new technology
trends on social policies have received attention, the other side of the coin -
to make systems adaptable to social policies - is nearly absent from engineering
and computer science curricula and design practice. The project brings together
a large, interdisciplinary group of researchers from Vanderbilt University, UC
Berkeley, Technical University of Munich and University of Oldenburg working on
integrated dynamics of humans, human organizations and networked CPS components,
systems science foundations for resilient H-CPS, high-confidence design of H-CPS
with learning enabled components, and social science. The goal of the project is
to develop technologies that can be adapted to varying public policies. The
international collaboration exposes students to H-CPS design which is strongly
contextual and provides practical experience with the required scientific and
technical foundations. The education goal is to lay the foundation for and
collect experience with new engineering and computer science education
constructs that prepares students for the design and operation of a new
generation of policy-aware H-CPS applications. The experience gained via the
joint US and German research collaboration will be generalized and extended to
broader international context.&lt;br/&gt;The central technical goal of this
joint research activity is to establish foundations for constructing H-CPS
systems that can be parameterized by social context. Our technical approach is
three-fold: (1) Understand and compare the nature, scope, and evolution of
policies and societal expectations in the operation of societal-scale H-CPS in
the US and in Europe. The purpose of the analysis is not to shape social
policies, but to determine which factors have the greatest influence on
technical solutions. (2) Investigate methods for the explicit and formal
representation of societal context (operational, privacy, safety, security
policies, incentives, pricing and market policies) that are machine
interpretable and impact the structure and behavior of H-CPS. (3) Develop
policy-aware architectures that guarantee the enforcement of policy requirements
during the operation of a new generation of H-CPS. The expected outcomes of the
proposed research program are: (1) H-CPS architecture specifications that can be
?parameterized? by operational, safety and security policies, and by constraints
emerging from societal expectations, (2) policy model repositories, (3) design
tool chains, and (4) test beds. The international project team will evaluate
research results in low-altitude air traffic control, smart-grid and intelligent
transportation system testbeds.