* 1743753
* PIRE: International Partnership for Cirrus Studies
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2024
* Thomas Ackerman, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 09/30/2024
* USD 4,678,892.00

PI: Elisabeth Moyer (University of Chicago)&lt;br/&gt;co-PIs: Thomas Ackerman
(University of Washington)&lt;br/&gt;Peter Blossey (University of
Washington)&lt;br/&gt;Stephan Fueglistaler (Princeton University)
&lt;br/&gt;Zhiming Kuang (Harvard University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The tropics are blanketed with a ubiquitous layer of thin,
high-altitude ice clouds (cirrus) that occupies one of the coldest and least-
understood parts of the atmosphere, the "tropical tropopause layer" or TTL. As
air ascends through the TTL, it is effectively freeze-dried by temperatures as
low as -75 Celsius (-100 Fahrenheit), and leaves its water vapor behind as
minute ice crystals that settle out slowly over timescales of days to weeks.
Because the TTL lies over twice as high as most aircraft can fly, it can be
studied only by remote-sensing instruments on satellites or by a handful of
specialized U.S. and European research aircraft. In the last decade, our limited
understanding of the TTL has been upended by new satellite measurements that
suggest its ice crystal layer is significantly denser than had been previously
thought, and with a stronger effect on the Earth's radiation budget. One
potential explanation is that fast-rising tropical thunderstorms carry water
directly to the TTL, influencing altitudes higher than had been expected. This
PIRE program will bring together an international team for coordinated studies
that will advance knowledge of this important natural phenomenon. The
international partners are France, Germany and Switzerland. This award is co-
funded by the Climate and Large-Scale Dynamics
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The PIRE research
team will integrate efforts to address a series of questions: How does deep
convection affect the TTL, in terms of moisture and energy budgets? How do
internal dynamics within cirrus affect their characteristics and persistence?
What factors determine where, when, and how cirrus forms? And how do cirrus in
turn affect large-scale circulations? These questions require separate but
linked modeling exercises addressing deep convection, TTL cirrus, and the global
circulation, as the problems differ substantially in scale. We will generate the
first tropics-wide cirrus simulation that combines explicit treatment of the
interactions among microphysics, radiation and dynamics with boundary conditions
that realistically represent the TTL, and will use it to evaluate both controls
on cirrus properties and resulting consequences for global atmospheric dynamics.
Our partnership with European collaborators is especially important for
integrating observations, and European partners will lead in developing
observation-based climatologies of TTL cirrus characteristics. The project is
designed to also leverage off new observations: the high-altitude StratoClim
aircraft campaign that will sample cirrus over the Asian Monsoon in summer 2017,
and laboratory studies of cirrus formation conducted at the AIDA Aeorsol and
Cloud Chamber in Karlsruhe, Germany.