* 1743654
* RAPID: Social Transitions in the North: Document Digitization
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2018
* David Driscoll, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 07/31/2018
* USD 25,000.00

This is a small RARID award to fund the digitization and long-term storage and
access of rapidly deteriorating scientific data records from the NSF funded
"Social Transitions in the North (STN)" project that are currently stored at the
Institute of Circumpolar Health Studies (ICHS), University of Alaska Anchorage.
STN was a four-year collaborative effort by Russian and Alaskan researchers in
the early 1990's to collaboratively collect and analyze historical and
contemporary demographic, epidemiologic, and domestic data in arctic
communities. The primary investigators died in a boating accident while engaged
in data collection at a Russian project site and the records of the project were
ultimately donated to the ICHS by the widows of the original research team. The
records have been stored at ICHS as analog tapes and paper documents, but
unfortunately these documents are deteriorating rapidly and are in need of
organizing and archiving in a way that would make them accessible to other
researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Arctic Social Science Program (ASSP) has
a long history with this project and with these data materials. ASSP funded the
original awards (OPP-9213137 and OPP-9496351) and in 2006 the program funded the
"Social Transition in the North Memorial Symposium" at during the Alaskan
Anthropological Association Meeting held in Kodiak Alaska. The workshop brought
together remaining original participants, some of the researchers' family
members, and other scholars whose work has been built on the foundation of the
original STN project. As the Review Analysis for the 2006 workshop proposal
stated, "This workshop has strong intellectual merit in that it will bring
together for the first time the original scholars, Russian and US, with new
scholars to discuss their mutual interests in the STN research and data and to
stimulate new research on social change in the Arctic. In addition, the workshop
will discuss the archived data and renew interest in its analysis and future
use."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These data have value and should be preserved as
envisioned in the original awards and as discussed at the 2006 workshop. Not
just for historical value but because they represent critical data on the social
and physical health and wellbeing of Russian Indigenous people during a time of
rapid social and economic change, the early 1990s following the development of
the policies of Glasnost (Openness) and ultimate fall of the Soviet Union. These
data are of particular interest today because Russia has again changed its
policies toward Indigenous people and anyone undertaking research in the
northeastern region of Russia should examine this data. PI Driscoll has the
qualification and the interest in ensuring that the digitization and access plan
can be completed and institutionalized.