* 1743086
* Graduate Student Travel Support Program for the 2017 V.M. Goldschmidt Conference in Paris, France, August 13-18, 2017
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2018
* Munir Humayun, The Geochemical Society
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 05/31/2018
* USD 30,000.00

This award will support participation by graduate students in the 2017 V.M.
Goldschmidt Conference in Paris, France, during August 13-18, 2017. This travel
grant will enable the best and brightest students from the US and US
Territories, students who might otherwise be unable to attend due to financial
constraints at their home institutions, to benefit from all the advantages this
meeting has to offer at this turning point in their respective careers. The
Goldschmidt conference is the premier venue for geochemistry and the chosen
students will be exposed to the latest advances in the field of geochemistry.
The conference offers an excellent opportunity for networking of students who
are close to graduation and will be entering the workforce. In addition to oral
and poster presentation in 19 theme sessions, students can participate in field
trips and workshops associated with the conference.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applications will be collected from the students, then
reviewed and ranked by a volunteer committee of scientists. Twenty-four
students, who are presenting their work at the conference, will receive $1,250
each toward travel expenses. Considerations for the award are the preparation of
the application package, the demonstrated need for the funds, the selection of a
diverse pool of applicants based on gender,representation and geographical
distribution. Every effort is made to encourage underrepresented minorities and
people with disabilities to apply for funding.