* 1743941
* EAGER:   Finite-Absorption-Bandwidth Materials for Cost-Effective Multijunction Photovoltaics
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Susanna Thon, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2018
* USD 79,999.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical: Commercial solar cells that absorb visible
light are reaching their theoretical and practical efficiency limits. An ideal
strategy for improving their performance would be a new material that could
simply be "stuck on top" of a current high-performing commercial cell, allowing
it to harvest the invisible infrared radiation emitted by the sun. This project
seeks to build a new class of flexible materials that only absorb in the
infrared while transmitting visible light by using semiconductor particles with
optical properties that depend on their nano- and micro-scale structures.
Specifically, the goal is to make photonic crystals (structures in which certain
frequency ranges of light cannot propagate) in strongly absorbing colloidal
quantum dot films, to be used in color-tuned and transparent solar cells. The
project has the potential to address broad societal goals in the development of
more efficient renewable energy technologies, as alternatives to polluting and
unsustainable fossil fuels, by developing lightweight, inexpensive, and flexible
solar energy harvesting materials. Additionally, these materials could be ideal
platforms for transparent and building-integrated solar cells. The project seeks
to address fundamental questions on the role of different length scales in
nanostructured materials, and how the interplay between them determines optical
and electronic materials properties. Research activities will be integrated with
a comprehensive education and outreach plan designed to introduce elementary
school students, undergraduates, and graduate students to the fields of
nanotechnology and sustainable engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The
objective of this study is to build new inorganic nanomaterials with finite
absorption bandwidths that will be used to improve the efficiency of transparent
and multi-junction solar cells. The project will take an innovative approach for
making flexible nanoparticle films with spectrally-tailored absorption and
transmission spectra based on novel realizations of photonic bandgaps in
strongly absorbing colloidal-quantum-dot-based thin-film materials. Methods to
be employed include computational simulations, chemical syntheses, solution-
processed device fabrication, and electrical and optical device
characterization. If successful, the research work will result in a new method
for improving the efficiency of current solar cell technology by introducing a
new class of active optoelectronic materials that absorb only in the infrared.
These flexible photovoltaic materials could increase the efficiency of current
commercial solar cell technology in a cost-effective way: the top infrared cells
will transmit visible light to the bottom standard visible cells, achieving
current-matching in a multi-junction structure without re-engineering current
high-performing solar cell technology. This project also aims to answer open
questions involving the interactions between nano-physical phenomena, how to
achieve self-assembly and optical engineering on multiple length scales, and how
artificial photonic band structures can be maintained in strongly absorbing
media. The novel materials developed in this project have the potential to be
used in a number of new technologies, including multi-junction solar cells,
transparent photovoltaics, and other photonic and optoelectronic devices.