* 1743418
* RAISE: Big Data Tools: From Bioinformatics To Materials Genomics
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Sanguthevar Rajasekaran, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 700,000.00

This RAISE project is jointly funded by the Big Data Spokes and BIGDATA Program
in the Division of Information and Intelligent Systems in the Directorate for
Computing and Information Science and Engineering; the Condensed Matter and
Materials Theory Program in the Division of Materials Research and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences; and the Office of Integrative Activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large
amounts of data get generated in every field of science and engineering.
Effective tools are needed to analyze these data and extract useful information.
During the past two decades, much progress has been made in the domain of
biological data analytics. Clearly, if we can translate this progress to other
domains, we can avoid repetition of efforts and also speedup discoveries in the
other domains. This project will promote translation of approaches and tools
first developed for biological genomics to materials genomics. To maximize
scientific impact and use in industry and academia, the software tools to be
built will be disseminated to a wide audience. The participation of women and
other underrepresented groups will be promoted by leveraging collaborations with
the Northeast Big Data Hub and strong, existing institutional programs to
encourage diversity at the University of Connecticut. The project will allow
many students to gain significant classroom and research experience using the
software tools, and they, in turn, will form the core of the highly trained
workforce that is essential for the advanced industries critical to our nation's
economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some of the existing tools developed for
biological data may not be directly applicable for materials data. In such
cases, novel algorithmic techniques will be developed to suitably modify them.
This project will engineer tools for the analysis and discovery of materials to
accelerate research in Materials Science. The project will support workshops to
bring together scientists from bioinformatics and materials science. The
interactions among scientists from these areas are expected to result in
crosscutting advances in big data analytics and hence create transformative
knowledge. The Northeast Hub as well as the Materials Science Spoke will
participate in the project's dissemination effort.