* 1743406
* Workshop on North American Indigenous Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Mary Linn, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 07/31/2021
* USD 48,850.00

This project is an interdisciplinary workshop on North American Indigenous
learning. The Native American Languages Act, passed by the U.S. Congress in
1990, enacted into policy the recognition of the unique status and importance of
Native American and Alaska Native languages. While most effort has concentrated
on describing and teaching Native languages situated in cultural practices, and
more recently on Indigenous knowledge systems, very little research has been
conducted on Indigenous learning. The goal of this workshop is to identify and
refine the major research questions that can guide the development of
collaborative proposals to advance our understanding of Indigenous Learning
through science-based evidence. This workshop will catalyze collaborations
between Indigenous and non-Indigenous educators, language and cultural
practitioners, and policymakers. Additionally it will help to develop a diverse
community working towards science-based evidence to inform learning and
educational practices, curriculum development, and policies in Indigenous
communities and those with significant Indigenous student populations.

Major scientific questions concerning Indigenous learning are still unanswered
or not investigated. These questions include what the characteristics of a good
learner are, what promotes learning, what is unique about learning in Indigenous
North America, and what kinds of data and methodologies are needed to answer
these questions. The twenty workshop participants drawn from multiple
disciplines will broaden the range of perspectives brought to bear on learning
and education. They include recognized experts in their fields, promising junior
researchers, Indigenous elders or cultural representatives, and Indigenous
participants from different Indigenous cultural areas in North America. The
workshop will begin with a series of on-line video break-out sessions to
identify the scope of research challenges, and will culminate in a two-day ideas
lab workshop at the Center for Folklife and Cultural Heritage at the Smithsonian
Institution. The workshop will enable interdisciplinary discussion and
identification of important research problems to be addressed in Indigenous
learning, and subsequently, how science-based evidence from such research could
be used to inform educational practice and policy. Participation in the workshop
and follow-up collaborations will foster participation of Indigenous scholars in
the science of learning, and encourage experts from diverse fields and
perspectives to lay the conceptual framework from which new research directions
could emerge.