* 1743691
* EAGER: Hot Extrusion of High-Strength Aluminum Alloys with Rotary Porthole Dies
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Kuniaki Dohda, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 08/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

Due to their outstanding strength-to-weight ratios, high-strength aluminum
alloys are widely used in the automotive, defense, and aerospace industries, as
well as in construction and anywhere weight savings are desired. Among the
different manufacturing methods used on these materials, hot extrusion is the
most efficient production process to produce parts with a constant cross-
section. However, even at very high temperature, some attractive aluminum alloys
have very low extrudability, limiting their wider application. This EArly-
concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project is intended to solve this
problem by exploring the feasibility of a new hot extrusion process with a
rotary porthole die. If successful, the research will be expanded to investigate
performance of a wider range of alloys, which ultimately will increase
production rate of high-strength aluminum. The fundamental scientific and
technological advances made will also be applicable to other difficult-to-
extrude alloys. Because superior aluminum alloys could then be used across many
industries, greater weight savings than is currently possible would become
routine. In addition, because extrusion is a near net-shape process, finishing
operations would be reduced and the cost of these aerospace alloys could
decrease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will deliver a new extrusion method
and scientific findings for improving the extrusion of aluminum alloys, and
create a model for extruding other difficult-to-extrude alloys, via metal flow
control. Since the full-scale exploration of the envisioned rotary porthole die
concept is associated with high risk and cost, in this EAGER project the concept
a rotary porthole die will be demonstrated through a set of stationary twist-
grove dies. In previous work, in-process material microstructural changes have
been observed in conventional porthole dies. This finding suggests that a rotary
porthole die might allow the control of the material flow to impart
microstructural changes, resulting in production improvements. This research
will involve the production of a testbed for with a twist-groove porthole die to
demonstrate the process. At the same time, modeling will be performed to
investigate metal flow in rotating porthole dies. The understanding of the metal
flow path and its effects on microstructure, as a function of process variables
such as temperature and deformation, will enable the control of the mechanical
properties of the extruded products and increase the process efficiency. The
goal is to provide a proof-of-concept of this new manufacturing process, which
then provides a path for widespread use of difficult-to-form lightweight alloys.