* 1743235
* Coherent Control of Light Propagation and Absorption in Complex Media and Resonators
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Alfred Stone, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2022
* USD 330,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and related education and training towards advancing our ability to
control light interacting with matter. The first of two main thrusts aims to
manipulate and control the ability of a material to absorb light by varying
either illumination conditions or other external control parameters. Normally,
the absorption of light is considered as a fixed property of a specific
material, which cannot be easily and reversibly changed. However, if the
material is appropriately structured at a microscopic level, it can be made to
preferentially absorb, or even perfectly absorb input light with specific
characteristics. Such a structure is called a Coherent Perfect Absorber or Anti-
laser, since it behaves in a certain sense like a laser in reverse, absorbing
instead of emitting light of specific frequency. The current project will study
how to predict and control the absorption of very strong light signals. It will
also study how to design structures that will perfectly absorb light. These and
similar microstructures that allow the manipulation of light routing are of
interest for communications and sensing, as well as for on-chip optical
processing of information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second thrust will study how
to control light when it is scattered by small nonabsorbing particles, such as
those that make up white paint. Typically, such scattering media make it
impossible for a beam of light to penetrate through without spreading out and
losing its focus. Modern optical instruments provide techniques for synthesizing
particular beams of light that can be focused through such media, given enough
input information about the medium. This project will extend the theory of such
focusing in scattering/opaque media so as to focus to a specific point in space
at a specific time after the beam has entered the medium. This new type of
optical control modality shows promise for improved optical imaging of regions
deep within biological media, such as living tissue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to the research, PhD students will be trained in critical areas of
modern optical technology, as identified in the national photonics initiative.
The PI will communicate the importance of condensed matter and optical science
to general audiences and precollege students through his popular science
writings and lecturing at diverse
venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
related education and training towards advancing our ability to control light
interacting with matter. The project comprises two research thrusts on the
physics of light-matter interactions in disordered media and resonant
structures. Potential applications of the research have great relevance to
important priorities in applied science, relating to communications, information
processing, materials research and imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
thrust addresses the concept of coherent perfect absorption or time-reversed
lasing, introduced recently by the PI. As previously developed, this phenomenon
only applies to linear absorption, which limits the power that can be
transmitted and absorbed via this mechanism. The proposed work will extend the
theory to describe saturable absorbers and to predict the properties required to
maintain perfect absorption at high input powers. An ab initio theory will be
developed that takes into account nonlinear effects of saturation, along with
algorithms and codes to implement the theory that will apply to absorbing
systems and resonators of arbitrary geometry and complexity. The coexistence of
perfect absorption and optical bistability and the properties of such bistable
absorbers as an on-off optical switch will be studied. Finally, the conditions
for coherent perfect absorption at an exceptional point (non-hermitian
degeneracy) will be determined and shown to enable intrinsically chiral resonant
absorption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second research thrust is to develop a
theory of coherent control of light in opaque strong-scattering media,
specifically focusing light strongly to a region in space within or at the
opposite side of such a medium at a particular time. This is achieved by finding
special pulsed input states that exploit multipath interference to bias the
diffusion of light and achieve coherent focusing. The correlations between the
light intensity at different points in space will play a critical role in
enabling such coherent control. This work builds heavily on insights from
quantum transport in mesoscopic electronic systems. The work will provide a
general theoretical framework based on microscopic calculations and random-
matrix theory for controlling the propagation and absorption of light in strong
scattering media for a variety of optimization goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to the research, PhD students will be trained in critical areas of
modern optical technology, as identified in the national photonics initiative.
The PI will communicate the importance of condensed matter and optical science
to general audiences and precollege students through his popular science
writings and lecturing at diverse venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.