* 1743802
* PIRE: Advancing Global Strategies and Understanding on the Origin of Ciguatera Fish Poisoning in Tropical Oceans
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Alison Robertson, University of South Alabama
* Continuing Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2023
* USD 5,007,281.00

PI: Alison Robertson (University of Southern Alabama)&lt;br/&gt;co-PIs: Donald
Anderson (Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution)&lt;br/&gt;Deana Erdner
(University of Texas - Austin)&lt;br/&gt;Michael Parsons (Florida Gulf Coast
University)&lt;br/&gt;Tyler Smith (University of the Virgin
Islands)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Coral reef
ecosystems are among the most biodiverse habitats on earth, providing societal
benefits and fishery resources critical to coastal communities. A significant
threat to utilizing these resources is ciguatera fish poisoning (CFP), the most
prevalent non-bacterial seafood illness. CFP is caused by the consumption of
reef fish that have accumulated ciguatoxins (CTXs). These potent neurotoxins are
produced by microscopic algae (dinoflagellates) that live on the surfaces of
aquatic plants (e.g., macroalgae, seagrasses) and enter reef food webs through
the diet of herbivorous fish and invertebrates. As these toxins move through the
marine food web they are structurally modified via metabolism and increase in
potency. Human exposure to CTX results in rapid onset of illness and duration of
6-8 weeks. Symptoms include gastrointestinal distress, neurological dysfunction,
and cardiovascular abnormalities. There are currently no effective treatments or
diagnostic tests available for CFP, and no field tests feasible for pre-market
surveillance of fish destined for human consumption. Despite its severity and
prevalence, CFP remains an underappreciated and under-reported problem. Most CFP
affects low socioeconomic groups in remote island communities who rely on local
seafood for subsistence. However, fish poisonings from recreational fishing and
the international seafood trade are increasing in continental areas increasing
exposure in temperate regions. A major goal of this PIRE project will be to
better understand the environmental conditions affecting the production of CTXs
by the source organisms and to determine the fate of the toxins through the food
web across geographical regions. International partners are from Hong Kong,
Cuba, Norway, Canada, Scotland (UK) and
Australia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;While the
mechanisms and environmental drivers of toxigenic phenotypes of Gambierdiscus
spp. remain unknown, many other toxigenic algae live in the same community and
are capable of producing toxic metabolites that can enter the food web. The
identity and toxicity of these toxins are largely unknown, but their elucidation
is critical to the development of monitoring approaches for public health
protection of CFP. Management strategies for CFP lag far behind other seafood
safety issues due to four major deficiencies: 1) the inability to easily
identify and monitor for the toxigenic Gambierdiscus species and strains
responsible for CFP; 2) a lack of knowledge on the toxicity and structure
secondary metabolites produced by these benthic micro-algae; 3) a limited
understanding of the food web dynamics and biotransformations of these
metabolites; and, 4) the inability to predict when and where CFP outbreaks are
most likely to occur. Based on these interlinked needs, we have developed a
central hypothesis for our PIRE program: toxigenic benthic dinoflagellates
produce a stable suite of secondary metabolites (meta-metabolome) allowing them
to prosper in an otherwise unstable environment driven by shifts in the
epiphytic flora, available substrates, and environmental conditions. Moreover,
the stability and advantages gained in this meta-metabolome are universal across
toxigenic genera and applicable to many (sub)tropical reef environments. This
hypothesis will be tested by examining the dynamics and persistence of toxigenic
Gambierdiscus in reefs around the globe to better understand the production and
fate of their toxic metabolites. Hypothesis testing will comprise three research
objectives: 1) Evaluate epiphyte and Gambierdiscus community diversity and
macrophyte host selectivity across spatio-temporal scales and environmental
gradients in coral reef ecosystems; 2) Characterize the meta-metabolome of these
communities, structurally elucidate key metabolites, and develop methods to
evaluate their toxicity and functional role; 3) Utilize chemical biomarkers
(toxins, lipids, stable isotopes) in bio-indicator species (primary producers
and consumers) and model their fate in reef food webs. To achieve these research
goals we will engage in a research program with US and International partners
that integrates expertise, addresses the global nature of CFP by working across
hyper-endemic regions, and develops unique and lasting educational experiences
for undergraduate and graduate students from the US and abroad.