* 1743662
* On-chip optical biosensing methods for quantitative measurement of antibiotic resistance
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Zhenyu Li, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 100,000.00

This project will study the problem of antibiotic-resistant bacterial infection
associated with medical devices. The goal is to develop improved methodologies
for quantitative assessment of this problem in the medical device context. This
project will develop an inexpensive, reproducible and quantitative basis for
comparing innovative therapeutic strategies to reduce the emergence of drug
resistant bacteria. The knowledge gained in this work will help researchers in
the area of regulatory science to improve predictive capability for the
assessment of novel antibiotics. This work will also help to improve predictive
capability for assessment of new therapies using existing antibiotics or
combinations of existing antibiotics. Graduate and undergraduate students will
have opportunities to develop their communication and leadership skills. The
team will hold monthly interactive meetings at GWU or FDA.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GWU-FDA collaborative team will develop an in vitro
resistance evolution model based on microfluidics and on-chip optical sensing to
assess how antibiotic resistance emerges in biofilm over 2 weeks on urinary
catheters in response to clinically realistic pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics.
This model will expose biofilm on catheters to 2-week concentration-time
profiles similar to those experienced in vivo. The model aims to use lab-on-a-
chip technology to increase the throughput of testing. This project will lead to
new insight and improved mechanistic understanding of the special infection
challenges that are posed by biofilms that are associated with indwelling and
implanted medical devices. The PI will use recent developments in optical
diagnostics and microfluidics technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.