* 1743820
* International Workshop on Computational Network Biology: Modeling, Analysis, and Control (CNB-MAC 2017)
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2018
* Ranadip Pal, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 04/30/2018
* USD 10,000.00

The Fourth International Workshop on Computational Network Biology: Modeling,
Analysis, and Control (CNB-MAC 2017) will be held in Boston, MA, August 20,
2017. The workshop will be organized in conjunction with the 8th ACM Conference
on Bioinformatics, Computational Biology, and Health Informatics (ACM-BCB 2017).
CNB-MAC 2017 is a continuation of the first, second and third CNB-MAC workshops
in 2014, 2015 and 2016. The continuing partnership with ACM-BCB will enhance the
visibility of the workshop and attract researchers from various disciplines
across engineering, computer science, statistics, biology, and
medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CNB-MAC 2017 aims to provide an international
scientific forum for presenting recent advances in computational network biology
and boost the awareness of the importance of rigorous mathematical modeling in
transforming big biomedical data into reproducible and meaningful scientific
knowledge. One of the missions of CNB-MAC that is of foremost importance is to
foster next-generation scientists in the emerging field of computational network
biology. The workshop aims to offer keynote, tutorial, and research talks to
provide future research directions for participating graduate students and post-
doctoral researchers, especially women and minorities. CNB-MAC 2017 will provide
travel awards to encourage graduate students to participate in the workshop and
present their latest research findings. Specifically, the workshop plans to
allocate a minimum of 20-30% of the awards to female and minority students to
encourage their participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Next-generation high-
throughput profiling technologies have enabled more systematic and comprehensive
studies of living systems. Network models play crucial roles in understanding
the complex interactions that govern biological systems, and their interactions
with the external environment. The main emphasis of CNB-MAC 2017 will be on
rigorous mathematical models and efficient computational approaches for studying
biological networks, integrative analysis of large-scale OMICS data, developing
mathematical models for the investigation of human-microbiome-environment
interactions, and other topics relevant to computational network biology.
Complementary to the focus of ACM-BCB 2017 on informatics tools and learning
algorithms for big biomedical data, CNB-MAC's main focus is on computational
network biology that involves modeling, analysis, and control of biological
systems under different conditions, and system-oriented analysis of large-scale
OMICS data with the goal of providing a dynamic international scientific forum
for presenting the latest advances in the field.