* 1743681
* Fire ecology research priorities across space and time: support for the Future of Fire workshop; Colorado Chautauqua National Historic Landmark; November, 2017
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2017,04/30/2019
* Douglas Goodin, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 04/30/2019
* USD 49,979.00

Fires play an important role in shaping and managing ecosystems. The importance
of fire in altering ecosystems is gaining renewed scientific attention of
ecologists with the increased pace of large, destructive, and seemingly novel
fires occurring across a large swath of North America and beyond. Understanding
fires occurring in the past decade raise a set of urgent questions for both
ecologists and society. Despite the large number of researchers working on fire,
there is an ongoing need to unify the approach of researchers working on
mechanisms of ecological change and fire. Funding for this workshop to bring
together researchers with complementary approaches to reconstructing ecosystems
during the Future of Fire workshop. The specific goals of the workshop are: (1)
To assess scientific priorities regarding the interactions of fire with
ecological processes from population to ecosystem levels, (2) To explore fire
science as a central research area within basic science research, and (3) To
find areas of synergy among previously separate areas of fire science based
within the discipline of ecology but interacting with many other disciplines
such as meteorology, climatology, Earth science, geography, and hydrology. The
four focal areas are: fire at large spatial scales, fire experiments, modeling
fire, and past fire regimes and baselines. The Future of Fire workshop will have
several impacts on society and the larger scientific community. Publications and
reports from the workshop will be disseminated broadly through scientific
society newsletters, publications, and websites. The workshop will engage a
diverse intellectual set of participants across career stage, with many initial
participants holding the rank of postdoc, assistant professor, or the
equivalent. Participants will engage government agencies and NGOs to provide
information about the effects of fire on ecosystem processes.