* 1743598
* NeTS: Student Travel Support for the 2017 SIGCOMM Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Lan Wang, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 05/31/2018
* USD 20,000.00

The 2017 ACM SIGCOMM conference is held from August 21 to August 25, 2017 in Los
Angeles, California, USA. This award assists 25 US-based graduate students to
attend this conference and associated workshops at SIGCOMM 2017. Participation
in conferences such as SIGCOMM forms a central part of the graduate school
experience as it provides students with an opportunity to interact with senior
researchers from academia and industry and exposes them to leading-edge research
in the field. SIGCOMM stands unique in its emphasis on interactions between
networking researchers at an international level, and attending SIGCOMM presents
an excellent opportunity for US graduate students to connect with a thriving
international research community. In addition to attending the conference and
associated workshops, SIGCOMM offers additional benefits to students. A
mentorship program assigns junior students with a more senior mentor at the
conference. At 'preview sessions' students are briefed on topics prior to
attending the session talks. The response to both of these has been extremely
positive. SIGCOMM exposes students to new ideas in emerging research areas and
allows them to interact with other researchers thereby broadening their
intellectual horizons. In particular, the mentorship program and topic preview
sessions help ensure students are engaged and get maximum benefit from attending
the conference.

Broader Impacts: This project integrates research and education of students
through exposure to a premier technical meeting in computer networks and
communications. Students will have the opportunity to observe high-quality
presentations and interact with senior researchers in the field both in the main
conference and the associated workshops. The proposed student participation is
expected to have a positive impact on the quality of their research. The travel
grant co-chairs are committed to encouraging the participation of women and
under-represented minorities. The SIGCOMM conference, as a top-tier
international conference, presents a tremendous opportunity for students to
expand their breadth of ideas, research skills, and technical perspectives.