* 1743335
* Black Males in Middle School (HBCU-DCL EAGER): Investigating How STEM Mentoring Programs and Experiences Influences Their Academic and Career Interest in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias, Bowie State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 08/31/2020
* USD 249,066.00

Nationally, there is increasing interest in broadening the participation of
minority males in engineering and other STEM-related fields. Compared to White
and Asian males, many minority males are underrepresented in engineering.
Throughout the theoretical and scientific literature, there is a dearth of
research focused on minority males in engineering, especially on Black male
students who have participated in engineering or other STEM-related mentoring
programs and experiences. There are also very little scientific and popular
literature that examines, specifically, how such programs may impact Black male
middle school-aged students' academic and career interest in engineering. This
research project is both timely and important to the National Science Foundation
as well as other U. S. governmental agencies that are working to diversify the
engineering workforce throughout the country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Comprising
quantitative and qualitative research methods,investigators from Bowie State
University and Morgan State University outlined a comprehensive exploratory,
mixed-method study that aims to pinpoint the different factors that shape Black
middle school-aged students' interest in engineering and determine what specific
experiences actually influence their understanding of engineering and other
STEM-related fields. It is quite likely that the research findings will offer
important insights on middle school-aged, Black males and how engineering and
other STEM-related programs and experiences can influence their academic
interests and career aspirations. Further, secondary and postsecondary
professionals will be able to use the project findings to improve formal and
informal engineering and other STEM-related learning experiences for Black
middle school-aged students.