* 1743836
* Workshop: Progress and prospects for neutron scattering in the biological sciences; September, 2017; Washington, D.C.
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Mark Dadmun, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2019
* USD 96,492.00

This workshop will discuss the progress and prospects in the field of neutron
scattering as a vital tool in biological research that could provide elusive and
critical, unique information about complex biological systems. Special emphasis
of the workshop will be on combining high-performance computation with neutron
scattering. Education and broader impact activities to enable better access to
neutron scattering methodologies will also be a focus of the discussion. The
workshop will provide a road-map by defining the scientific, engineering and
data challenges required to use neutron scattering as a tool to study biological
systems.

Recent world-wide research and development activities have created an
opportunity to use neutron scattering as another vital tool in biological
research. This technology offers excellent potential to provide previously
elusive information about complex biological systems unobtainable with other
measurement tools. Neutrons are ideal for studying multi-scale phenomena
intrinsic to biological processes. With no charge, they cause little radiation
damage and are highly penetrating, enabling use of complex sample environments.
Also, neutrons have energies similar to atomic motions, and their spin can be
coupled to magnetic fields in spin echo measurements, allowing the study of
dynamic processes over a wide range of timescales, from picoseconds to
microseconds. Moreover, a particularly desirable property of neutrons for
biology has to do with hydrogen (H), the most abundant element in biological
systems. Photons and electrons interact with the atomic electric field. With
just one electron, hydrogen is all but invisible to x-rays or light. Neutrons,
on the other hand, interact with nuclei, and protons have a relatively strong
and negative scattering length. The isotope deuterium (D) has an even stronger
scattering length, which is positive. This different sensitivity of neutrons to
H and D allows for enhanced visibility of specific parts of complex biological
systems through isotopic substitution. These properties are the foundation by
which neutron scattering can be used to obtain precise information on the
location and dynamics of H at the atomic level, as well as truly unique
information on large, dynamic, multi-domain complexes at longer length and time
scales. The workshop will discuss neutron crystallography, small angle
scattering, diffraction, reflectometry and imaging for studying soft matter
structure from the atomic to micrometer length scales and, via spectroscopic
measurements, self and collective motions and excitations from sub-picosecond to
microsecond timescales.

This workshop is co-funded by the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division
of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Biological Sciences Directorate,
and by the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of Chemistry and
the Physics of Living Systems Program in the Division of Physics, both in the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.