* 1743472
* Science Policy Research Report:  On the Relationships between Manufacturing, Innovation, National Competitiveness, and the Magnitude and Nature of Work
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Erica Fuchs, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 06/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

Shifts in the global locus of manufacturing may affect not just production
costs, but alter the nature and pace of innovation, as well as the amount and
type of jobs. Despite growth in U.S. manufacturing value added, the number of
U.S. manufacturing workers has declined with fewer middle income jobs and
displaced workers experiencing persistent, large earnings losses. Increasing
productivity and manufactured products that are demanded worldwide and require
specialized knowledge and capabilities specific to the United States are
important factors for the U.S. to increase its global share of manufacturing
value added. Further, for the U.S. to maintain national security and capability
to innovate in certain sectors, it likely must manufacture certain advanced
products locally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The report summarizes the existing
literature on the global redistribution of manufacturing activity from developed
to industrializing nations and the implications of those shifts for innovation,
national security, and the magnitude and nature of work. The report provides
recommendations for policy based on this scientific evidence and notes important
areas for additional research. The report reviews publicly available data on
longitudinal trends of the global distribution of manufacturing and employment
in manufacturing and reviews scientific evidence on the relationship between
manufacturing, innovation, national security, and economic and nature of
employment. A taxonomy for different categories of technology change in
manufacturing, and a preliminary assessment of how each category of technology
change may influence the magnitude and nature of employment differently is
provided along with a discussion of possibilities for national action, critical
areas for improved data collection, and scholarly study.