* 1743346
* Integrated Manufacturing of Therapeutic Cardiac Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Timothy Kamp, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2022
* USD 599,447.00

PI: Palecek, Sean P.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 1743346&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cardiac
disease is a leading cause of death and represents a major burden on the health
care system. Patients who experience a heart attack or heart failure exhibit a
permanent loss in mechanical function in their hearts, reducing quality of life
and increasing the risk of later medical complications. Today there is no
treatment to restore mechanical function of the heart, but the transplantation
of heart muscle cells manufactured from stem cells represents a promising
approach in preclinical studies and clinical trials. A current limitation of
stem cell-derived heart muscle cells is they generate forces and transmit
electrical currents in a manner more similar to fetal cells than adult cells. We
propose to explore the notion that manufacturing heart muscle cells in
conjunction with stem cell-derived epicardial cells, which provide a supportive
role during heart development, will enhance the functional quality of the stem
cell-derived heart cells. This project will explore whether this developmentally
relevant exchange of chemical factors or direct contact between the heart muscle
and epicardial cells from stem cells will improve heart muscle cell function,
then use these finding to design strategies to manufacture the approximately one
billion heart muscle cells necessary to replace the heart cells lost during a
heart attack. This project will enable the manufacturing of sufficient
quantities of high quality heart muscle cells from stem cells to facilitate
preclinical and clinical studies to restore heart function in persons who have
experienced heart disease. This project also addresses the lack of a trained
workforce in cell therapy manufacturing. Project activities will provide unique
training opportunities to undergraduates and graduate students to perform
manufacturing research in partnership with industry. The project team will also
develop a multi-institutional course in cell therapy manufacturing, create
outreach activities related to stem cell therapies for K12 students, and refine
an international short course on regenerative manufacturing targeted to graduate
students and industry employees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The next generation of
therapeutics will involve living cells with the capacity to regenerate damaged
or diseased human tissues. The US is poised to become a leader in cell
therapies, but significant challenges in manufacturing complex living cells must
be overcome. In this project we will address key roadblocks facing the cell
therapy manufacturing industry including (1) lack of robust, scalable
manufacturing platforms, (2) lack of knowledge of how manufacturing affects
critical quality attributes (CQAs) of potency, and (3) the unavailability of a
trained workforce. The project focuses on robust, scalable, and cost-effective
manufacturing of safe and potent therapeutic cardiac cells from human
pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs). hPSC-derived cardiomyocytes (CMs) have
demonstrated improvement of ventricular contractile function in preclinical
animal models. Success of impending clinical trials and development of effective
human therapies will require production of high quality cells at a reasonable
cost. However, scaleup of CM manufacturing reduces differentiation robustness,
leading to expensive batch failures. Also, hPSC-derived CMs lack critical
quality attributes (CQAs) of mature adult CMs. To address these manufacturing
limitations the research team will design and evaluate a developmentally-
inspired process that employs integrated manufacturing of CMs and epicardial
cells (EpiCs), which provide trophic factors during heart development. This
project will test the hypothesis that co-differentiation of EpiCs with CMs will
generate cardiomyocytes that exhibit key maturity CQAs in a more robust,
scalable manner than CMs differentiated alone. The Research Plan is organized
under 3 objectives: (1) Compare robustness of integrated manufacturing of CMs
and EpiCs with monoculture manufacturing as a function of differentiation scale;
(2) Quantify effects of integrated manufacturing of CMs and EpiCs on acquisition
of potency CQAs; and (3) Develop a scalable suspension process for integrated
manufacturing of CMs and EpiCs. This project will provide a better understanding
of developmentally-relevant endogenous, cross-cellular communication during
integrated manufacturing of CMs and EpiCs from hPSCs. Outcomes will establish
new principles for how this cross-talk affects batch-to-batch robustness of
cardiac cell differentiation as the manufacturing process scales. Furthermore,
this study will identify how EpiC-CM interactions during integrated
manufacturing affect CQAs of both CM and EpiC products.