* 1743355
* Collaborative Research: How does groundwater inundation of carbonate island interiors from sea level rise impact surface water-aquifer interactions and evaporative losses?
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Jonathan Martin, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 02/28/2023
* USD 192,051.00

Sea-level rise and coastal flooding are well-known to reduce freshwater
resources. It is however less recognized that sea level rise can push water
tables above the land surface to flood low-lying depressions. Lakes and wetlands
that form by groundwater flooding expose connected aquifers to direct,
continuous evaporation, which can result in substantial losses of water
resources. Impacts from groundwater flooding and evaporation will be most
intense on low-lying carbonate islands, where evaporated freshwater is replaced
by seawater that percolates through the bedrock. These models incorporate impact
of climate and predicted that lakes should remain fresh, and groundwater
resources continuous, beneath islands in humid regions. In arid regions, lakes
would be hypersaline, and much fresh groundwater would be replaced by seawater.
In contrast to expectations, modern lakes that are formed by groundwater
flooding in the arid southern Bahamas islands have salinities that range from
fresh to hypersaline. This paradox between modeled and observed lake salinity
underscores our lack of understanding of how groundwater flooding impacts island
water resources. During this project, new field data will be collected, and new
transient modeling tools will be developed, to test the overarching hypothesis
that how groundwater flooding will impact island water resources. We will test
the impact of lake area relative to its groundwater contributing area, the
degree of connectivity between lakes and the ocean, and dynamic interactions
with climate and sea level change on this process. The results of this study
should improve predictions of freshwater resource loss of Small Island
Developing States (SIDS) from groundwater flooding, perhaps the primary
environmental factor triggering their loss of habitability. The modeling tools
to be developed as part of this project will be freely distributed to the
hydrological community. A field hydrogeology curricular exercise, with learning
outcomes of quantitative coastal hydrology, will be developed to be used by the
more than 100 student groups that visit the Gerace Research Centre (base of
operation for this project) each year. Project results will be presented as part
of a guest lecturer series at the University of the Bahamas and at international
conferences. The project will enhance human resources by introducing coastal
hydrology to 2 geology PhD students, and one civil engineering postdoctoral
researcher at Michigan Tech. Each PI will work with their institution's
diversity office to ensure that these positions are effectively advertised to
under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaporation of lakes
and wetlands that form on islands by groundwater inundation reorganizes
groundwater flow paths and lowers water tables. Impacts from groundwater
inundation and evaporation will be most intense on low-lying carbonate islands,
where the Ghyben-Herzberg relationship results in losses from freshwater lenses
(the primary freshwater resource) being 40x the lowering of the water table.
Primary controls on groundwater inundation will be sea-level rise and island
topography, but impacts to freshwater resources could be moderated by climate
(precipitation, and evaporation), aquifer permeability, ratio of groundwater
contributing area to lake surface area, and distance between the lake and coast.
During this project, new field data will be collected, and new transient
modeling tools will be developed, to test the overarching hypothesis that
groundwater inundation will reduce freshwater lens volumes through interactions
of lake area relative to its groundwater contributing area, degree of
connectivity between lakes and ocean, and dynamic interactions with climate and
sea level change. Hypothesis testing will take a three-pronged approach. First,
DEMs of San Salvador Island, Bahamas, will characterize lake hydrogeological
setting (catchment/lake area ratios). Field observations of hydrogeological
parameters and weather data will be used to estimate groundwater fluxes and lake
evaporation; chemical and isotopic compositions of groundwater, lake water, and
precipitation will be used to estimate recharge thresholds and lake water
sources (ocean, groundwater, recharged precipitation). Second, a package for
simulating dynamic flow and solute transport between lakes and groundwater will
be developed and integrated into the SEAWAT/MODFLOW model in cllaboration with
USGS. The model will be parameterized with observational data collected on San
Salvador Island. Third, transient responses of island freshwater lenses to
multiple sea level rise, climate change, and lake formation scenarios will be
tested with the newly developed numerical modeling tool. Simulations will
determine the nature of relationships between freshwater lens volumes and sea
level, climatic variables, and island-lake hydrogeological
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.