* 1743178
* Collaborative Research: NISC SI2-S2I2 Conceptualization of CFDSI: Model, Data, and Analysis Integration for End-to-End Support of Fluid Dynamics Discovery and Innovation
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Jed Brown, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2023
* USD 321,838.00

Fluid dynamics is a broad field spanning a large number of science and
engineering problem domains that are critical to a wide variety of important
applications including manufacturing, climate analysis, environment, health,
transportation, propulsion, and power generation. To support the fluid dynamics
research and applications community, this project seeks to engage the community
in order to conceptualize a future institute, the Computational Fluid Dynamics
Software Infrastructure (CFDSI), that will broadly develop, share, and apply
computational tools for the generation and analysis of fluid dynamics data from
both experimental and computational sources. After its conceptualization, CFDSI
will create and extend tools for problem definition, solution, and analysis of
both computational and experimental investigations. The primary objective is to
facilitate the sharing of computational tools and data resources through a rich
and extensible set of software components that can be integrated into a wide
range of existing fluid dynamics analysis tools. By improving the efficiency of
tools and their ease of use, the ability for scientists and engineers to
accurately predict and understand how complex fluid flows behave will be
enhanced, having a significant impact on design, innovation, and discovery
across the vast range of applications where fluid dynamics plays a role. CFDSI
even has the potential to impact on K-12, undergraduate and graduate education
by making a wide variety of resources available to students for fluid dynamics
investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conceptualized institute will make a
wide variety of powerful simulation, data, and analysis resources available to
the fluid dynamics research community by lowering or eliminating barriers
associated with the adoption and use of these resources. The software
infrastructure will have a number of positive impacts on the fluid dynamics
research community. To do so, CFDSI will connect the best research in fluid
dynamics to the best research in data science/analytics within a highly
sustainable software development environment. Specifically, CFDSI will: 1)
enhance the dissemination of fluid dynamics data resources and advances in CFD
modeling, 2) facilitate collaboration in fluid dynamics research, especially
between computational and experimental researchers, 3) enable detailed
comparisons between different data sources and detailed validation of
computational models, 4) ease the use of advanced CFD models, methods, and codes
in new and complex applications, 5) facilitate advanced analytics, such as
uncertainty quantification, data compression, and optimization, 6) provide
students access to advanced CFD methods and data resources, both computational
and experimental, to enhance both graduate and undergraduate education in fluid
dynamics, 7) improve the sustainability of current and future CFD software, and
8) facilitate the management of the growing body of fluid dynamics data sets.
These outcomes will greatly enhance the effectiveness and productivity of
research in fluid dynamics. In particular, they will transform the conduct of
fluid dynamics research by: 1) making it more collaborative, 2) enhancing the
credibility of research results, 3) enabling discovery, 4) reducing the cost of
pursuing new research questions, and 5) diversifying and widening the fluid
dynamics community through lowering the barriers associated with accessing and
adopting CFD codes and large data sets. Software components will be designed for
both analysis of experimental and computational databases as well as direct
integration into CFD codes. The latter will enable in situ data analytics to
address the growing chasm between data creation rate (solver performance) and
data storage rate/volume (I/O resources). After conceptualization and
implementation, CFDSI will enable more effective fluid dynamics research and
thus impact the wide variety of application domains in which fluid dynamics is
critical including manufacturing climate, environment, health, transportation,
propulsion, and power generation (including conventional, alternative, and
nuclear sources) which will, in turn, strongly impact our economy. Additionally,
CFDSI will provide the capability for immersive simulations and experiments that
will close the loop on idea, insight, discovery, and design through establishing
links to in situ data analytics and problem redefinition during ongoing
simulations or experiments. Finally, CFDSI will impact other problem domains
governed by partial differential equations (e.g. solid mechanics) by serving as
a model and starting point for similar domain-specific software
infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.