* 1743284
* The Second Cargese School on Earthquakes - Participant Support
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Gregory Beroza, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 06/30/2018
* USD 12,000.00

Advances in the last decade have led towards a more complete picture of
earthquake processes. The quality and quantity of data available to study
earthquakes is increasing rapidly and both the availability of those
observations and the capacity of computers to them have improved dramatically.
Recent earthquakes are providing the research community with exceptionally rich
datasets with which to explore earthquake behavior. Some of these data indicate
an extended and complex earthquake initiation process that may involve
previously unrecognized slow fault slip. The second Cargèse School on
Earthquakes will provide focused yet diverse perspectives on our understanding
of earthquakes. These will be delivered as lectures by leading earthquake
scientists from around the world who are working at the cutting-edge of
earthquake research. Lectures will be combined with hands-on tutorials that
focus on learning new analysis methods and software. The school is intended to
stimulate the emergence of a broader understanding of the current issues, and is
aimed particularly at engaging young scientists (students and post-docs), and
will thus facilitate future collective momentum towards earthquake preparedness
and forecasting. This proposal would provide partial travel support for
scientists from US institutions. The costs of participation by US scientists are
highly leveraged against the costs of hosting the school, which are covered
through European funding sources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second Cargèse
School on Earthquakes will provide instruction on the state-of-the-art covering
three main research topics: (1) Earthquake Nucleation. Earthquakes are the
culmination of accelerating processes that may manifest as growing aseismic
slip, as confirmed by laboratory rock mechanics experiments, often accompanied
by foreshocks, tremor, or other seismic phenomena. Recent observations of these
and how they scale with magnitude suggest earthquake size may be influenced by
the nucleation process. (2) Earthquake Triggering and Rupture. New opportunities
to discover what triggers earthquakes include: (A) experimentation on real
crustal faults under anthropogenic forcing, principally wastewater injection,
and its consequent increase in seismicity rates and (B) the development of new
methods to image in four dimensions the physical conditions and properties that
determine which fault slip mode is likely to dominate. There are also open
questions to be addressed concerning how geometrical/structural configurations
and past history influence rupture propagation. Discoveries relevant to these
opportunities and others will be discussed. (3) Beyond Earthquakes - Completing
the Slip Spectrum. Slow aseismic slip acts to relieve stress applied to faults
and to accelerate stress accumulation on neighboring stuck fault patches that
eventually break and radiate seismic waves. Innovative seismic waveform and
statistical analyses have served as proxies for the more difficult to observe
aseismic slip, which is an ongoing challenge. These include verification of the
proxy status by detecting aseismic deformation directly and evaluation of how
seismic and aseismic modes interact.