* 1743034
* Doctoral Consortium at the IEEE ACII 2017 Conference; October 23-26, 2017; San Antonio, Texas
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2018
* Yelin Kim, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 04/30/2018
* USD 8,000.00

The International Conference on Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction
(ACII) is the premier international forum for interdisciplinary research on the
design of systems that can recognize, interpret, and simulate human emotions and
related affective phenomena. Its broad scope includes: multi-modal recognition
or synthesis of human affect, psychological, cognitive, and neurological affect
modeling, affective computing for social and behavioral sciences, and affective
interactions for social robotics and virtual agents. The conference presents
latest research in these and related areas and it plays an important role in
shaping related scientific, academic, and educational programs. A theme of this
ACII 2017 will be to emphasize the affective computing in action. The theme will
showcase how affective computing can impact scientific knowledge and address
societal challenges. Besides the main conference program, the conference will
also feature workshops, tutorials, exhibitions, and a doctoral consortium. This
project is to support the travel of approximately 10 U.S. Ph.D. students to
attend the 7th ACII conference to be held from October 23rd to 26th, 2017 in San
Antonio, Texas, USA. Besides attending the main conference program, the Ph.D.
students will also attend the Doctoral Consortium, where they will share their
research results with the community and receive feedback from senior researchers
in the field. This will help the students only learn the state of the art in
affective computing research but also have an opportunity to present their own
work to, and receive feedback from, an invited committee of faculty and industry
researchers along with other students working in related areas. The event
organizers will make a particular effort to support underrepresented students
(in particular, women and minorities) to maximize the benefits of the NSF
support.

The specific goals of the doctoral consortium are to provide an opportunity for
face-to-face interaction and constructive feedback for doctoral research of
student participants; to promote collaborative research with peer Ph.D. students
and senior researchers; to develop a supportive community of scholars in the
affective computing field; and to support the next generation of researchers and
provide advice on academic, research, industrial, and non-traditional career
paths in the field. The Doctoral Consortium solicits extended abstract (4 pages
plus 1 page for references) from students from any U.S. PhD granting institution
whose research falls within the Affective Computing field. Students are expected
to be the sole authors on their submission. For student selection, the DC
committee is committed to student and research diversity. The event organizers
will make a particular effort to achieve a diversity of research topics,
disciplinary backgrounds, methodological approaches, and home institutions in
ACII 2017 Doctoral Consortium cohort. Each student participant will be assigned
a mentor based upon similarity of research interests and experience, and have a
one-one-one meeting to discuss the work. There will be a Doctoral Consortium
poster session, in which all participants will present their doctoral work or a
recent paper that is part of their doctoral work.