* 1743819
* CBMS Conference: Smooth and Non-Smooth Harmonic Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Justin Peters, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 01/31/2019
* USD 35,364.00

This National Science Foundation award provides support for the Conference Board
of the Mathematical Sciences Conference "Harmonic Analysis: Smooth and Non-
smooth" to be held at Iowa State University on June 4-8, 2018.  In recent years
there has been an increasing interest in understanding the harmonic analysis of
non-smooth geometries that are unlike the familiar smooth Euclidean geometry,
such as when nearby points are not locally connected to each other.  Real-world
examples in which these types of geometry appear include large computer
networks, relationships in datasets, and fractal structures such as those found
in crystalline substances, light scattering, and other natural phenomena where
dynamical systems are present. The proposed conference will consist of a series
of ten lectures by Professor Palle Jorgensen from the University of Iowa, a
leader in the fields of smooth and non-smooth harmonic analysis, who will in the
course of the conference demonstrate the surprising connections between the two
domains. The conference aims to bring both experienced and new researchers
together to stimulate collaboration on this timely topic.  The broader impacts
of the conference include the advancement of underrepresented minorities within
mathematics and the development of a globally competitive STEM workforce.
 Approximately thirty participants will be supported, many of whom will be
current graduate students.  The conference will contribute to those graduate
students' educational and professional development and hence prepare the
nation's next generation of researchers to engage this increasingly important
subject area.

A remarkable and oft-cited result of Professor Jorgensen is that there exists a
Cantor-like set with the property that the uniform measure supported on that set
is spectral, meaning that there exists a sequence of frequencies for which the
corresponding exponential functions form an orthonormal basis in the Hilbert
space of square-integrable functions with respect to that measure.  Research
that has been inspired by this stunning result includes: fractal Fourier
analyses, spectral theory of Ruelle operators, representation theory of Cuntz
algebras, convergence of the cascade algorithm in wavelet theory, reproducing
kernels and their boundary representations, Bernoulli convolutions, and Markov
processes.  The remarkable feature of this array of subjects is that they
straddle both the smooth and non-smooth settings.  The lectures presented by
Professor Jorgensen will unify these far-reaching research areas at the
interface of smooth and non-smooth harmonic analysis, with the corresponding
monograph being of great value to current and future researchers as a
consolidated reference for these topical connections. Information regarding the
conference is at the following URL:
 http://www.public.iastate.edu/~esweber/cbms2018/