* 1743594
* RCN:  Integrating and Coordinating a National and International Plant, Algae, and Microbial Metabolomics Research Coordination Network
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Libuse Brachova, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 09/30/2019
* USD 432,534.00

US Participants: Lloyd W. Sumner (Samuel Roberts Noble Foundation); Oliver Fiehn
(University of California, Davis), James Liao (University of California, Los
Angeles), Georg Jander (Boyce Thompson Institute), Basil Nikolau (Iowa State
University), Richard A. Dixon (University of North Texas), Jean S. VanderGheynst
(University of California, Davis), John Labavitch (University of California,
Davis), Tobias Kind (University of California, Davis), William Wikoff
(University of California, Davis), Alisa Huffaker (USDA-ARS, Gainsville), and
Eric Schmelz (USDA-ARS, Gainsville)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Japan Participants:
Kazuki Saito (Riken Plant Science Center), Masanori Arita (University of Tokyo),
Eiichiro Fukusaki (Osaka University), Yutaka Okumoto (Kyoto University), Kazuo
Shinozaki (Riken Plant Science Center), Jun Kikuchi (Riken Plant Science
Center), Mami Yamazaki (Chiba University), Hideyuki Suzuki (Kazusa DNA Research
Institute), Daisaku Ohta (Osaka Prefecture University), Shigehiko Kanaya
(NAIST), Hiroshi Shimizu (Osaka University), Fumio Matsuda (Osaka University),
Naoki Mori (Kyoto University), Naoko Yoshinaga (Kyoto University), and Yutaka
Okumoto (Kyoto University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project
is to develop a Plant, Algae and Microbial Metabolomics Research Coordination
Network (PAMM NET) that will promote effective communication, enhance
opportunities for collaboration, build community consensus, identify key
challenges in metabolomics, and facilitate coordinated community empirical
efforts to meet these challenges. Participation in PAMM NET will be open to the
public, and will begin with the unification of four independent and
international projects funded through the joint NSF-JST Metabolomics for a Low
Carbon Society program. This unification will further amplify NSF's current
investment in plant, algae and microbial metabolomics, and will be achieved
through regular videoconferences and annual face-to-face program meetings and
workshops. This team will serve as a nucleus to build forth a more unified
national and international PAMM NET that will identify and pursue solutions to
the key challenges that still impede the full potential of metabolomics. This
will be facilitated through the recruitment of a network coordinator who will
serve as a dedicated advocate for the organization, facilitate integration, and
provide logistical support for consensus reporting of the network outcomes. The
initial nucleus and the network coordinator will then recruit public
participants from the US and global plant, algae, and microbial metabolomics
communities to build working focus groups. These focus groups will actively
discuss the current grand challenges associated with metabolomics and potential
solutions to these challenges. The PAMM NET recognizes that many challenges will
need the involvement of the larger biology, technology, and bioinformatics
communities and PAMM NET will therefore recruit feedback and active
participation from these diverse groups to best formulate empirical solutions to
the grand challenges. PAMM NET will further contribute to the development of a
US National Chapter of the Metabolomics Society to better serve and provide
long-term solutions for the needs of the US metabolomics community. PAMM NET
will build a repartee with other federally funded programs such as the NIH-
supported National Metabolomics Centers to better coordinate efforts across
federal funding divisions and scientific disciplines. Finally, PAMM NET will
initiate conversations with the global metabolomics community to identify and
pursue cooperative international metabolomics funding opportunities. A
coordinated community effort is expected to be more cordial, efficient, and
productive, thereby leading to new and enabling scientific discoveries and
innovations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PAMM NET RCN considers research-based
education and training as an integral part of preparing young scientists for
fruitful careers. Accordingly, the PAMM NET will encourage, coordinate and
support the attendance of early-career scientists (young faculty, graduate
students, post-docs and a limited number of undergraduate students) at annual
workshops that are associated with each of the NSF-JST Metabolomics programmatic
projects through a limited number of scholarships. These programmatic workshops
will include hands-on demonstrations of different aspects of metabolomics
research that will range from the use of sophisticated chromatographic, mass-
spectrometric and NMR-based tools for metabolite analysis, to computational and
statistical analyses and interpretation of metabolomics data. In addition, this
RCN will organize and support an annual workshop associated with international
plant biology or metabolomics meetings (e.g., Annual Meeting of the Metabolomics
Society or the Annual Meeting of the American Society of Plant Biologists).
Information about the activities of the PAMM NET will be housed at the project
website (to be developed) and the resources generated will be transferred to the
Metabolomics Society website for long-term maintenance and support.