* 1743138
* PPSR: Workshop on Citizen Science in Agrifood Systems: Exploring the Synergy between Science and Counter-expertise
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Aya Kimura, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Trapani
* 06/30/2020
* USD 32,929.00

All Americans are affected by food safety and quality as well as the
sustainability of the agrifood system. Citizen science can improve food and
agriculture in multiple ways, from assessing access to nutritious food in low
income communities, to monitoring pesticide drift from farms, to responding to
health impacts of concentrated animal feeding operations. In citizen science
projects, members of the public collaborate with scientific institutions or non-
profit organizations to collect data and monitor local conditions that influence
sustainability and health in agrifood systems. This workshop establishes a
research agenda for citizen science in the agrifood system. The workshop
convenes social and natural scientists and non-profit organizations to share
their experiences with citizen science on food and agricultural issues. The
workshop provides the potential for networking among professional scientists and
citizen scientists and has the potential to advance agrifood systems research
for broader societal impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Discussion focuses on five
issues: public participation in research agenda setting; the potential for
citizen science to advance holistic analysis of the agrifood system; the
influence of gender, race and class on participation in citizen science; citizen
science as a form of collective action for social justice and sustainability
groups; and the institutional resources necessary to bridge citizen science-
generated data and policy change. Participants prepare and circulate short
position papers in advance of the workshop. Participants then work intensively
in small groups to compare and synthesize their experiences and perspectives, to
develop a clear trajectory for future research and policy action in this domain.
Social scientists facilitate discussion and identify opportunities for further
collaboration, with attention to equity and justice. A keynote address and panel
discussion are open to the public and video-recorded for viewing on a public
website created to disseminate the outcomes of the workshop. Results are
disseminated through a public website that includes the workshop agenda,
conference papers, an executive summary of the event, and video of the keynote
address. Additionally, the workshop supports publication of an edited volume or
special journal issue on the process of translation between agrifood-related
scholarly research, citizen science, and public policy.