* 1743321
* EarthCube RCN: Towards Integration of Heliophysics Data, Modeling, and Analysis Tools
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Alexander Kosovichev, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Subhashree Mishra
* 03/31/2024
* USD 299,754.00

Heliophysics is in the core of the Geospace science because the solar activity
directly determines the conditions of the Earth space environment and
atmosphere. For understanding the physical mechanisms of the complex multi-scale
processes on the Sun and developing Space Weather forecasting techniques, it is
critical to develop a common cyberinfrastructure to collect, access, analyze,
share and visualize all forms of data from ground-based and space observatories,
as well as from data-driven numerical simulations and modeling, and develop
capabilities for their efficient analysis using advanced computer science
techniques. The main goal of this project is to create a Research Coordination
Network (RCN) that will foster new collaborations between heliophysics and
computer scientists, which will result in ideas and concrete plans for
developing building blocks supporting the goals of the EarthCube initiative.
This RCN will actively encourage involvement of a diverse pool of community
members and will provide an organized virtual structure that will promote a
science transforming open source knowledge collaboration. This collaboration
will enhance the science return from individual research projects run by the RCN
participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities of the RCN will be overseen
by a steering committee composed of academic Heliophysicists and computer
scientists from leading universities and research centers in the field. The
steering committee will organize three topical working groups led by the members
of the principal investigator (PI) team, which will address specific challenges
related to: 1) Finding data and discovering knowledge, 2) Working with data and
cross-disciplinary data, and 3) Simulations and modeling. The steering committee
will organize topical working groups that will have as primary goals to build
and strengthen the partnership between heliopyhsicists and cyber/computer
scientists, foster new collaborations that will lead to better science outcomes,
develop and discuss new ideas, methodologies and tools for efficient integration
and analysis of the existing and upcoming large databases generated by space and
ground-based observatories and supercomputer modeling centers. The RCN working
groups will be led by the members of the PI Team, who will organize virtual
seminars, as well as special sessions during general conferences in the field
(such as the annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union and the Solar
Heliospheric and Interplanetary Environment conference). In addition, the PI
team will organize annual plenary technical interchange meetings attended by all
working groups. The RCN steering committee will closely work with the EarthCube
Governance and participate in the annual EarthCube meetings. The RCN will
actively involve students and young researchers in its working groups and
promote and support their participations in the EarthCube meetings. The project
outcomes will be published in regular project reports, scholarly articles, and
presented at the EarthCube meetings and scientific
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.