* 1743426
* Collaborative Research: Maintaining Energy Homeostasis to Preserve Biological Properties during Culture Expansion of Human Mesenchymal Stem Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Timothy Logan, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 07/31/2022
* USD 607,972.00

PI: Ma, Teng&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 1743426&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human mesenchymal
stem cells (hMSCs) have tremendous potential for cell-based therapies and are
featured in nearly 500 clinical trials. Targeted areas include cardiomyopathy,
left ventricular dysfunction, diabetes and immune diseases such as graft-versus-
host diseases (GvHD), rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and multiple schlerosis (MS).
hMSCs are isolated in small numbers from adult donors and are mass-produced for
clinical trials by sustained serial expansion in culture. Many studies have
shown that sustained culture reduces the potency and clinical potential of hMSCs
but the key factors that contribute to the reduced potency are not known. The PI
has obtained preliminary results suggesting that metabolism and cell signaling
associated with metabolites related to nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD)
may play a central role in controlling the potency of hMSCs in culture. The
objective of this project is to investigate the biological changes in NAD
metabolism that occur during prolonged expansion, and then use this knowledge to
develop new engineering practices that maintain the level of NAD and, therefore,
the desired clinical effects. The project will first determine the feasibility
and specific treatment strategy and then evaluate the therapeutic efficacy of
the treated hMSC in treating an experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE)
mouse model of multiple sclerosis (MS). The outcome of this research will be new
fundamental knowledge and engineering practices that accelerate the translation
of stem cell technology to clinical applications. The project has broader
impacts on workforce development by training undergraduate and graduate students
in a cross disciplinary research setting covering stem cell biology, cell
metabolism, reaction engineering, and process design. This interdisciplinary
training is especially important for developing the next generation of
bioengineers in cell therapy industry. The analysis of metabolic networks and
cellular homeostasis in stem cells will be integrated in the senior chemical
reaction engineering course taught by the PI to highlight the application of
classical reaction engineering principles in stem cell engineering. The
participating laboratories have established collaborations, and are experienced
in education of domestic female and minority students. The project, which has an
established relationship with an HBCU (Historically Black Colleges and
Universities), is expected to have a significant impact on the recruitment and
education of students from underrepresented groups in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) are the
cell of choice in more than half of stem cell therapy and the most clinically-
tested cells worldwide. Biomanufacturing of hMSCs requires in vitro expansion
which leads to a gradual loss of therapeutic potency, contributing to
inconsistent clinical results. The culture-induced changes in hMSC property are
accompanied by metabolic shifts and a breakdown in cellular homeostasis as
characterized by reduced basal autophagy, telomere attrition, and increased
senescence. Published and preliminary studies from the PI's laboratory
demonstrate a passage-dependent decrease in the NAD+ concentration, its key role
in maintaining cellular homeostasis, and the effectiveness of NAD+-boosting to
restore hMSC homeostasis andphenotypic and functional properties in high passage
hMSCs. This project will test the hypotheses that: 1) in vitro expansion leads
to a metabolic shift and a progressive decrease in NAD+concentration and the
NAD+/NADH ratio; 2) these alterations in NAD metabolism lead to abreakdown in
cellular homeostasis; and 3) maintaining NAD+ levels during expansion
effectively restores mitochondrial potential and cellular homeostasis, thereby
preserving the clinically relevant hMSC functions. Understanding the regulatory
mechanisms underpinning the changes in hMSC phenotype during expansion and
implementation of a metabolic approach to maximize expansion yield while
preserving their therapeutic potency will accelerate the translation of hMSC-
basedtherapy for clinical applications. The intellectual merit of the project
lies in addressing fundamental gaps in our knowledge ofvenergy metabolism in
maintaining hMSC homeostasis and functional properties. This gap currently
prevents more widespread clinical translation of hMSCs. While metabolism
underlies all aspects of cellular events, little is known about its role in
regulating hMSC homeostasis and phenotype during large scale expansion. The
results of this study will address a significant technological barrier in hMSC
biomanufacturing by establishing a metabolic strategy to preserve the
therapeutic properties of cultureexpanded hMSCs. Importantly, the metabolic
approach is an implementable strategy in large scale MSC manufacturing because
it meets the regulatory requirements and eliminates the safety concerns
associated with gene transfection. The unique and potentially transformative
aspects of this proposal are 1) the novel concept that the hMSC in vitro
expansion leads to a breakdown in cellular homeostasis, 2)that NAD+/NADH
metabolism and NAD+-dependent sirtuins are cellular energy sensors that preserve
cellular homeostasis and properties, and that 3) NAD+-boosting is an
implementable and effective strategy to preserve hMSC property in large scale
manufacturing. The project will establish a novel metabolic strategy to address
a progress-limiting barrier in hMSC-basedcell therapy and therefore has broad
impacts in Advanced Biomanufacturing of Therapeutic Cells(ABTC).