* 1743985
* EAGER: PPER: Collaborative: Cellphone-Enabled Water Citizen Science for Data and Knowledge Generation, and Sharing: WatCitSci
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2019
* Sriram Chellappan, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 10/31/2019
* USD 28,000.00

This Water Citizen Science, "WatCitSci," project seeks to expand the capacity
for water resource data collection by leveraging public participation in the
efforts. Novel, cell phone-based water quality sensors for cloudiness, acidity
levels, dissolved oxygen concentration and surface water flow are being
developed and deployed to citizen scientists. These participants are then being
deployed to gather data for making informed water management decisions in
municipalities, agricultural areas, and other water-intensive sectors. This
project offers a platform and knowledge source for many future research,
education and policy making efforts. Sharing new knowledge may also fuel novel
approaches in assessing and projecting impacts of water use and allocation that
affect all sections of society. The development of citizen science tools will
enhance community engagement on water quality engineering and research,
specifically addressing challenges to our drinking-water systems and the safety
of our water supplies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tools developed for WatCitSci
include cellphone-based water quality sensors for turbidity, pH, and dissolved
oxygen concentration and a particle tracking velocimetry tool for surface water
flow quantification. These efforts, initiated at Missouri University of Science
and Technology, make water quality assessment assessable to the citizenry, both
economically and technologically. The project researchers use the approaches of
the scientific method with hands-on, engaging activities to guide others in
formulating research questions, conducting scientific experiments, collecting
and analyzing water data, interpreting results and investigating community
impacts. The resultant WatCitSci citizen scientists provide deployable data
collection to "critical control points" when and where water supply or water
quality becomes an issue. The data collection, computation and integration
platforms can then be used in developing forecasting models to create a wide
array of research opportunities. Future researchers will have increased ability
to gather data on critical water issues at greater spatial and temporal
resolution, particularly in urban communities. The objectives of the project
are: 1) Humans in Advanced Networks - Developing advanced data collection and
computation in cell phone-based platforms for rapid deployable citizen
scientists; 2) Public awareness through integrated student/citizen science
programs, bi-directional knowledge transfers and educational tools for
classrooms and field education; 3) Integrated real-time data analysis
information projection to stakeholders and decision-makers; and, 4) Assessing
water attitudes, beliefs and quantifying public understanding of citizen science
knowledge and beliefs via social media.