* 1743142
* EAGER: Facilitating Graph Computation by Graph Sparsification
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2021
* Peixiang Zhao, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 11/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

Modern science and technology have witnessed in the past decade an explosive
growth of networked systems giving rise to a vast ocean of data with completely
transformed scale, structure, and complexity, which are often modeled and
interpreted as graphs. However, real-world graph-structured data are voluminous
and exhibit unprecedented complexity and unique challenges that render them
extremely hard to manage, costly to ingest, and complicated to analyze. In this
project, the PI will systematically investigate the principles, methodologies,
and algorithms of graph sparsification, the objective of which is to simplify
large-scale graphs into structure-enriched, quality-preserving graph summaries
toward facilitating and optimizing a wide range of graph-based computations in
real-world, large-scale graphs. This project will open a new research frontier
for managing and understanding big graphs, facilitate the widespread
availability of networked systems, and result in efficient, cost-effective, and
scalable graph management, access, and summarization solutions for the whole
modern, networked society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to develop new
foundations, principles, and algorithms for sparsifying big graph data, and
systematically address a series of central challenges for graph sparsification:
1. What crucial structures or key properties of big graphs should be encoded in
sparsified graph summaries. 2 How to sparsify big graphs efficiently, cost-
effectively, and scalably. 3. How to employ sparsified graph summaries in
support of graph-based computation and analytics, including, but not limited to,
graph clustering, classification, query processing, and link prediction. The PI
will build on his extensive background in graph data management to develop new
graph sparsification methods, and integrate them toward facilitating large-scale
graph computation in real-world graph databases and big graphs. In particular,
the PI will apply and validate the proposed graph sparsification techniques in a
series of protein-protein interaction networks, social networks, RNA molecule
graph databases, and in-situ oceanographic graph databases. The project plays an
integral part in educating next-generation professional workers and scholars
especially from underrepresented groups, and contributing to K-12 outreach
activities through the Florida State University Young Scholars program. Finally,
data, system artifacts, and publications from the project will be disseminated
broadly in the research community and to the public to enhance the
infrastructure for research and education.