* 1743249
* CAREER: Measuring the thermal tolerances of individuals, populations, and species and predicting plant species' responses to climate change in the tropical Andes
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Kenneth Feeley, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 07/31/2020
* USD 470,361.00

One of the most basic questions in ecology is: Where does each species occur?
And following on that: What environmental factors determine where a particular
species occurs? Despite the seeming simplicity of these questions, they remain
unanswered for the vast majority of species. This lack of knowledge is
especially troubling given the implications for understanding how species will
respond to climate change through either shifts in where they occur or through
physiological adaptations. This study will address these and other questions
through a series of experimental and observational studies conducted in the
Andean mountains of Peru, where many species are unusually vulnerable to small
changes in temperature and rainfall. More specifically, the project will measure
altitudinal ranges and thermal tolerances of nearly two dozen cloud forest tree
species. The investigators will also determine the extent to which small
populations of each species are tightly adapted to particular elevations ("local
adaptation") and each species' ability to change its thermal tolerance
("plasticity"). Data will be incorporated into models designed to predict where
species currently occur and where they might start to occur as climates change.
This project is one of the first to systematically test several key assumptions
critical to the assessment how climate change will impact where species are able
to live. It will be the first-ever study to simultaneously measure the thermal
tolerances of individuals, populations, and species of tropical trees. The
results will greatly expand our understanding of the complex factors determining
where species occur, and will strengthen our ability to predict species
responses to future climate change.

The research will be integrated with an extensive set of educational, training,
and outreach programs in collaboration with established domestic and
international environmental education organizations. Outreach programs are
designed to help increase the participation of US minorities and international
students in the biological sciences, and to broaden public awareness of the
potential impacts of climate change on tropical forests around the world.