* 1743452
* Interdisciplinary Consortium for Research and Educational Access in Science and Engineering (INCREASE) Workshop at the CHESS Facility
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Ernest Fontes, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2021
* USD 23,858.00

This award supports Hampton University to host a workshop with the goal to
increase the number of Minority Serving Institution users taking advantage of
research opportunities at synchrotron x-ray facilities, and the Cornell High
Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS) in particular. The workshop is organized by
the Interdisciplinary Consortium for Research and Educational Access in Science
and Engineering (INCREASE) group in collaboration with CHESS. INCREASE is an
organization that promotes research and education at minority-serving
institutions (MSIs), to increase the utilization of national research facilities
and for research education and training for members of groups underrepresented
in science and engineering research, such as African-Americans, Hispanics, and
women. The Workshop is integrated within the annual CHESS Users? Meeting and
aims to connect MSI faculty to the CHESS facility users and in-house experts.
Participants will also learn about NSF and DMR programs, particularly the
Partnership for Research and Education in Materials (PREM) program. CHESS is a
NSF funded National User Facility located on the Cornell University campus in
Ithaca, New York. With 11 experimental stations serving over 1,100 users each
year, CHESS provides hard (10 keV) and high-energy (25 to 150 keV) synchrotron
X-ray facilities for academic and industrial researchers from the physical,
biological, engineering, and life sciences, as well as cultural specialists such
anthropologists and art historians. PREM is a program to enhance diversity in
materials research and education by stimulating the development of formal, long-
term, collaborative materials research and education partnerships between
minority-serving institutions and the National Science Foundation (NSF) Division
of Materials Research (DMR) supported groups, centers, and
facilities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award from the Division of Materials
Research supports participation of Faculty from Minority Serving institutions at
the Annual Users Meeting of the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source. The
workshop will help faculty participants from MSIs and other strategic university
partners to broaden the diversity of users at CHESS, and at synchrotron
facilities across the US in general. Faculty from MSIs will explore research
capabilities and modes of access to CHESS beamlines directly through their own
user proposals, and/or collaborations with users or CHESS scientists, or through
developing partnerships with NSF-supported centers and facilities through
programs such as PREM. MSI users will bring their students, who will gain
exposure to a broad range of science fields and scientists using synchrotrons,
an opportunity not broadly available at MSIs. Synchrotron light sources are
vital and state-of-the-art research facilities used in almost all science and
engineering fields, so the proposed workshop will also emphasize
multidisciplinary research teams. Since INCREASE participants work across a
variety of science and engineering disciplines, and often do not have many
collaborators on their campuses, this workshop may enable isolated researchers
to form teams to carry out competitive research.