* 1743856
* Reproducibility and Replicability in Science
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Adrienne Butler, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Dragana Brzakovic
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,296,247.00

This proposal is to conduct a study of the nature, prevalence and impacts of,
and reasons for the occurrence of, irreproducibility and lack of replicability
in published scientific and engineering research. The awardee will convene a
group of experts with knowledge of a broad range of science and engineering
domains and familiarity with issues associated with reproducibility and
replication. The study committee will explore issues of reproducibility and
replication and produce a written report. The report will describe examples of
good practices, identify gaps in knowledge, and consider the roles of
researchers, professional societies, journals, universities, other research
institutions, and funders in advancing reproducibility and replication. The
report will include recommendations for advancing reproducibility and
replication in research. The scope of the study does not include biomedical
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When concluded, the study will illuminate the
issues involved in reproducibility and replicability for the many stakeholders
in the science and engineering community. The study includes opportunities for
community engagement and input. The study and its recommendations will likely
lead to stronger scientific practice as well as set the stage for a greater
awareness among various stakeholder of how science works. Additional
intellectual merit includes the potential to advance the understanding of team
science and to further the understanding of how scientific inquiry is currently
conducted in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary potential
broader impacts of the project are improvements in the ability of the research
community to conduct research that is reproducible and replicable. A potential
ancillary benefit associated with the dissemination of the results of the study
is a clearer understanding by non-scientists of the nature of science and
engineering research, how it moves forward, and how scientific knowledge
evolves. The project will promote dialogue between different scientific and
engineering fields that involves comparing approaches to the practice of
research, weaknesses that reduce reliability, and successful solutions. The
findings and general recommendations in the committee's final report are
expected to help promulgate best practices.