* 1743088
* EAGER:  Collaborative Research:  Correspondence Discovery in Disparate Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Danai Koutra, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Aidong Zhang
* 07/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

In many important data mining applications, the input networks may be collected
from different sources, at different times, at different granularities, with
partially or completely different sets of nodes, and thus create the disparity
issue. The network correspondence problem, which aims to find the node or
network alignment across different input networks, is a vital stepping stone
behind a variety of high-impact applications. For example, in bioinformatics,
network correspondence is often the very first step toward discovering which
diseases are related to which proteins in order to help design new drugs or re-
purpose the existing ones; in brain-informatics, it can help detect which brain
wirings are correlated with certain diseases and personality traits; in
management, finding the correspondence between different team networks is often
the key to characterize high-performing vs. dysfunctional teams within an
enterprise. The vast majority, with only very few exceptions, of the existing
work on network correspondence focuses on pairwise alignment for static and
homogeneous (i.e., uni-partite) graphs, although many emerging applications
often produce multiple (more than two), dynamic and heterogeneous graphs. The
overall goal of this project is to discover correspondence in disparate networks
in order to enable collective mining of them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will investigate three main research tasks, which incorporate constraints from
realistic scenarios and applications: (1) Linkage of heterogeneous networks with
multiple types of nodes and edges, (2) Linkage of dynamic networks, and (3)
Collective network linkage, as opposed to pairwise comparison and alignment of
networks. Accurate and efficient linkage of different types of networks will
enable the applications of the existing graph mining tools to a collection of
disparate networks, and lead to new insights in a variety of important
application domains. This project will advance the state-of-the-art techniques
on mining disparate networks in multiple dimensions, including its generality,
applicability, effectiveness, and scalability. The algorithms developed from
this project will be applicable to a wide range of high-impact domains, such as
social sciences, brain-informatics, and bioinformatics. The research outcomes
will be disseminated by publications, conference tutorials, open-source
software, as well as potential tech transfer.