* 1743717
* PIRE: Hybrid Materials for Quantum Science and Engineering (HYBRID)
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2023
* Hrvoje Petek, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 11/30/2023
* USD 4,889,767.00

PI: Sergey Frolov (University of Pittsburgh)&lt;br/&gt;co-PIs: Michael Hatridge
(University of Pittsburgh)&lt;br/&gt;David Pekker (University of
Pittsburgh)&lt;br/&gt;Hrvoje Petek (University of
Pittsburgh)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;A future
quantum computer will unlock revolutionary computing powers based on the
principles of quantum superposition and entanglement. However, any computer is
only as good as the materials it is built from: for instance, the success of our
present day computers is due to the remarkable properties of silicon which can
be crafted into processors. This PIRE will establish a multidisciplinary
partnership between universities, research centers and corporations in the U.S.
and France, led by the University of Pittsburgh. The aim of the partnership is
the discovery and investigation of materials that hold exceptional promise for
fundamental quantum physics and quantum device engineering. In particular, the
focus will be on hybrid materials which combine disparate materials kinds, such
as semiconductors and superconductors, in a single structure. Hybrid materials
are as diverse as nanowires and atom-thick sheets, with atomically sharp
interfaces between one material and the other. This PIRE program will bring
together materials engineers, surface scientists, computational chemists, and
experimental and theoretical physicists. The approach will extend from crystal
growth to fabrication and testing of quantum devices based on newly synthesized
materials, guided and aided by theoretical and computational studies. U.S. and
French students will receive quantum technology training in the multicultural
and multidisciplinary environment of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract&lt;br/&gt;Due to the inherent fragility of quantum information, the
materials requirements for quantum computers are more stringent than for
classical computers. Furthermore, new physical phenomena may need to be
discovered and mastered before a practical quantum computer can be built. The
primary research goal of this PIRE is the discovery of new hybrid materials and
the search for emergent phenomena that can only be realized at hybrid
interfaces. Hybrid materials are those which combine layers of dissimilar
material classes, such as superconductors and semiconductors. This partnership
will focus on a diverse universe of hybrid materials including nanowires, van
der Waals heterostructures and two-dimensional epitaxial interfaces. The
approach will extend from in-situ observation of crystal growth to low
temperature measurements of quantum devices based on these materials, guided by
first-principles and mesoscopic theory studies. Two-dimensional materials will
be primarily pursued in the U.S., while one-dimensional materials will be the
focus in France. Scalability of quantum architectures comprising thousands of
quantum bits demands a precise understanding of and control over the materials
that will comprise quantum circuits. Interfacing superconductors with
semiconductors may pave the way to realizing such large-scale quantum circuits
by combining the virtues of both, namely the electrical tunability of
semiconductors with the long coherence times observed in superconductors.
Superconductor/semiconductor interfaces are also the basis for proposed fault
tolerant qubits encoded in topologically protected quantum states immune to
local noise. Undergraduate, graduate students and postdocs from U.S. will
perform research visits to France and participate in international research
projects that will take advantage of unique research infrastructure and a well-
established International Internship Program in Grenoble. Laboratories in the US
will welcome French students for reciprocal visits. Summer schools and online
courses on the frontier subjects in materials science and quantum computing will
be organized for the junior researchers in the program.