* 1743794
* PIRE Investigation of Multi-Scale, Multi-Phase Phenomena in Complex Fluids for the Energy Industries
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2024
* Jeffrey Morris, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 09/30/2024
* USD 5,389,822.00

Masahiro Kawaji (PI), Sanjoy Banerjee, Robert Messinger, Jeffrey Morris, Vincent
Pauchard (CUNY City College)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multi-phase fluid flows
involving mixtures of liquids, and often solids and gases as well, play an
important role in nature and in the environment. Research on multi-phase flows
is important to many key energy technologies, including oil-gas production and
processing, energy conversion and storage, refrigeration and heating/cooling
systems. This PIRE project will investigate microscopic phenomena occurring in
complex liquid-liquid, multi-phase systems. The collaborative research will
result in innovations in both experimental and modeling methods, leading to
improvements in energy and process efficiency in industrial systems. It will
also accelerate education and training of students and early career researchers
by providing them unique opportunities participate in substantive international
research experiences, taking advantage of the scope, scale, expertise, and
facilities of the PIRE network. The City College of New York (CCNY) will
collaborate with eleven international partner institutions, three in Norway, and
four each in France and Germany. Partners will contribute both expertise and
research tools that are complementary to those available at CCNY. The resources
and research infrastructure will be shared to build strong international
partnerships and enable research advances in multi-phase fluids that could not
occur otherwise. The research and education plans will ensure that the U.S.
maintains its competitive status in the field of complex, multi-phase fluids and
their applications to engineering systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
PIRE project includes four research thrusts wherein microscopic-scale insight
into molecular and interfacial control of transport phenomena would result in
transformative improvements in commercial-scale energy processes: asphaltenes,
gas hydrates, drilling fluids, and phase-change nano-emulsions, with diverse
applications in oil &amp; gas, thermal energy storage, and environmentally
friendly refrigeration. The critical common issue in the four research thrusts
is that molecular-scale phenomena, particularly at interfaces, impact macro-
scale properties and behavior. Through experiments and theoretical/numerical
analyses, the overarching objectives of this project are to (i) elucidate
molecular-level phenomena that govern the formation, aggregation and stability
of interfacial and network structures in multi-phase systems, and (ii) control
their development and effects on macro-scale rheology and transport processes.
Challenging fundamental issues will be addressed related to interfacial
adsorption and/or crystallization processes by network-forming species or
particles, which can form bridges between dispersed phases and dramatically
affect macroscopic fluid behavior, e.g., transitions from fluid to gel-like
systems or heat and mass transfer instabilities. Resolution of these problems
could transform the ability to efficiently use, transport, and control complex,
multi-phase fluids, which include liquids with other immiscible and dispersed
liquid, gas, and/or solid phases. To address these issues, cross-cutting
research approaches available at CCNY and international partner institutions
will be used, e.g., from nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, density
functional theory (DFT) and molecular dynamics (MD) at the molecular scale, to
X-ray tomography, X-ray particle tracking velocimetry, rheological measurements
and Lattice Boltzmann (LB) simulations at the micro- and macro-scales. Using
cutting-edge experimental and theoretical research techniques that probe
physicochemical phenomena up from the atomic length scale, the proposed project
will transform existing understanding of multi-phase fluids while incorporating
a unique set of non-intrusive, radiation-based techniques with wavelengths
ranging from radiofrequencies to gamma-ray frequencies (e.g., high resolution
tomography).