* 1743587
* Unearthing interacting nontuberculous mycobacterial, environmental, and host determinants of lung disease in the Hawai'i Islands
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2023
* Michael Strong, National Jewish Health
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2023
* USD 2,619,817.00

This research will study the environmental factors affecting a naturally
occurring type of bacteria, nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM), which cause an
infectious type of lung disease in people. It occurs around the globe and number
of people affected is increasing; it infects 180,000 people in the United States
each year. Hawaii has the highest prevalence of this lung disease in the United
States. While NTM are regarded as an environmentally acquired type of bacteria,
there is much we don't understand about where they live in the environment,
which of those places are most important for getting into people and causing
disease, and how interactions with the host cause disease. This
interdisciplinary project will study NTM found from a broad range of
environments, such as household water sources, soils, feral pigs, and healthy
humans, and compare these to strains from patients in Hawaii. This will be the
first time soil and water characteristics, climatic factors, human genes and
behaviors, bacterial genomics, and potential vertebrate reservoirs are studied
together in a single model. The work will help us understand how bacteria that
are sometimes free living and sometimes associated with people and animals use
their environment, and provide needed information about environmentally acquired
NTM lung disease, and how to reduce these types of infections. This research
will involve a large-scale citizen science project. It will involve patients in
research, establish outreach programs, and mentor high school, undergraduate,
and graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows from Hawaii and other
underrepresented Pacific Islands in the fields of microbiology, microbial
genomics and ecology, and mathematical modeling. It will contribute to the goal
of reducing and perhaps eliminating difficult-to-treat NTM
infections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will investigate environmental and
clinical nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM) by comprehensively characterizing
genomic signatures of these opportunistic pathogens, and identifing where they
reside in the environment. Human susceptibility to NTM infections will be
examined by sequencing the genomes of individuals with NTM lung disease, to
investigate and identify human genetic factors influencing disease incidence,
including the examination of immune genes, cilia function genes, and genes
affecting body or organ morphology. Over 3,000 environmental samples from Hawaii
will be examined, and whole genome sequencing of over 1,000 environmental and
clinical NTM bacterial strains will be conducted to comprehensively characterize
the genome evolution and population dynamics of clinically relevant NTM species
on the Hawaiian islands. These data will be combined with environmental analysis
of water and soil characteristics to identify variables contributing to NTM
survival and colonization in the environment. Through modeling of where
individuals acquire NTM infections the research will contribute to identifying
specific environmental, climatological, animal reservoirs, host genetic
anomalies and behaviors, and particular genetic subtypes that facilitate this
acquisition, driving the high prevalence of NTM lung disease in Hawaii. The
research will thereby shed light on ecological processes affecting host
colonization by environmentally acquired pathogens.