* 1743831
* Conference:  Identifying Challenges for Elementary Educators: Implementing the Oklahoma Academic Science Standards
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Elizabeth Allan, University of Central Oklahoma
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 49,805.00

This conference seeks to address a persistent challenge for pre-service teacher
education programs, that is, how to align what occurs in the preparation of
elementary teachers related to science with the expectations set forth in state
standards for science. The project will provide support to stakeholders across
the state of Oklahoma to come together in a workshop to generate ideas related
to changing the elementary teacher preparation curriculum in science.
Participants will include science and education faculty at the University of
Central Oklahoma, Oklahoma City metropolitan area elementary school teachers and
administrators, and various state and local non-profit agencies and
organizations, such as the Oklahoma State Department of Education. At least four
additional institutions of higher education (3 private and one public) with
elementary teacher preparation programs, will participate as well. A synthesis
document of discussions and consensus outcomes, will be produced and
disseminated beyond workshop participants to the Oklahoma Academy of Science,
the Oklahoma Science Teachers, and more, as well as published on the College of
Mathematics and Science website. The process by which this statewide effort
achieves it intents will be documented to inform other like-minded state
efforts. This endeavor to provide support for influencing the undergraduate
preparation of elementary teachers in science is supported by the Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education program of the National Science
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will convene a one-day workshop
among university, school district, and non-profit entities to come to consensus
on the essential science content and pedagogical approaches necessary for
elementary teachers to implement the state science standards. Recorders will
serve to document both the shared vision related to the preparation of pre-
service teachers in science emanating from the workshop, as well as the process
by which this outcome was obtained. This project will create or reinforce new
partnerships among university content experts, elementary educators, and
stakeholders (local and state non-profit curriculum developers such as public
utilities, and zoos and museums) who provide resources to elementary teachers.
The shared vision document will provide the basis for development or revision of
instructional approaches and materials that can first be introduced in pre-
service education programs and then used to teach the necessary content and
pedagogical approaches consistent with state standards and best practices. These
materials can then be used by the nascent elementary teachers in their
classrooms as they support students in learning science in their early years.
This workshop will identify the appropriate foundational content knowledge and
pedagogically sound curriculum approaches that will provide future elementary
educators with an experience of phenomenologically nature-based elementary
education. This will allow for the better engagement of students in science
education and will also generate a better understanding of the resources
available for science educators in utilizing natural world examples, as well as
identify cross-disciplinary strategies. Using the shared vision, university
faculty can develop university courses specifically for elementary teachers.
This has important intellectual merit as the potential exists to provide high-
quality, scientifically literate elementary teachers for the schools across the
state while also impacting university science and engineering faculty's
understanding of the needs of area elementary schools. The overarching intent of
this effort, the understanding of science through attainable, comprehensible
"real world" examples by pre-service teachers and their students has the
potential to broaden participation and allows students to be excited about
learning science. The partnerships created among university scientists and
elementary educators, as well as elementary classroom teachers, administrators
and stakeholder non-profit entities, through this seminal workshop and the
generation of a shared vision for the science preparation of pre-service
elementary teachers, also has the potential to serve as the seed of future
collaborations.