* 1743428
* I-Corps: Printed Bioelectronic Solutions for Food Allergens
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2017,11/30/2018
* Kevin Dorfman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 11/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is an
improvement in the safety of food products. In particular, this I-Corps project
aims to identify a customer base for a novel biosensing technology using printed
floating-gate transistors (FGTs). FGTs are a platform-technology that can be
used to detect any analyte that can be captured using an antibody or a special
sequence of single-stranded DNA, known as a DNA aptamer. The most likely
direction for commercialization is gluten detection. The growing industry of
gluten-free foods is valued at $2.8 billion/year. These foods are critical to
people suffering from celiac disease, which affects 1% of the population. The
FGT platform can also be adapted to other allergens, clinically relevant
proteins, or even microorganisms. The continued advancement and
commercialization of this technology thus has broader impacts in food safety,
and potentially for biomedical and clinical
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is motivated by the
development of a new transistor-based sensing strategy that combines printed
electronic and microfluidic technologies. Existing transistor-based sensing
technologies pose a difficult materials science problem, wherein the transistor
material needs to have outstanding electronic properties as well as stability in
the biosensing environment. In contrast, the sensor electronics in the
technology under development here are decoupled from the fluidic environment
through a side-gate architecture. Published research has established that this
platform can detect DNA and proteins. It is thus a flexible platform for
biosensing. The research in this project focuses on customer discovery to
identify promising directions for commercialization. The initial customer
discovery will focus on the food safety industry, with the aim of determining
whether gluten detection is the optimal entry point to this market. Subsequent
activities will broaden the customer discovery efforts to identify targets in
the biomedical and clinical areas.