* 1743973
* Meeting: Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF) Node Manager Meeting, Helsinki Finland, September 23-24, 2017.
* BIO,EF
* 08/15/2017,01/31/2019
* Gregory Riccardi, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Roland Roberts
* 01/31/2019
* USD 74,544.00

Funding is provided to Florida State University to stage a workshop at the 2017
Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF) annual meeting in Helsinki,
Finland. GBIF is a repository for global biodiversity data of critical
importance to the U.S. research community. GBIF's data include accessions from
developing countries, some of the most biodiversity rich countries but whose
data are usually inaccessible to U.S.-based researchers. The workshop will
engage managers of biodiversity information (GBIF Node Managers) from several
developing countries. This effort facilitates increased accessibility of
biodiversity information and benefits U.S.-based researchers as they will be
able to leverage these data for their scientific and other benefits.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting of the Global Biodiversity Information
Facility (GBIF) will be held on September 23-24, 2017 in Helsinki Finland. A
goal of this meeting is to increase the ability of GBIF National Nodes to
contribute to the biodiversity information that is available globally. Access to
biodiversity data through the GBIF portal benefits the U.S. research community
by making available crucial data from across the globe, including developing
countries whose data is often difficult to obtain. The supported workshop
facilitates the participation of Node Managers from some developing countries.
These individuals are usually tasked with the responsibility, or involved in the
decision-making process, that impacts the availability of, and access to
biodiversity information from their countries. The workshop also facilitates the
sharing of digitization expertise and associated technologies, potentially
resulting in overall improved data quality. Additionally, collaborations
developed as a result of this workshop will facilitate U.S. researchers'
navigation of the requirements of the Nagoya Protocol in their pursuit of data
from other countries. Citizen science initiatives, that have proven successful
in the U.S. and other developed countries, will also be discussed. If these
public engagement strategies are adopted by resource managers in developing
countries, they have the potential for broad community engagement across
national boundaries resulting in more data of higher quality.