* 1743986
* EAGER:  BRAIDING:  Materials to enable voltage-gateable Majorana systems in silicon using top-down fabrication techniques
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Maxim Vavilov, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Non-technical Abstract: Modern state of the art single-chip processors that go
into our everyday electronic devices, such as cellphones, contain billions of
transistors. This number has been doubling ever since 1971 approximately every
two years following the trend of Moore's law. We are now at the threshold of
ultimate capacity, which motivates the search for new integrated circuits. This
EAGER project is for novel exploratory work whose eventual goal is to create and
manipulate silicon-based superconducting heterostructures in order to provide a
foundation for topological quantum transistors. This project builds on recent
experimental progress demonstrating that superconductivity arises in doped
covalent semiconductors, and the use of Si is attractive because this material
is the most common semiconductor in the modern microelectronics industry. It is
therefore motivating to explore an approach where highly scalable gate control
of semiconductors can be incorporated into superconducting devices for quantum
computing purposes. This could be achieved by defining superconducting-
semiconductor quantum circuits using metal top gates, a technology similar to
that currently employed in large scale microelectronics. Under certain
conditions these circuits have very special properties encoded by Majorana
modes, which are excitations that enable operations that are protected by
topological principles. Thus, these systems are potentially highly resistant to
various sources of decoherence, which is the main problem in non-topological
quantum processors. Implementing topological quantum computation is a grand
challenge with potentially transformative societal implications. The work on the
project will have an impact on development of human resources by training of
graduate students and other junior scientists in quantum information,
nanofabrication, characterization of qubits and materials, theoretical
simulation and calculation, and experimental design and practice.

Technical Abstract: This EAGER project is for novel work to explore an approach
where highly scalable gate control of semiconductors can be incorporated into
superconducting devices for quantum computing purposes. The proposed research
aims to characterize and develop superconducting semiconductor quantum circuits
supporting Majorana fermion states using metal top gates, a technology similar
to that currently employed in large-scale microelectronics. The project is
balanced between the experiment and theory in the Physics Department of the
University of Wisconsin-Madison. Experimental goals include: (i) development of
lithographically patternable and voltage-gateable superconducting layers in
silicon enriched by gallium; (ii) realization of all-silicon superconducting
semiconductor Josephson field effect transistors; (iii) measurements of various
transport characteristics of Josephson junctions such as current voltage
characteristics, current-phase relationships, and Fraunhofer interference
patterns. Theoretical efforts include exploration of patternable micromagnet
configurations within the superconducting silicon channel that enable formation
of robust Majorana modes. Theory work additionally includes computation of
essential parameters for the silicon-gallium superconductor in the presence of
doping-induced inhomogeneities, modeling transport characteristics of proposed
devices, and determination of the phase diagram that hosts topologically
nontrivial states in terms of realistic parameters that are controllable
experimentally.