* 1743273
* Evolutionary genetics of adaptation in natural populations of Arabidopsis thaliana
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Christopher Oakley, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 01/31/2020
* USD 646,137.00

Understanding how organisms adapt to the many challenges they experience in
nature is a central goal in biology. Knowledge of the genetic mechanisms
underlying adaptation in nature is also useful for increasing crop yields and
for the conservation of wild species. One such challenge faced by organisms at
high latitudes is freezing temperatures. This research investigates the genetics
of freezing tolerance in the mouse-eared cress, a relative of many crop species
that has become a "model" organism for which many genetic tools have been
developed. In earlier work, the researchers collected seeds of this species from
Italy and Sweden and planted them in experimental gardens located in each
country. They found that freezing tolerance is required to survive the long,
cold winters in Sweden, whereas freezing tolerance reduces performance in Italy.
This result exemplifies the concept of biological "trade-offs"; adaptation to
one environment often reduces performance elsewhere. This simple principle can
explain why there are so many different species on earth, in that each species
is adapted to a particular environment. The research investigates the genetic
control of freezing tolerance and explores the mechanisms that contribute to the
tradeoff in performance across environments. The genetic mechanisms identified
in these studies may be useful tools for producing new crop varieties with
increased yield in cold climates. In addition, the research team will perform
outreach activities that advance scientific literacy and promote careers in
science. Michigan State University scientists will contribute to a partnership
between K-12 teachers and the W.K. Kellogg Biological Station to develop lesson
plans that support Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) for inquiry based
learning.

The research employs cutting edge genetic technologies to address the mechanisms
and adaptive value of freezing tolerance using three complementary approaches.
First, the genetic basis of freezing tolerance will be further examined in the
two original populations in Sweden and Italy using new lines manipulating
freezing tolerance genes in otherwise homogeneous parental backgrounds. These
lines will then be grown in controlled environment chambers and in the field to
estimate the importance of freezing tolerance genes for genetic trade-offs in
performance across environments. Second, the genetic basis of freezing tolerance
will be investigated in four new populations from Scandinavia and Spain with
dramatic differences in freezing tolerance. Third, this research will be
expanded to an even broader scale, asking if the same genes for freezing
tolerance found in these focal populations are found in other geographic
regions. The techniques employed in part three are similar to those used to
study the genetics of many human diseases. Taken together, these studies examine
the genetic basis of freezing tolerance in a broad diversity of natural
populations and assess the mechanisms of performance trade-offs for this
important adaptive trait.