* 1743797
* I-Corps: New Approach for Virtual Prototyping and Computer-Aided Engineering
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2018
* Ahmed Shabana, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 05/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be
significant because of the anticipated effect on improving product quality and
safety for a large number of industry sectors. The project will lead to more
reliance on virtual prototyping and less reliance on the costly and time
consuming actual prototyping and experimental testing. Advanced virtual
prototyping will result in more credible accident investigation reports and
safety and operation guidelines, and will allow experimenting easily with
innovative design configurations and for significant reduction in maintenance
cost in many engineering areas, including transportation. Reliance on a single-
software technology will eliminate the incompatibilities of existing computer-
aided engineering (CAE) systems, improve communications, and produce a healthier
work environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project aims at addressing
serious incompatibility issues attributed to the use of multiple computer-aided
engineering (CAE) software systems developed using fundamentally different
approaches. It is the main goal of this project to address this problem by using
a new mechanics-based CAE framework in order to eliminate the incompatibilities
and allow for developing models with unprecedented levels of accuracy and
details. To this end, the finite element (FE) absolute nodal coordinate
formulation (ANCF) will be used to seamlessly integrate the computer-aided
design (CAD) and analysis processes by using one approach to create a unified
geometry/FE analysis mesh and perform the multibody system (MBS) dynamic
simulations. ANCF finite elements can be used to define a geometry that is
invariant under an orthogonal coordinate transformation. In addition to
describing the geometry accurately and performing the analysis efficiently, ANCF
elements lead to an optimum sparse matrix structure for the dynamic equations of
motion, leading to the development of new computational procedures that will
drastically change the design process and eliminate the need for using multiple-
software system.