* 1743694
* EAGER:   Exploiting Superior Electrochemical Characteristics of Scaled PEDOT:PSS Microelectrode Arrays for High Fidelity Electrocorticography
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Eric Halgren, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2018
* USD 100,000.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical: &lt;br/&gt;Electrophysiological clinical
mapping of brain activity has high spatial resolution and high sensitivity that
supersedes other noninvasive techniques such as functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI). This clinical procedure is important for a large population of
patients with neurological disorders that either do not respond to drugs or have
adverse side effects such as in medically intractable epilepsy. It also has
promising applications in brain-machine interfaces. The majority of
electrophysiological devices utilize noble metals as the contact interface with
brain tissue, and these metal electrodes detect ionic currents and potentials by
either surface redox reactions or capacitive charge screening. Organic
electrodes on the other hand are permeable to ions and allow volumetric redox
reactions and capacitive coupling of brain activity. This superior
electrochemical performance allows organic electrodes to resolve minute
potentials from the brain which has implications for better understanding and
treatment of neurological diseases. But their superior characteristics fade with
time due to instability of the bonding interface between the organic electrode
and the underlying metal pads that carry the signals to the outside world. This
project aims at improving the stability of these organic electrodes by
developing novel fabrication procedures that can extend their superior
performance for several years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: &lt;br/&gt;This
project combines expertise in electronic materials processing,
electrophysiological recording from humans, and data analysis in order to
develop new geometries of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate
microelectrodes. Device geometries that can result in the lowest electrochemical
impedances and highest electrochemical stability will be developed and
characterized with accelerated aging experiments in-vitro. Impedance and cyclic
current-voltage characterization will be monitored over the course of several
weeks while the microelectrodes are immersed in saline solution at high
temperatures. Surface and cross-section scanning electron microscopy and atomic
force microscopy will be utilized to assess the morphological stability of these
microelectrodes and will inform the device fabrication to develop stable
interfaces. The research is integrated with an educational plan for students
with a central focus on biomedical implant devices as well as on the burgeoning
field of neuro-technology. The plan includes extensive education and training
programs for undergraduate and graduate students, with an emphasis on minority,
female, and other underrepresented groups. If successful, the devices will
broadly impact how we understand the brain, diagnose diseased regions of the
brain, and advance the development of brain implants potentially opening access
to such information to broader societal populations.