* 1743623
* I-Corps: Scalable conversion of carbon dioxide to value-added commodity chemicals
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2017,05/31/2019
* John Kuhn, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 05/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to create a
closed loop synthetic carbon cycle that addresses both carbon dioxide (CO2)
mitigation as well as generating high value hydrocarbons from waste CO2
feedstock. Currently, fossil-fuel-fired power plants typically exhibit
significant emissions of CO2. The process developed here has the potential to
capture this waste CO2 and repurpose it towards generation of hydrocarbon fuels
and other high value hydrocarbons. It presents an opportunity for these
electricity generation units to add profit margin in their business model based
on these hydrocarbon chemicals. Similar opportunities are available to
positively impact many other industries, as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project develops a sustainable repurposing of CO2. The process, reverse
water gas shift chemical looping (RWGS-CL) has demonstrated capability of
converting CO2 to CO at high rates and at low temperatures, paving the way for
implementation at large scale. The temperatures of operation of RWGS-CL allows
for thermal integration with Fischer Tropsch process (FTS). With FTS reactors
already being used in industrial scale, the reactor module developed here can
potentially find an appropriate use in those industries. This process involves
the use of stable catalysts that can be used for several cycles without loss of
activity. The process is designed such that there is no intermixing of CO and
H2O or H2, thereby restricting any methane formation or any backward reaction.