* 1743697
* EAGER: Evaluating the Risks, Tradeoffs and Opportunities of Entrepreneurial Startups In Different Regions Using Gamification
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Bruce Avolio, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 06/30/2019
* USD 199,999.00

While successful entrepreneurship contributes to job creation, many unanswered
questions remain about why so many new start-ups fail. The research develops and
evaluates a novel educational model to increase the likelihood of
entrepreneurial success and ability to operate in different regional innovative
ecosystems. Through a computer simulation game or gamulation, entrepreneurs can
experiment with different organizational structures, hiring decisions, strategy
development, and use of a variety of institutional supports. The research will
examine how entrepreneurial organizations may function when confronting
different regional dynamics. Gamulation play allows entrepreneurs to experiment
in a safe environment with their start-up proposals, while also providing data
with which to generate recommendations for how entrepreneurs should approach
different challenges within and between regions. The results of this project
contribute understanding to why similar start-ups vary in performance; how
regional attributes affect these outcomes; and what strategies firms may use to
increase the likelihood of survival and growth. This project designs a user
friendly, novel game design for engaging entrepreneurship students and provides
for experimentation with different decisions in new firm formation and scale up.
Students will gain a better understanding of what constitutes successful
entrepreneurial firm development. The gamulation simulates different
entrepreneurial environments and is tailored to different entrepreneurs,
industries, and regions. The gamulation further serves as a platform for
collecting data about entrepreneurial decisions and generates real-time data on
how decisions that entrepreneurs make in their regional and economic context
impact their firm?s success.