* 1743532
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Resilience Theory as a Context For Understanding Long Term Social Change
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2017,10/31/2019
* Brigitte Kovacevich, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2019
* USD 25,030.00

Dawn Crawford, a PhD Candidate at Southern Methodist University, along with the
Holtun Archaeological Project (HAP) team working within the ancient Maya site of
Holtun, Guatemala will reconstruct the daily lives of its inhabitants during a
period of extreme political and economic stress, often referred to as the Maya
collapse during the Terminal Classic period (AD 800-900). Previous research on
the Maya collapse has focused on the causes of the abandonment of major cities
and centers. Crawford and HAP will examine the inherent resilience of humanity
by trying to understand how people actively changed their economic strategies in
order to mitigate the impact of political failure. Additionally, this research
will investigate the variable responses of different social classes to political
collapse, as certain social groups may be more resilient in the face of social
change. Archaeology is well suited to examine both large and small-scale changes
across a society through deep time and can provide new perspectives on the
ability of humans (ancient and modern) to respond to political and economic
crises and survive them. The HAP team also works with local communities on the
preservation of cultural heritage and provides education and training in
archaeology and STEM applications for both US and Guatemalan students. Through
applying resilience theory to economic patterns, a focus particularly suited to
archaeological research and material culture studies, this study opens up new
applications and opportunities to understand how humans of varying backgrounds
and socio-economic rankings adjust to drastic political and economic change,
relevant today, as in the past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crawford
utilizes resilience theory, a theoretical perspective initially developed within
ecological research to look at how environments bounce back from disruptions.
Through applying this idea of resilience to humans rather than just environments
it is possible look at larger patterns of human behavior in ancient societies.
Crawford specifically investigates economic activities and decision making (as
opposed to only ecological changes) to examine human resilience. Economic
resilience is especially visible archaeologically through what people made, what
they imported, and how they used these goods. Specifically, residents at the
Maya site of Holtun may have changed where they got their clay to make ceramics,
how many of their pots were imported vs. locally made, and what types of pots
they made in response to the breakdown of interregional trade and dwindling
markets. They may have also responded to shortages of imported obsidian volcanic
glass (used for everyday cutting and ritual activities) by reusing and re-
sharpening existing blades and/or focusing on locally available material like
chert (flint). Excavations of houses of various societal ranks within Holtun
combined with Neutron Activation Analysis and Ceramic Petrography laboratory
analyses for pottery and portable X-Ray Fluorescence for obsidian will provide
clues to changing trade routes and resources utilized by different social groups
during the period of collapse.