* 1743404
* A Therapeutic Cell Distillery: Light-Controlled Fractionation of Stem Cells for Next-Generation Biomanufacturing Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Stefano Menegatti, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 09/30/2023
* USD 380,702.00

PI: Menegatti, Stefano&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 1743404&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major
challenge in developing robust manufacturing processes for therapeutic cell
products (TCPs) is being assured that the cells produced have the desired
therapeutic potency. Many of the current separation and enrichment processes are
based on sorting technologies using "affinity tags," which are adsorbents that
bind cells specifically by targeting their surface markers. The process of
removing these tags after sorting is completed is often associated with low
yield and cell damage. The research goal of this project is to develop an
innovative "affinity tag" based purification technology for separating complex
mixtures of cells into cell fractions with different bioactivity and unique
therapeutic value using light at controlled intensity and exposure time to
control the binding and sequential release of different cell populations. The
use of the "affinity tags" ensures that the recovered cells are highly pure,
while the use of light as a biologically gentle mean to control cell binding
ensures that the recovered cells are bioactive. The cell products targeted
include stem and progenitor blood cells, which give rise to all the other blood
cells, and can be administered by intravenous infusion into patients whose bone
marrow or immune system is damaged or defective. The proposed technology is
flexible, and can be easily adapted towards both research and processing
scenarios, from use in basic cell biology and tissue engineering research, all
the way to the production of clinically relevant amounts of cells. The
interdisciplinary team encompassing the departments of Chemical Engineering,
Biomedical Engineering, and the Biomanufacturing Training and Education Center
(BTEC) at North Carolina State University will integrate research with a plan
for workforce development and engagement with biotech companies. Activities
include BTEC training opportunities for students and industrial and federal (FDA
and BARDA) employees on cGMP processing of protein and cell therapeutics,
incorporation of outcomes into existing BTEC courses on bioseparations, and
creation of ad hoc half-semester and short courses targeted to biotech
professionals on fractionation and purification of cell-based products. The
project also plans to connect with stakeholders of NIIMBL, a NIST institute
designed to innovate biomanufacturing in the United States, to develop joint
research projects aimed at the large-scale translation of the project's cell
distillery for TCP production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
proposes to develop a technology based on light-controlled affinity to separate
stem cell populations into highly pure and bioactive fractions with distinct
therapeutic value. This "cell distillery" employs marker-specific peptide
ligands with light-controlled binding activity integrated in a microfluidic
platform, to control cell binding and release based on the expression and
density of cell surface markers. The ligands are designed to target cell markers
selectively, and switch reversibly between ON and OFF binding modes upon
exposure to visible/near IR light at specific wavelengths. The optimization of
ligand density on the devices and light dosage ensures the recovery of highly
pure and viable cell fractions. The project will demonstrate the technology by
(1) separating hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) from multipotent hematopoietic
progenitor cells (HPCs), followed by the fractionation of (2) HSCs into long-
term and short-term HSCs, and (3) HPCs into multipotent and lineage-committed
HPCs. To this end, the project will develop light-responsive ligands for VCAM-1,
CD38, and Flt-3 markers (Objective 1); correlate cell binding to ligand density
and light irradiance (Objective 2); construct and characterize a microfluidic
"cell distillery" for fractionating HSCs and HPCs obtained from commercial whole
bone marrow aspirate or cord blood mononuclear cell fractions (Objective 3). The
outcomes of this research have the potential to transform the science and
technology of manipulation and isolation of therapeutic cell products (TCPs),
opening new avenues in regenerative medicine and treatment of challenging
malignancies.