* 1743401
* Understanding Photochemistry and Export of Ozone and Its Precursors from China
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Yuhang Wang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 02/29/2024
* USD 732,470.00

This project includes measurements and modeling to improve understanding of the
key processes and atmospheric emissions that result in regional ozone formation
in the North China Plain (NCP), and the transport of pollution out of China with
resulting implications for air quality in the United States. The project
includes a collaboration with Chinese scientists and with a German aircraft
campaign (EMeRGe-Asia) that will track pollution outflow from the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;US Scientists will participate in the Ozone
Photochemistry and Export from China Experiment (OPECE), that includes in-situ
observations at Tuoji Island downwind from the polluted North China Plain (NCP)
region. Measurements at Mount Tai in the NCP and at an urban site in Shanghai
will be made by collaborators in China. The specific research objectives of the
project are as follows: (1) Extend the EMeRGe-Asia aircraft dataset with in-situ
observations in the outflow pathway at Tuoji Island, on Mount Tai, and at an
urban site in Shanghai. Assess the 3-D modeling capability using in-situ and
satellite observations; (2) Examine radical and ozone photochemistry in China
using CAREBEIJNG 2014 (Wangdu), OPECE, and EMeRGe-Asia observations; (3) Improve
the emission inventories of NOx, aromatics, and other VOCs, and quantify the
effects of key photochemical processes and precursor emissions on regional ozone
formation and export; and (4) Understand the export processes in the boundary
layer and free troposphere during spring and investigate large-scale atmospheric
systems affecting springtime pollution export from China.