* 1743052
* I-Corps: Using mobile health and gamification to reduce snoring and sleep apnea
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2017,04/30/2018
* Umesh Goswami, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 04/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to reduce
snoring and sleep apnea using a software that resides on a smartphone. There are
over 90 million Americans who suffer from snoring and 25 million Americans who
suffer from obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). Snoring is a pervasive social problem
that greatly reduces the quality of life of individuals, partners, and families
and has been tied to negative health outcomes. The current treatments for
snoring are often ineffective, too expensive or burdensome. Snoring is also
associated with the medical condition of OSA which is linked to serious health
conditions such as hypertension, stroke, heart disease, arrhythmias, diabetes,
depression, and increases the risk of cancer mortality. In addition, there is
also a considerable economic cost associated with OSA. This I-Corps project is a
completely new approach to address the root cause of both snoring and sleep
apnea and will greatly improve the lives of millions of
Americans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is a new therapy that
exercises the upper airway and treats the root cause of snoring and obstructive
sleep apnea (OSA), a weak airway that collapses during sleep. The approach is
innovative because it identifies unique, directed exercises that can be
performed in a voice controlled smartphone game that is both effective and
engaging. The therapy builds on existing research, which shows that exercising
the upper airway can result in a substantial reduction in snoring and sleep
apnea. Backed by strong support from scientific literature, the initial work
involved partnering with experts in speech therapy and sleep medicine to
identify the most effective therapy to strengthen and tone the upper airway,
which addresses the root cause of snoring and sleep apnea. The work has included
proof-of-concept experiments using ultrasound imaging of tongue motion during
various articulations to ensure the therapy consistently had the intended
effect.