* 1743741
* PIRE: Confronting Energy Poverty: Building an Interdisciplinary Evidence Base, Network, and Capacity for Transformative Change
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Pamela Jagger, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 09/30/2023
* USD 4,790,728.00

Principal Investigator: Pamela Jagger (University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill)&lt;br/&gt;Co-PIs: Michael Emch, Barbara Entwisle (University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill), Andrew Grieshop, Stephen Kelly (North Carolina State
University)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Access to modern energy services are limited in
the developing world. Energy poverty, or lack of access to modern energy
services, has serious implications for the well-being of individuals and
communities, the environment, and impacts economic growth. This project seeks to
understand the impact of strategies to improve access to modern energy in
Southern Africa, a region with low energy access. The researchers will evaluate
the environmental and human impacts of approaches that rely on promotion of new
technologies and/or incentives for behavior change to mitigate energy poverty.
They will investigate the social, demographic, and spatial dimensions of energy
poverty by analyzing geographic variables, and consider the optimal scale of
interventions for maximizing environmental benefits and human well-being. The
researchers will use social ecological systems frameworks and theories of
population and environment dynamics to study energy poverty. They will foster
and sustain a network of academic, practitioner, and policy communities to fill
critical gaps in the strategies used to mitigate energy poverty. This project
will train over 70 postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate researchers from
disciplines as diverse as anthropology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sub-Saharan Africa is an epicenter
of energy poverty, defined as the lack of access to electricity and reliance on
biomass fuels. In Southern Africa, the absolute number of energy poor is
projected to increase through 2050. Energy poverty has implications for climate,
environmental sustainability, human health, and well-being, with negative
impacts realized at individual and collective-scales, and in local, regional,
and global contexts. The researchers' goal is to build an interdisciplinary
evidence base and network for transformative change. They will center their
research and educational program around two themes: evaluating technology and
incentives; and population and environment dynamics. Using rigorous impact
evaluation research designs, they will measure the air quality, land use, and
human welfare impacts of a representative set of novel and scalable technology
and behavioral interventions designed to mitigate energy poverty. The
researchers will use life-cycle analysis to evaluate temporal trade-offs and
synergies between environmental and social outcomes. In the second theme, they
will investigate the social, demographic, and spatial dimensions of energy
poverty by analyzing geographic variables as determinants of energy poverty, and
consider the question of optimal scale of implementation of interventions for
maximizing environmental benefits and human well-being. Using their comparative
research design, they will explore the relationship between energy poverty and
urbanization and migration, and shocks such as droughts and political
instability. The research is innovative for two reasons. First, it uses rigorous
interdisciplinary impact evaluation as the anchor. The team will study what
works, why it works, and over what spatial and temporal scale. Second, the study
of energy poverty is highly fragmented across a large number of disciplines with
very little cross-fertilization or engagement with interdisciplinary frameworks
(e.g., complex socio-ecological systems and population and environment
dynamics). The researchers will use these theoretical lenses to shed new light
on this problem, and guide a coherent body of empirical research in an
understudied region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the
Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences.