* 1743430
* Management and Operation of the Ocean Observatories Initiative (OOI)
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* John Trowbridge, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Cooperative Agreement
* George Voulgaris
* 09/30/2023
* USD 220,735,035.00

The Ocean Observatories Initiative (OOI) is a research observatory with arrays
of instrumented buoys, profilers, ocean gliders, and autonomous vehicles within
different open-ocean and coastal regions, as well as a cabled array of
instrumented platforms and profilers on and above the seafloor. This award to
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI), for continued operations and
management, builds upon the accomplishments of the initial OOI consortium,
including cutting edge in-water infrastructure required to support
transformative ocean observing. WHOI, the University of Washington (UW), Oregon
State University (OSU), and Rutgers University (RU), will provide scientific and
technical management and operation of OOI, beginning in 2018, for a five-year
period with the possibility of a five-year extension. WHOI serves as the lead
institution overall, as well as the marine implementing organization (MIO) for
two global arrays, Irminger Sea in the North Atlantic, and Station Papa in the
North Pacific, and one coastal array (referred to as the Pioneer Array), located
on the East Coast of the U.S. UW will serve as the lead MIO for the Regional
Cabled Array off the West Coast of the U.S., and OSU will serve as the lead for
the second coastal array (the Endurance Array), located off the West Coast of
the U.S. RU is responsible for the cyberinfrastructure and, in conjunction with
the three MIOS, will focus on the data dissemination. A central portal for data
access, supported by a common cyberinfrastructure, ties the system of systems
together. The OOI can be used to investigate a spectrum of phenomena and
processes including episodic, short-lived events, and more subtle, long-term
changes in ocean systems, such as extreme events including storms, undersea
volcanoes, and ocean circulation on continental shelfs and slopes. OOI data are
vitally important for understanding ocean acidification, nutrient dynamics
critical to fisheries, and other questions throughout the basic and applied
science continuum of ocean sciences. As such, the OOI facility is providing the
public, educators, students, and researchers with: (1) long-term time series
data sets; (2) an in-situ ocean laboratory to allow users to submit proposals
for development and application of new technologies by connecting their
instruments or concepts to the OOI network; and (3) tools that will support
undergraduate classroom applications of the OOI, as well as public outreach
through informal education. The OOI delivers all data/metadata and education
tools to the public via the internet at
www.oceanobservatories.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary OOI
measurements provide comprehensive insight into the Earth, oceans and
atmosphere, useful for scientists, educators, students, laypersons, industry,
and policymakers. The Irminger Sea Array provides interdisciplinary measurements
of the water column, mesoscale variability, and air-sea fluxes in a region of
documented deep-water formation, which impacts the Atlantic meridional
overturning circulation, a key component of the climate system. Together with
ongoing NOAA measurements of air-sea fluxes, the OOI Array at Station Papa
quantifies water column properties and mesoscale variability in a region of
longstanding interdisciplinary interest. The Pioneer Array on the New England
shelf break quantifies the interdisciplinary processes near the persistent
shelf-slope front that drive some of the nation?s most productive ecosystems.
The Regional Cabled Array, which brings high power and high-bandwidth, real-
time, two-way communications into the oceans with adaptive sampling
capabilities, provides new insights into interlinked seismic, volcanic, and
hydrothermal processes operating off the Oregon coast, the flux of methane from
the seafloor, the seafloor biosphere, high resolution temporal measurements of
blue water and coastal ocean dynamics and ecosystems (e.g. hypoxia, thin layers,
plumes), biogeochemical interactions, and turbulent mixing. The Endurance Array
provides interdisciplinary observations within the coastal upwelling region of
the Oregon and Washington coasts, providing synoptic, multi-scale observations
of the greater eastern boundary current regime, and new insights into
shelf/slope nutrient exchange, air-sea property exchange, carbon cycling, and
ocean acidification. Taken together, OOI measurements improve understanding of
processes impacting climate variability, ecosystems, fisheries, geohazards, and
the subseafloor environment, which advance the capabilities of decision-makers
charged with the wise stewardship of ocean resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.