* 1743896
* EAGER:  BRAIDING:   Collaborative Research:  Manipulation of Majorana Modes in Topological Crystalline Insulator Nanowires
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Judy Cha, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 150,000.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The team aims to make topological
superconducting nanowires as the building blocks of new quantum computers that
are more robust and energy efficient than current quantum computers. Nanodevices
based on these nanowires are used to demonstrate the basic rules for quantum
computations. The superconducting nanowires are made of indium doped tin
telluride, and are expected to alleviate some of the challenging technical
constraints imposed on a competing system, a semiconducting nanowire with large
spin orbit coupling. A portion of the research is included in the undergraduate
and graduate physics curriculum to inspire and encourage students to pursue
research. Undergraduate students are involved in the project through senior
research projects, REU programs, and summer research internships. Collaboration
between Yale University and the University of Maryland at College Park provide
broader networking opportunities to graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The team aims to
demonstrate braiding anyon world lines using indium-doped tin telluride (SnTe)
topological superconductor nanowires and nanowire junctions. Indium-doped SnTe -
SnTe junction nanowires are synthesized via a growth method that adapts the
vapor-liquid-solid growth mechanism. Superconducting topological nanowires
eliminate the need for superconducting contacts. Nanodevices using the
heterojunction nanowires are fabricated to demonstrate the signatures of
Majorana fermions (MFs) at the junctions and perform fusion and braiding
operations. A half quantum flux magnetic field is to be applied parallel to the
nanowire to ensure the topological superconducting phase while small additional
local magnetic fields are to be used to generate, manipulate, and fuse MFs.
Quantum dot devices on the nanowire are to be used to read out the parity
through the parity-to-charge conversion. The use of magnetic fields, instead of
electric gating, combined with relaxed conditions for the placement of chemical
potentials, represents technical advantages for this system.