* 1743693
* Collaborative Research: Detecting Glacier Calving Events from Ocean Waves and Underwater Acoustics
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2017,02/28/2018
* Fiammetta Straneo, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 02/28/2018
* USD 163,191.00

Predictions of future sea level rise depend on accurate estimates of the rate at
which ice sheets deliver fresh water and ice to the oceans. These estimates are
provided by models, which, in turn, depend on our understanding of iceberg
calving, among other processes. Due to a lack of observations, our ability to
project rates of iceberg calving needs improvement. This project will provide an
inexpensive means of detecting and, potentially, characterizing such events.

The project will contribute to workforce development through provision of
support for the training of a graduate student and a post-doctoral associate. It
will enhance community resources by releasing the open source calving detection
software, written in the R statistical language, on a variety of web sites.

The principal investigators of this project will develop a method for detecting
and characterizing glacier calving events by measuring the surface waves
generated during the process. Development of the method will make use of data
already collected in Sarqardleq fjord in West Greenland. Following the project
both the data and the method will be made publicly available. In addition, they
will characterize the noise generated by calving events using underwater
acoustic data that was collected simultaneously with the wave data. The
comparison of the acoustic and surface pressure data, in conjunction with high
temporal resolution time-lapse imagery, will be used to improve understanding of
the details of acoustic signatures of glacier calving.