* 1743584
* SBP:  Planning Grant:  Collaborative Research:  Strategies for Building Capacity for Linguistic Research on Dakota, an Endangered Native American Language
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Lise Dobrin, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 01/31/2023
* USD 62,256.00

American Indian and Alaska Native students earn fewer than 1% of all degrees
from the bachelor's to the doctorate, according to the National Center for
Science and Engineering Statistics at NSF. One way to increase the number of
degrees earned is by partnering tribal colleges and universities (TCUs) with
research universities. This project will undertake planning activities to pilot
just such a partnership built around language preservation. The Native American
Languages Act, passed by the U.S. Congress in 1990, enacted into policy the
recognition of the unique status and importance of Native American languages.
This project will do planning and assessment to identify areas of institutional
capacity building for three tribal colleges which serve a set of tribal
communities which share a common heritage language. Broader impacts include the
potential for greater participation of underrepresented groups in the language
sciences and identification of areas for capacity building at a network of TCUs
in the language sciences and linguistic archiving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaboration between Sisseton-Wahpeton Tribal College (SWC) of South Dakota and
University of Virginia (UVA) will foster planning activities that will serve
Dakota communities served by SWC, as well as other tribal colleges in South
Dakota and Nebraska. Dakota and its sister languages in the Siouan family are
all endangered. This lost language vitality affects the well-being of the
community, impedes linguistic research, and represents a loss of American
heritage. The project will enable exchange visits between Virginia and South
Dakota by project personnel from both teams. These exchanges will contribute to
identification of needs and areas of potential support for the development of
tribal college infrastructure for linguistics education and Native language
preservation, archiving, and revitalization. The project directly advances the
broader participation of Native Americans in higher education and STEM research
and will promote teaching and research at the tribal college and associated
community. The project will also support training in language archiving to be
held at SWC for interested members of the local communities.