* 1743455
* I-Corps: Enhancing Vaccine Performance
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2017,11/30/2018
* Harm HogenEsch, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 11/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is substantial
improvement of animal health and well-being, food safety, and public health
through more effective and safe vaccines. Vaccination is a critical tool for the
control of infectious diseases, and new vaccine technologies are needed to
address challenges resulting from new emerging infectious diseases and increased
restrictions on the use of antibiotics. They are essential for increasing global
animal protein production to meet the demand of the growing human population.
Nanoparticle-based vaccine adjuvant technology can enhance the performance and
safety of vaccines used in food animals. The incorporation of this technology in
licensed vaccines will improve animal health and well-being, help to reduce
economic losses caused by infectious diseases, and decrease reliance on
antibiotics. As many infectious diseases, like influenza, can be transmitted
from animals to people, control of these diseases is also critical for the
protection of public health.

This I-Corps project is based on a new plant-derived nanoparticle adjuvant
technology. Adjuvants are compounds that are added to vaccine formulations to
enhance the protective immune response. Current vaccine adjuvants have a number
of challenges including lack of efficacy with certain vaccine antigens,
instability, non-biodegradable ingredients, and association with adverse
effects. Nanoparticles are attractive candidates for new generation vaccine
adjuvants, but many nanoparticles are synthesized chemically in the lab,
expensive to produce, and difficult to scale up to meet the need of mass
vaccinations. Certain varieties of plants have naturally occurring alpha-D-
glucan nanoparticles that can be modified to give them immunostimulatory
properties. The surface properties of the nanoparticles enables effective
activation of immune cells, which contributes to the strong immune protection
induced by the vaccines. The fact that the particles naturally exist in plants
makes their preparation affordable and easy to scale up, and suitable for use in
vaccines. In addition, the naturally occurring particles are stable in
formulation, but biodegradable following injection minimizing possible adverse
reactions associated with vaccine adjuvants.