* 1743325
* Student Housing and Symposium Support for 49th North American Power Symposium held at West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV, USA, September 17,- September 19, 2017
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Muhammad Choudhry, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 05/31/2018
* USD 25,000.00

This project provides funding to subsidize a student-oriented conference in
power engineering, the 2017 edition of the North American Power Symposium
(NAPS). Most of the funding will be used to support student-related travel
expenses incurred by US university students attending the symposium, which will
take place in Morgantown, WV during September 17-19, 2017. The symposium will be
hosted by West Virginia University. NAPS is a nonprofit event with technical
sponsorship from the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)
and has a tradition of providing an opportunity for students to share their
research with one another and with faculty and industry experts. The
overwhelming majority of papers in NAPS are traditionally presented by students.
NAPS has been supported by the National Science Foundation in the past, which
has positively influenced student participation. In addition to providing
subsidized accommodation for students, the organizers' efforts to foster and
encourage student participation include a comprehensive student program, tours
of nearby industry sites, and a student paper competition with awards. Moreover,
measures will be taken to encourage participation of women and underrepresented
minorities in the conference.