* 1743498
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Intersection of Labor and Race in Intercultural Interaction
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* David Carlson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2021
* USD 30,914.00

One of the goals of historical social scientific research in the United States
is to understand the complex interactions between immigrant and host communities
and how they differ across space, time, ethnicity, and point-of-origin. Much of
recent literature highlights how various forms of discrimination - based on
perceived class, gender, or racial/ethnic distinctions - impact immigrants, and
how they in turn grapple with these issues and adapt to United States society.
How are different immigrant groups, from different origins, affected by the
inequality and discrimination they encounter in the United States? How do they
respond, in ways that secure their own social and economic needs? How has this
changed over time? Archaeology is well equipped to help answer these questions.
The archaeological record is not necessarily subject to the same kinds of biases
as archival and oral historical sources. Thus, when combined with these sources,
it provides a more complete picture of community responses to inequality and
discrimination. Because the archeological record is often formed from the daily,
practical, and habitual actions of human beings, archaeology is particularly
well-equipped to push beyond investigations of conscious political action (such
as activism and civil lawsuits) and understand how the dynamic relationships
between immigrant and host communities influenced immigrants' daily lives. In
addition to the research it will conduct this project will also employ and train
undergraduate and graduate students in the methods of archaeological survey and
excavation, and build connections with local community institutions, both as
part of public outreach and as a foundation for future collaboration. The
project's results will be made available through university-funded data
depositories, public talks and site tours, and a thematic website dedicated to
issues of Japanese American history, archaeology, and immigration.

This project's Principal Investigators will, with the assistance of paid and
volunteer researchers, examine how local labor hierarchies, direct and indirect
racism, cultural traditions, and on-the-ground strategies deployed by first-
generation Japanese American (Issei) sawmill workers are reflected in and
mediated through the material evidence for daily activities. This research will
be conducted at the sawmill town of Barneston, Washington (1898-1924). Barneston
is an excellent location for such research; it employed a significant proportion
of Issei workers and operated during a period of turbulent economic and social
changes which may have affected Issei sawmill laborers. The researchers will use
archaeological evidence, supplemented by written and oral histories, to
reconstruct a variety of daily activities, including dining and food
consumption, drinking, and gaming behavior. The goal is to determine the extent
to which Issei at Barneston adopted anti-exclusion behaviors which were proposed
by regional Issei leadership as a means of reducing anti-Japanese hysteria, and
how such adoption varied throughout the community. In doing so, this project
will add to archaeology's collective knowledge of the intersection of labor,
race, and culture.