* 1743112
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:The Social Construction of Nature and Health through Engagement with  National Parks in  Southeast Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2020
* Sara Newman, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 06/30/2020
* USD 29,282.00

Paragraph 1&lt;br/&gt;Alaska is commonly characterized as cold, remote, rugged
and, above all, natural, and attracts over one million visitors per year. In
parallel fashion, interacting with nature is widely viewed as healthy. With the
explicit goal of "creating healthy outdoor recreation" opportunities, and as
places where many people seek to experience nature, many parks function as a
focal point where complex interpretations of the health-nature nexus play out.
Tensions persist as to what constitutes an "authentic nature experience" and
therefore what constitutes a "healthy nature experience." Few studies have
engaged a comprehensive view of health as a platform for exploring human-
environmental interactions. This research will further explore opportunities to
improve health, as well as leverage existing outdoor programs for visitors and
the general public. This work will produce important information that can
directly improve public programming in national, regional, and potentially local
outdoor destinations. By encouraging more inclusive views of engagement and the
potential comprehensive health benefits, public engagement and experiences can
be enriched and reach more diverse audiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paragraph
2&lt;br/&gt;This research will further a theoretical understanding of what
factors influence a comprehensive perception of health and engagement with
nature using an interdisciplinary social science perspective drawing on
geography, anthropology, and health and behavioral science. Few studies have
engaged a holistic view of health as a platform for exploring human-
environmental interactions that incorporate the power dynamics embedded in
socially-constructed views of nature and health. This project is a case study of
an outdoor destination in Skagway, Alaska that examines how the perceived health
of two primary visitor populations, cruise ship tourists and people attempting a
33-mile backcountry trail, is influenced by perceptions of nature. By exploring
the complexity of health-nature relationships, this project seeks to expand the
definition of who can participate and receive health benefits from the natural
environment beyond the gendered, racialized, able-bodied, ideal of an outdoor
enthusiast. This work will produce important information that can directly
improve: programming for outdoor destination tourism and other visitors, as well
as the general public; inform public interpretation and guidance given by park
rangers, outdoor education staff, and local guides; and has the potential to
inform marketing and recruitment materials used in public
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.