* 1743118
* Statistical Comparison of Auroras in Northern and Southern Hemispheres
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Kan Liou, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2021
* USD 303,142.00

Auroral displays are an optical manifestation of the Sun-Earth connection, and
studying the aurora provides understanding of this connection and their
coupling. Owing to geophysical constraints (~2/3 of aurora in the southern
hemisphere are above the ocean), there is a lack of information on the southern
hemisphere aurora. Current knowledge of the aurora is based primarily on
observations made in the Northern Hemisphere. This has prevented full
understanding of the magnetosphere-ionosphere as a whole system. With the advent
of satellite-based particle and optical imaging and more observations made in
the southern polar regions, there is mounting evidence suggesting that auroras
are not always hemispherically symmetric and/or conjugate, especially under
certain conditions and certain types of aurora. Therefore, studying the aurora
from both hemispheres can provide much more information about the polar wind-
magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling than any single hemisphere does. This type of
approach is essential because past studies have either relied on global auroral
images from a single hemisphere or on combined particle data from both
hemispheres. The expected results will be made available through the JHU/APL
(Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory) Auroral Particles and
Images Team web site, which serves up a variety of auroral data and models,
including the OVATION Prime, to the space physics community. Furthermore, the
expected result can be used to update the OVATION Prime auroral
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to study hemispheric
symmetries and asymmetries of the large-scale north and south auroral intensity
to improve current knowledge of the solar wind-magnetosphere-ionosphere
coupling. Specifically, the following questions are to be addressed as science
objectives: (1) Are there relationships between the IMF (Interplanetary Magnetic
Field) and the north-south asymmetry of the aurora? (2) Does the southern aurora
respond to sunlight in a similar manner as the northern aurora does? and (3) Is
there a relationship between the geomagnetic field and auroral intensity? This
project consists of analyzing FUV (far-ultraviolet) auroral images acquired by
NASA's TIMED/GUVI from both hemispheres. It will be carried out using (1) a
large number (~6 years' worth) of near-global auroral images in the FUV band
with unprecedented spectral and spatial resolution not only from the Northern
Hemisphere but also from the lesser-known Southern Hemisphere and (2) the
quantitative inversion of images made at certain wavelengths which can reveal
characteristics of these precipitating particles such as their energy and the
power they deposit in the upper atmosphere. This method has been tested in
recent case studies involving GUVI data and have demonstrated the accuracy and
utility of these inversions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.