* 1743631
* The 6th International Congress on Sustainability Science and Engineering, Barcelona, Spain, October 2017
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2018
* Kimberly Ogden, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 06/30/2018
* USD 49,297.00

Proposal: 1743631&lt;br/&gt;PI: Kimberly Ogden&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the
past two decades industries have made significant efforts to improve energy and
material efficiency in engineered systems, design greener products and
sustainable supply chains, and become more responsible to the society through
improving their business sustainability. Sustainability science and engineering
has become an active area of research in various disciplines of engineering,
natural, and social sciences. Sustainability theories and sustainability
assessment, analysis, design and decision making methodologies as well as tools
have been developed, many of which are used to tackle real-world problems in
collaboration with industries. To improve communications and promote experience
sharing, networking, and collaboration between academia, government, and
industry, a variety of sustainability related conferences, symposiums, and
workshops are organized around the world every year. To address much broader
issues of sustainability science and engineering, facilitate discussions on
scientific and technological development, and share research and practice
experiences in industrial sustainability, a group of scientists, educators, and
engineers, and governmental officers organized the sixth event of a conference
series, namely the 6th International Congress on Sustainability Science and
Engineering (ICOSSE 17). The conference will be held in Barcelona, Spain in
October 2017. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is the third time for the ICOSSE series
to organize an event in an international setting. The breadth of the conference
is rapidly expanding. The conference is organized on three key themes:
transition to sustainable living, sustainable technologies in manufacturing and
processing industries, and bringing sustainability into the mainstream. Specific
topics include process intensification, green chemistry, the food-energy-water
nexus, and advances in sustainability education. The conference bridges the gap
between research and development and strengthens the linkage between industry
and academia, while exploring opportunities for broad international
collaboration. This meeting will be held in Europe concurrently with the 10th
World Congress of Chemical Engineering. The travel grant will help US academic
attendees take this opportunity to learn the cutting-edge research in various
fields of sustainability, share their experience with world-class leaders and
other colleagues, especially those in European region, and identify
international collaboration opportunities in strengthening sustainable
engineering research and education. Junior faculty members, young researchers,
graduate and undergraduate students, especially those from underrepresented
minority groups in science and engineering will be strongly encouraged to attend
the conference. Student poster paper competitions will provide an opportunity
for students to present their research activities and receive advice from
leading experts from different countries. To disseminate results, selected
papers will be submitted to five technical journals.