* 1743823
* Proposal to Support Student Travel for the ACM CoNEXT 2017 Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2019
* David Choffnes, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2019
* USD 20,000.00

The 13th International Conference on emerging Networking EXperiments and
Technologies CoNEXT) will take place from December 12 to December 15, 2017 in
Seoul, Korea. This proposal requests funding to assist 15 US-based graduate
students for attending this conference. Participation in conferences such as
CoNEXT forms a central part of the graduate school experience as it provides
students with an opportunity to interact with senior researchers from academia
as well as industry and exposes them to leading-edge research in the field. ACM
CoNEXT stands unique in its emphasis on interactions between networking
researchers at an international level, and attending CoNEXT presents an
excellent opportunity for US graduate students to connect with a thriving
international research community. As in past years, CoNEXT 2017 will include a
special student workshop that will enable students to present and obtain
feedback on their work in progress. The support requested in this proposal will
enable students to attend the main conference and associated workshops at CoNEXT
2017. These students would otherwise be unable to attend the conference. The
travel grant chair is committed to encouraging the participation of women and
under-represented minorities.

This project proposes to provide travel support for graduate students to attend
CoNEXT 2017 and the associated workshops, which will include the student
workshop, among others to be determined. This program will expose students to
new ideas in these emerging areas, and allow them to interact with other
researchers thereby broadening their intellectual horizons. In particular, the
student workshop focuses on providing students an opportunity to present their
work in progress, receive feedback on their work, and obtain valuable experience
in writing and presenting technical papers.

This project integrates research and education of students through exposure to a
premier technical meeting in computer networks and communications. Students will
have the opportunity to observe high-quality presentations and interact with
senior researchers in the field both in the main conference and the associated
workshops. The proposed student participation will have a positive impact on the
quality of their research. Women and other minorities are encouraged to
participate. The CoNEXT conference has developed into a top-tier international
conference, presenting a tremendous opportunity to students to expand their
breadth of ideas, research skills, and technical perspective.