* 1743665
* NSF/FDA SIR: Impact of Mechanotransduction in Polymer Microparticle-Induced Macrophage Inflammation and Osteolysis
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2019
* Jan Stegemann, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 12/31/2019
* USD 98,210.00

NSF/FDA SIR: Impact of Mechanotransduction in Polymer&lt;br/&gt;Microparticle-
Induced Macrophage Inflammation and Osteolysis&lt;br/&gt;PI: Jan P. Stegemann,
University of Michigan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: This award under the
NSF/FDA Scholar-in-Residence program is for a collaborative project to study how
wear particles from medical devices may interact with the body. The use of total
joint implants has been expanding to younger and more active patient
populations. Though effective in restoring joint motion and enabling patient
independence, joint implants have a finite lifespan because their surfaces can
wear over time. The microscopic wear particles produced can trigger the body's
inflammatory response, which can lead to health complications. This project will
develop advanced methods to study how polymer wear particles from medical
implants can interact with macrophage cells in the joint capsule, and in
particular how these interaction are influenced by fluid pressure. It is a
follow-on to a project under the same program to design and test a 3D hydrogel
model for studying interactions between immune cells and microscopic wear debris
generated by medical implants. The project team has extensive experience
fabricating 3D environments mimicking physiological conditions necessary that
can be used to understand the cellular mechanisms of inflammation. The work
presents an opportunity for collaborative research between academic and
government research labs benefitting public health and
safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The goal of this one year Scholar-in-
Residence program is to investigate the role of the local mechanical environment
characteristic of joint synovium in determining the degree of inflammation
mounted by resident macrophages to polymeric wear debris. It will apply a simple
3D cell culture model of macrophage inflammation, representing the biological
and histological components of the joint space, combined with a pressure system
control hydrostatic pressure, mimicking the mechanical environment. The role of
mechanotransduction on macrophage activation and the resulting inflammatory
response to wear particles will be evaluated in vitro using a pressure-
controlled culture environment that mimics the spatial configuration of the
physical cell-wear particle interaction, as well as the changes in the
hydrodynamic environment caused by inflammation or implant micromotion. The
outcome biomarkers of interest will be those that exhibit a release pattern
dependent on the local concentrations and physiochemical properties of wear
particles as well as the surrounding mechanical environment. A combination of 3D
in vitro mechanobiological and physiochemical tests will be applied to evaluate
the biocompatibility of polymeric wear debris, focusing on how phagocytic cell
response alters implant fixation or promotes osteolysis. More robust and
predictive studies at the cellular level are necessary to limit the potential
risk to patients benefitting from the next generation of medical devices. The
broader impact of the proposed project includes its contribution to our
collective understanding of macrophage mechanobiology and it also provides a
model system for screening new potential biomaterials under normal or
pathologically-relevant mechanical conditions. Outcomes of this study may be
applied to predict how mechanical demands caused by physiological location or
pre-existing pathology could impact the lifespan of a total joint device. Such a
system is important for the FDA's mission as it addresses potential patient
safety and efficacy issues that are related to implant success, and potentially
reduces the costs of new device development by providing a relatively less
burdensome and more rapid method for materials testing.