* 1743184
* SI2-S2I2 Conceptualization: Geospatial Software Institute
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Donna Cox, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2021
* USD 599,997.00

Throughout the globe, changes and concerns such as emergency management,
population growth, and rapid urbanization are creating scientific and societal
challenges that are both localized and interdependent across space and time.
Data related to location (i.e. geospatial data) collected and used for academic,
governmental, and industrial purposes urgently needs innovative geospatial
software to allow such data to be transformed into valuable insights and
significant scientific knowledge. Fields such as agriculture, ecology, emergency
management, environmental engineering and sciences, hydrology, geography and
spatial sciences, geosciences, national security, public health, and social
sciences all require geospatial data and software to make important advances.
This project seeks to conceptualize a Geospatial Software Institute (GSI) as a
long-term hub of excellence in software infrastructure that will bring together
the diverse research communities that use advanced geospatial analysis software
to do their research. This project will develop a strategic plan for such a
Geospatial Software Institute, that is, develop the vision and roadmap of the
Institute by mobilizing the relevant communities and stakeholders. The central
goal of this project is to understand how to structure and implement a GSI as a
long-term hub of excellence in advanced geospatial software infrastructure, that
can bring together and serve the advanced and diverse geospatial software and
science research and education communities. The project will bring together the
perspectives of diverse academic, governmental, and industrial institutions as
well as international partners.to better understand the requirements for a GSI,
identify potential software contributors, and then develop the mission, vision
and plan for the GSI. A community report will additionally be produced, that
will assess critical science and engineering needs as well as promising
solutions for high-performance geospatial software. Finally, this project will
make useful contributions to the strategic objectives of the National Strategic
Computing Initiative (NSCI). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will conduct a
number of activities, consisting of three workshops as well as a number of
engagement and outreach activities. These activities will consist of an initial,
in depth survey of science drivers and user needs to be completed within the
first month of the project, with the goal of identifying a preliminary list of
community needs and requirements. This survey will help focus the three
workshops; the project team will use the results of the survey to develop the
key foci, agenda, and desired outcomes of each workshop. This information will
also be used to advertise the workshops and solicit applications for
participation. The project will reach out to underrepresented groups, target a
small set of minority institutions (e.g. Harris-Stowe State College in St.
Louis) and communities (e.g. social sciences) by leveraging existing activities
by at the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) and the
National Socio-Environmental Synthesis Center (SESYNC), engage national museum
programs, and collaborate with professional organizations (e.g., IEEE TCPP and
UCGIS Body of Knowledge Committee) to understand the needs of education and
workforce development, as well as develop effective mechanisms for leveraging
these organizations to ensure that the findings and recommendations of the
project related to curriculum and education materials are disseminated to broad
communities. Finally, this project is well-aligned with the strategic objectives
of the National Strategic Computing Initiative (NSCI) and will contribute to
increasing coherence between technology for modeling and simulation and data
analytics, increasing the capacity and capability of an enduring national HPC
ecosystem, and to to developing U.S. government, industry, and academic
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award, supported by the Office of
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure and the Division of Social and Economic Sciences,
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.