* 1743019
* IBSS-L: The Effect of Social Networks on Inequality: A Longitudinal Cross-Cultural Investigation
* SBE,SMA
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Samuel Bowles, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2022
* USD 880,000.00

This interdisciplinary research project will examine how people's connections
within social networks affect whether they gain or lose wealth over time. The
project will test hypotheses that advantageous positions in community-wide
social networks allow some households to aggregate wealth more quickly than
their peers, and it will explore mechanisms for these emerging disparities. The
project will provide new insights regarding the origins and effects of income
inequality on measures of individual well-being as well as to the heterogeneous
mechanisms through which relatively egalitarian societies exhibit increases in
the distribution of wealth within communities. Through the conduct of research
using consistent methods across a broad range of site, the project will
facilitate the education, training, and mentoring of early-career scholars in
data acquisition and analysis. The project will result in new software for
analyses using this kind of approach that will be made available for use by
others through an open-source platform. Because the project will include
assessments of how economic factors and policy decisions that affect the
structure of networks are likely to impact the long-run distribution of wealth,
project findings can assist in the design of policies and interventions to
reduce inequality by fostering particular ties within a
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To assess how connections within social networks
affect wealth distributions over time, the investigators will collect data in 25
locations across the globe. The data will be collected regarding who is
connected to whom and what their level of wealth is at the beginning of the
study and four years later. The study sites exhibit geographic and
socioecological diversity, and the researchers will examine communities that
includes hunter-gatherers, horticulturalists, pastoralists, wage laborers, and
intensive agriculturalists as well as varying degrees of involvement with market
economies and national political systems. Data regarding network, wealth, and
household characteristics will be analyzed to determine whether and how networks
matter in determining outcomes of wealth and inequality. The investigators also
will test the idea that bargaining power depends on social connections. This
project is supported through the NSF Interdisciplinary Behavioral and Social
Sciences Research (IBSS) competition.