* 1743506
* RAPID:  Time critical survey of great ape population size, health and genetics in threatened habitats
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Michael Wilson, The Jane Goodall Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2018
* USD 89,494.00

This RAPID award will support a survey of wild chimpanzees living in an area
that is immediately threatened by deforestation and agricultural expansion, near
but outside of Gombe National Park. The demographics of this chimpanzee group,
and the relationship of this group to wild chimpanzees on protected lands, are
not well understood. As part of the survey, biosamples will be non-invasively
collected, so that genetic relationships and dispersal patterns can be
understood in the context of habitat pressure and as comparative data for
understanding hominin evolution. The project will foster international research
collaborations and contribute to endangered primate conservation
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chimpanzees of Gombe National Park, Tanzania,
have played a central role in anthropological and biological studies,
contributing to the understanding of human evolution through elucidating the
similarities and differences between chimpanzees and humans, and providing
fundamental insights into topics including behavior, ecology, life history, and
disease ecology. Also, a substantial chimpanzee population has persisted 10-20
km to the northeast of the park within a recently established network of village
forest reserves along the Gombe-Burundi Ridge. Little is known about the extent
to which these populations are currently connected. Moreover, recent surveys and
satellite images show that the northern population faces immediate threats from
tree cutting, farming, and other activities. The investigators will work with
village forest monitors to conduct a thorough survey of these chimpanzees,
procuring, before the population dwindles, fecal samples vital for future
research. Non-invasive genetic and biomarker analyses will provide new insights
into chimpanzee dispersal patterns, microbiome and pathogen diversity, and the
speed at which anthropogenic habitat fragmentation influences population
differentiation.