* 1743287
* I-Corps: Rapid, low-cost, microfluidic chips for molecular point-of-care diagnostics
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2017,09/30/2018
* Rhonda Shrader, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* cindy walkerpeach
* 09/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of simple and low-cost point-of-care microfluidic molecular
(DNA/RNA) tests that are designed to be used in decentralized or low-resource
settings. Currently, point-of-care tests for infectious diseases are
predominately done in a paper dipstick format. Although these dipstick tests are
inexpensive, they have limited sensitivity. As an alternative, the most
sensitive detection method entails DNA/RNA detection by polymerase chain
reaction (PCR), however PCR testing often requires time-consuming manual steps
and costly equipment. Because of its cost, PCR is generally confined to
centralized laboratories, so front-line decentralized clinics can suffer days to
weeks of delay in testing results because samples need to be sent out for
testing. Low-cost nucleic acid detection is desirable for point-of-care
diagnostics; The availability of an on-site molecular tests will give doctors a
powerful tool to confirm diagnosis of infectious diseases and allow faster
treatment with higher sensitivity. This project will help confirm the best
product-market strategy to deploy the technology, and guide the development of
devices that makes positive impact for better patient management, increased
accessibility to molecular testing, and a faster response to epidemics.

This I-Corps project is based on several patented microfluidic technologies
developed for on-site nucleic acid detection. The microfluidic chip is designed
to reduce molecular testing setup costs by 100X. The key technologies include
vacuum based self-powered microfluidic chips that do not require any costly
equipment often necessary seen in conventional microfluidic setups (such as
external pumps, controllers, valves, or power sources). This allows the
microfluidic test to be a fraction of the cost compared to conventional
microfluidics. The vacuum technology also makes the microfluidic chips fully
portable and easily transportable, which is ideal for decentralized point-of-
care use. It was also possible to perform sample preparation with the vacuum
based microfluidic technology. Using this vacuum based microfluidic platform, it
is possible for rapid quantitative digital nucleic acid detection of drug
resistant bacteria DNA directly from human blood samples within 30 minutes.
These technical features are important building blocks for building autonomous,
portable, lab-on-chip technologies for a future generation of low-cost molecular
diagnostic assays.