* 1743938
* EAGER:  Feedback optimization of dynamic nonlinear signal processing systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Alexandre Megretski, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2019
* USD 160,000.00

The proposed research will investigate a new approach to design of non-linear
signal processing systems, utilizing efficient real time implementation of
frequency weighted least square optimization with signal value constraints: a
modified classical Wiener filter setup, in which the optimized signal has to
minimize a quadratic frequency domain integral, subject to its samples being
restricted to a given compact set. In particular, such optimization is motivated
by applications in peak-to-power ratio reduction, where the optimized output
signal has to be as close as possible to the input, while satisfying a spectral
mask constraint, as well as an absolute value bound imposed on its time domain
samples. Another motivating application is optimal quantization, where the
output signal has to provide the best approximation of the input, as quantified
by a frequency-weighted integral error measure, while its time domain samples
are restricted to a finite set. In addition, the proposed research aims to
establish an analytical foundation for complexity reduction of high quality
linear finite impulse response filters, a ubiquitous element of digital signal
processing units, prone to consume significant resources in FPGA and ASIC
implementations. Defining the ideal response of a signal processing system as
the solution of an optimization task specified in terms of system input is a
well-established fundamental idea in filter design. A well-known example is the
case of unconstrained frequency weighted quadratic optimization, where the
optimal solution is a linear function of the input, implemented by the Wiener
filter. In the case of constrained frequency weighted quadratic optimization, to
be investigated in this proposal, analytical conditions of optimality are well
known, but come in the discouraging form of an infinite set of non-linear
equations with respect to an infinite number of variables. The proposed research
is based on the recent observation supporting the expectation that, under
reasonable assumptions, the dynamic mapping from the input to the optimal output
will have exponentially fading memory, and, moreover, will be approximated
extremely accurately by a specific class of feedback-based real time algorithms.
The proposal intends to build a non-causal version of robustness analysis
machinery, to quantify and assess exponential stability of nonlinear dynamical
systems in which the current output sample depends in equal degree on the past
and future inputs, and to provide high quality real time realizations of such
systems.

The proposed work has the potential to deliver a fundamentally new class of
practical non-linear signal processing algorithms with superior performance. It
will also enhance the theory of robustness analysis of feedback control by
extending some of its basic tools to non-causal systems motivated by signal
processing applications. The application problems in this proposal are motivated
by the current needs of developing digital signal processing algorithms for the
next generation of communication devices, most significantly, those involved in
digital signal conditioning in radios (cell tower base stations, WiFi hubs,
etc.) If successful, the proposed research will become a factor in reducing
power consumption and footprint of common digital signal processing units. It
may also affect the way communication standards are written, by ensuring easy
access to efficient high performance implementation of a number of common signal
processing tasks. Thus, the project may contribute to increased partnerships
between academia and industry, and increase economic competitiveness of the US.