* 1743136
* TTP: A Kit for Exploring Databases under the Hood for Security, Forensics and Data Recovery
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2020
* Jonathan Grier, Vesaria LLC d/b/a Grier Forensics
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 05/31/2020
* USD 88,344.00

Database Management Systems (DBMS) have been used to store and process data in
organizations for decades. Larger organizations use a variety of databases
(commercial, open-source or custom-built) for different departments. However,
neither users nor Database Administrators (DBAs) know where the data is stored
or how it is processed. Most of the relational databases store internal data
using universal principles that can be inferred and captured. This project
builds tools that draw on these principles to offer x-ray vision into storage of
many DBMS, illustrating exactly what is happening inside. This research benefits
users at all levels: students, teachers, database users, DBAs and forensic
analysts. Tools developed by the research team will let DBAs inspect storage and
observe any leaking data and help forensic analysts discover what happened in a
database during an attack. Users will be able to restore data that was deleted
or recover in the face of a critical corruption event. The same tools also help
students to better understand concepts of database operations in introductory
courses and help them observe security vulnerabilities.

Some DBMS' provide profiling and recovery tools, but the available functionality
is always database-specific and varies wildly across different platforms. This
research project standardizes basic profiling and data recovery capabilities and
deliver a universal solution for most major relational DBMS. This solution will
include recovery against corruption events that can cause data loss or
incapacitate any modern DBMS; reconstruction of "unrecoverable" (i.e., discarded
or deleted) data; and visualizing artifacts that will offer insight to forensic
analysts. The tools built in this project will focus on providing easy-to-use
and intuitive visualization of all deconstructed DBMS content from disk and RAM
and recommend strategies for minimizing data leaks. Development and evaluation
will be done in collaboration with IT professionals and academic DBAs as well as
industry partners. This project will also produce a suite of standard benchmarks
that can quantify data leakage and recovery rates for different databases.
Finally, the visualization tools and benchmarks will be combined into training
tutorials and student lessons both for database and security curricula.