* 1743854
* Mesoscale Vortex Dynamics in Tropical Weather Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2022
* David Schecter, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 02/28/2022
* USD 324,042.00

Tropical cyclone development remains a difficult forecast problem. The objective
of this research project is to study the complex motions that occur in a
tropical weather system and how they interact to either assist or hinder
tropical cyclone development. The impact of the project will be to help improve
tropical cyclone forecast models that are relied upon for public safety. The
project also includes an internship opportunity to enhance workforce
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on the nature and
consequences of complex mesoscale vortex interactions that occur in tropical
weather systems. The research activities will advance knowledge of the
mechanisms that control mesoscale vortex merger and alignment under various
scenarios, when oceanic surface fluxes, cloud processes and radiation have the
potential to strongly affect the dynamics. Idealized numerical modeling using
the Cloud Model 1 model will comprise the bulk of the study and is intended to
help answer the main two research questions: 1) How do mesoscale vortex
interactions influence tropical cyclone development? 2) How do diabatic
mesoscale vortices interact, and what controls the nature of their
interaction?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.