* 1743852
* Understanding the Reversals in Polarity of the Magnetic Fields of Planets and Stars
* MPS,AST
* 02/15/2018,12/31/2022
* Michael Calkins, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 12/31/2022
* USD 289,999.00

Magnetic fields in the stars and planets are common features in the universe.
The individual properties of these magnetic fields vary widely, however, among
all of these different objects. In our own Solar System, the Sun's magnetic
field has a well-defined, periodic reversal of polarity every 22 years. In
contrast, the Earth undergoes magnetic field polarity reversals that are
irregular in timing. All planets in the Solar System except Mars and Venus have
active magnetic fields, and Mars was once home to a relatively strong magnetic
field. Magnetic fields have also been observed in other stars. Research into the
causes of magnetic field polarity reversals can produce results affecting the
forecasting of solar flares, as well as understanding the space environment that
will affect human exploration beyond the Earth's orbit. The investigators will
develop and use new software tools to advance our understanding of polarity
reversals. The Principal Investigator and a graduate student will lead this
project, which will also make many opportunities for undergraduates to join in
the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will develop novel dynamo
modeling analysis tools and incorporate them into a well-understood and highly
efficient magnetohydrodynamic code to advance our understanding of polarity
reversals in new dynamical regimes. These tools will allow for a multiscale
analysis of polarity reversals, and enable a precise characterization of the
physical processes at work in the two reversal regimes observed to date. This
research has the potential to significantly alter the current view of dynamo
physics by conducting one of the most detailed numerical analyses to date of the
equations governing natural dynamos.