* 1743605
* Free Space Optical Network Workshop
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Vincent Chan, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 06/30/2019
* USD 96,959.00

Free Space Optical (FSO) networks are increasingly of interest because of their
ability to deliver very high data rates 'through the air'. They are being
applied to an expanding set of diverse application areas, e.g., satellite
crosslinks and downlinks to earth and airborne platforms, communication among
aircraft, metro short haul applications, telecom/wireless front and back haul,
and datacenter networks, all of which are struggling to keep pace with the
deluge of data that is now part of every enterprise. This project will organize
and run a workshop with the goals of identifying the key research challenges,
open problems and major opportunity areas associated with FSO. The output of the
workshop will help guide the future research investigations of the CISE and ENG
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Free space optical (FSO) communication
networks are important because of the very high bit rates they can potentially
deliver 'through the air'. In addition to traditional application areas (e.g.,
satellite crosslinks and downlinks to earth and airborne platforms,
communication among aircraft), a diverse set of new applications areas is
emerging (e.g., metro short haul applications, telecom/wireless front and back
haul, and datacenter networks). These systems have been leveraging traditional
telecom technologies, which are delivering programmable, high-bit rate,
spectrally efficient transmission in ever-smaller form factors. Beyond this,
there is the emergence of new technologies (e.g. silicon nanophotonics, phased
arrays, long-wavelength sources), advances in signal processing and interaction
with the networking layer which may have the potential to enable a significant
"leap" in FSO capabilities. The workshop this project will run is therefore very
timely; it will bring together a community covering both a wide array of
application areas and new technologies to identify the major challenges and
opportunities for FSO systems. The workshop output will be used to guide future
research investigations within CISE and ENG communities. The variety of FSO
application areas to be discussed (e.g., indoor vs. outdoor, long vs. short
range) also suggests considerable opportunity for technical cross-fertilization
among diverse research groups.