* 1743572
* Native Americans: An Exploratory Study Pinpointing the Factors That Influence Their Interests and Aspirations for Engineering Faculty Positions
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Sue Jacobs, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 08/31/2020
* USD 99,998.00

This project aims to develop a deeper understanding of the factors influencing
Native American or Alaskan Native (hereafter referred to as Native American)
participation in the engineering professorate. According to a 2014 NACME report,
only 0.4% of engineers are Native American, and even fewer engineering faculty
are Native American. Engineering faculty are important in attracting and
retaining students by providing positive socio-cultural experiences, role
modeling, mentorship, and inclusive learning environments that reduce isolation.
However, little is known about the factors promoting Native Americans' entry
into the engineering professorate or persistence as engineering faculty members.
The project's research will provide systematic evidence that could lead to best
practices in providing Native Americans with experiences and support to
encourage them to pursue the engineering professorate and consider the academy
as their professional home. In an era of decreased enrollment in engineering
programs, enhancing diversity is key to long term growth and global
competitiveness. Diversity in engineering fields is more than an issue of
fairness and equity, but also of quality of the engineering endeavor.
Cultivating the talent and promoting full inclusion of Native Americans in the
engineering professorate can promote diversity in the workforce to encourage the
growth, creativity, and innovation necessary to solving our most pressing
tribal, national, and global problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a critical
need to investigate potential factors and the linkages among them to make
meaningful progress toward increasing the number of Native American faculty in
engineering. However, the lack of prior systematic investigations means that
research methods and materials designed to tap underlying constructs are
unavailable, and that pilot data on which to base more extended investigations
are non-existent. Therefore, the overall objective of this proposal is two-fold:
1) to conduct an exploratory pilot study of hypothesized factors and the
linkages among them in several samples of Native American engineering students
and faculty, including participants from Oklahoma, Minnesota, and members of the
American Indian and Science and Engineering Society (AISES), and 2) to develop
methods and materials in preparation for subsequent cross-sectional and
longitudinal work. The central hypothesis is that there are identifiable factors
that explain Native Americans' entry into and persistence in the engineering
professorate, and that these factors are discoverable and accessible through
quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods means. The project aims to recruit
Native American engineering undergraduates, graduate students, and faculty to
capture current and retrospective perceptions of their journey toward and
participation in the engineering professorate. The team will collect and analyze
qualitative and quantitative data, and disseminate findings in ways that advance
foundational knowledge of the field. In so doing, this effort will lay the
groundwork for subsequent studies on broadening participation of Native
Americans in the engineering faculty.