* 1743035
* Using Bio-acoustics on an Autonomous Surveying Platform for the Examination of Phytoplankton-zooplankton and Fish Interactions in the Western Ross Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Grace Saba, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Burns
* 07/31/2019
* USD 299,988.00

The Ross Sea is the one of the most productive regions in Antarctica and
supports large populations of several key species in the Ross Sea food web,
including copepods, crystal krill (Euphausia crystallorophias), and Antarctic
silverfish (Pleuragramma antarcticum). Copepods and crystal krill dominate the
diets of Antarctic silverfish, the dominant fish species in the high Antarctic
zone, and silverfish are a major link between lower (copepods, krill) and higher
(fishes, marine mammals, flighted birds, Ad√©lie and Emperor penguins) trophic
levels. Despite the significance of these key species, there is limited
understanding of copepod, krill, and silverfish mesoscale distribution, spatial
structure of age/maturity classes, and their interactions with physical drivers
within the Ross Sea. Autonomous underwater profiling gliders are a developing
technology that offers the potential for providing high spatial, temporal, and
depth resolution data on regional scales. The project will test the capability
of a multi-frequency echo sounder integrated into a Slocum Webb glider with the
aim of providing the first glider-based acoustic assessment of simultaneous
distributions of three trophic levels in the Ross Sea. Complementary glider
sensors measuring physical, chemical, and biological parameters will provide
mesoscale and sub-mesoscale hydrographic information from which phytoplankton-
zooplankton-fish interactions and the relationships between these organisms and
physics drivers (sea ice, circulation features) will be investigated. The
approach proposed here, glider acoustics, is relatively new and has the
potential to be transformational for investigating food webs and the Ross Sea
ecosystem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will modify and integrate an
Acoustic Zooplankton and Fish Profiler (AZFP) multi-frequency echo sounder into
a Slocum Webb G2 glider with the capability to differentiate between krill and
other types of zooplankton, including copepods, and different sizes of krill and
silverfish. The AZFP will be complemented with the existing glider sensors
including a CTD, a WET Labs BB2FL ECO puck configured for simultaneous
chlorophyll fluorescence (phytoplankton biomass) and optical backscatter
measurements, and an Aanderaa Optode for measuring dissolved oxygen. The new
sensor suite will be tested during a four-week glider deployment, where it will
conduct acoustic surveys to map distribution and abundance of multiple
zooplankton taxa and silverfish during the austral summer along the Terra Nova
Bay polynya ice shelf and in adjacent continental shelf waters. The
relationships between phytoplankton-zooplankton-fish distributions and the
physical drivers of zooplankton and silverfish species and size distributions
will be investigated. Coordinated ship-based acoustic sampling and net
tows/trawls will be conducted multiple times during the glider deployment to
validate glider acoustic-based species, size, and abundance measurements. Open
accessible, automated data produced during this project will be made available
through RUCOOL (Rutgers University Center for Ocean Observing Leadership) and
THREDDS (Thematic Real-time Environmental Data Distribution System). The
production of consistent, vertically-resolved, high resolution glider-based
acoustic measurements will define a successful outcome of this project that
should help in identifying the challenges in their use as a potentially cost-
effective, automated examination of food webs in the Antarctic.