* 1743649
* I-Corps: Surgical Retractor System
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2019
* Jeffrey Vipperman, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 05/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the creation
of a platform technology with a rapidly deployable, motorized arm that can be
used wherever rapid, precise positioning of objects is required. There are many
potential medical, commercial, industrial, and consumer applications for the
technology. In the industrial sector there are needs to position and hold for
assembly, soldering, gluing, welding, or metrology. The device can also support
needs for mechanical assistance during disassembly and re-assembly in
maintenance operations. Consumer applications include holding tablets, books, or
laptops and adjustable workbench arms. Medical applications include surgical
retraction and surgical device or tool holding, including laparoscopic
instruments. The first target application in development is an abdominal
surgical retraction system that can be deployed and/or adjusted within seconds.
A rapidly deployable retractor reduces operating room and anesthesia times.
Further, since the retractor arm is disposable, the risk of infection is
reduced, and the need for cleaning, sterilization, and maintenance is
eliminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps team has developed a device that
consists of a motorized base with an attached flexible arm that can be locked
into place and/or adjusted in seconds at the push and release of a button.
Various grippers can be attached to the end of the arm to firmly and steadily
grasp or support an object at any orientation. The speed and flexibility of
these devices provide advantages over slower, manually operated fixtures,
especially when working in and around complex geometries or fragile
environments. The intellectual property consists of a unique joint surface that
permits the mechanical arm to be made much longer and stronger than competing
systems. A first generation system that operates as a surgical retractor was
built and demonstrated before surgeons in mock scenario in a hospital operating
room. It was shown to be capable of providing adequate retraction force for
abdominal surgeries.