* 1743816
* EAGER:  PPER:  Enable Crowdsourcing in Microbial Water Quality Monitoring in Water Distribution Networks
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Tao Yan, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2020
* USD 99,994.00

Microbial contamination of drinking water within the distribution networks can
occur at unspecified locations, at unspecified times, and due to diverse
reasons, causing significant public health problems and uncertainties. The final
critical control point against microbial contamination within the water
distribution networks is at the tap where human water consumption occurs, yet
water quality monitoring at the tap represents a major operational challenge to
water utilities. This challenging problem, however, is an excellent opportunity
for involving and motivating the public in water quality engineering research,
as water customers are perfectly situated and often interested and motivated in
knowing water microbial quality at their own homes. If enabling, low-cost tools
are available to water customers, this could become an excellent example of how
citizen science can be cultivated and harnessed to solve a complex and otherwise
intractable water quality engineering problem. Two major technology gaps for
involving citizens in this crowdsourcing approach include: (1) collecting
reliable water microbial quality data within households and low-cost tools, and
(2) encouraging and facilitating voluntary and efficient data sharing. The
research goal of this project is to enable crowdsourcing by specifically and
effectively addressing these two technology gaps.

This project uses an iterative citizen consultation process to optimize a
crowdsourcing approach that enables low-cost and high-quality measurements of
total coliform and E. coli in drinking water samples by water consumers.
Specifically, a commonly used EPA method is being adopted and modified for home
implementation using commonly available household tools. The two research
objectives are (1) to define, test, and optimize the proposed crowdsourcing
approach, and (2) to investigate the feasibility of using an integrated device
for one-step water sample collection and subsequent processing. The project
involves a large group of undergraduate students at a largely commuter campus
with diverse backgrounds as citizen scientists. Their participation not only
provides feedback to the design, test, and optimization of the crowdsourcing
approach, but also provides the participants with a great opportunity to
understand the importance and complexity of water quality data collection in the
distribution networks.