* 1743030
* SuperMAG: High Time-resolution Data Enabling Global UltraLow Frequency (ULF) Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Kazue Takahashi, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 08/31/2021
* USD 525,828.00

This research will develop and provide a new SuperMAG project capability for
organizing, storing, and disseminating high time resolution data from world-wide
arrays of fluxgate and induction coil magnetometer for magnetospheric ultralow
frequency (ULF) waves and substorm-related investigations. SuperMAG is a
worldwide collaboration of organizations and national agencies that currently
operate &gt;300 ground-based magnetometers. This research effort will gather and
organize high-time resolution data, write software packages to pre-process and
process high time resolution fluxgate and induction coil magnetometers data, and
disseminate them to the community on the SuperMAG website. The resulting data
product will enable studies of global ULF activity by allowing easy access to
high time resolution measurement (&lt;5sec), derived data products, plots and
other tools. Availability of the new data product will provide new opportunities
of research to students. The project will also foster education and public
outreach activities, which are already a key component of
SuperMAG.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will enhance the current SuperMAG
capabilities by expanding its ground-based magnetometer data holdings from
1-minute cadence to higher sampling rates (&lt; 5 sec) of both fluxgate and
induction coil arrays and by developing additional data products that will make
observations of ULF waves and substorm-related variations in these high-cadence
data more easily accessed and understood by the wider geospace science
community. The high time-resolution magnetometer dataset will enhance studies of
substorm-related processes because of the availability of data on Pi1b wave
activity (higher frequency than Pi2, but also generated in association with
nightside magnetic field dipolarizations), and studies of radiation belt
enhancement and loss processes because of the availability of the full range of
ULF waves, including in particular electromagnetic ion cyclotron (EMIC) waves
generated in the middle and inner magnetosphere. The implementation of high
time-resolution data, along with the new addition of satellite footpoints to
SuperMAG, will foster collaborations between the satellite community and the
ground community for new scientific areas such as ULF waves. The project will
foster education and public outreach (EPO) activities, which are already a key
component of SuperMAG.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.