* 1743907
* EAGER: Braiding of Majorana Zero Modes in the Quantum Hall - Superconductor Hybrids
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Gleb Finkelstein, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Semiconductor electronics currently relies on
the flow of electrons and holes, but other types of particle-like "excitations"
can be artificially created and controlled. These excitations, which include so-
called Majorana fermions and non-abelian anyons, have properties that protect
them against external perturbations. As a result of this robustness, control
over such "topological excitations" would revolutionize electronics and bring
quantum computing closer to reality. Over the past few years, the condensed
matter research community achieved dramatic progress in the practical
implementation of topological excitations. It was indeed realized that they
could be artificially created by inducing superconductivity into certain types
of low-dimensional materials such as semiconducting nanowires. The PI proposes
an alternative approach to create the topological excitations based graphene
subject to high magnetic fields and coupled to superconducting electrodes. The
individual topological excitations are connected by gateable links, allowing one
to controllably couple and manipulate them. The planar nature of the host
material should facilitate making multiple copies of these devices, enabling
future scaling and integration with conventional electronics. The project
strongly emphasizes mentoring and education: it involves two PhD students, and
undergraduate and a high school student. High school students from the NC School
of Science and Math will be recruited to participate in the laboratory
activities and get a feel for physics research. This research will train the
graduate and undergraduate students in the measurement and nanofabrication
methods relevant for both industrial and academic
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Working with
Josephson junctions based on graphene contacted by type II superconductor, the
principal investigator's group reported last year on the first observation of
supercurrent through a two-dimensional region in the regime of the quantum Hall
effect. This result proves the capability to coherently couple the
superconductor electrodes to the quantum Hall edge states. It allows the
principal investigator's group to approach superconductor-quantum Hall
interfaces with more complex geometries, which are expected to host Majorana
fermions. The specific goals are the superconducting electrodes in a shape of
quasi-1D "trenches" etched in a quantum Hall mesa, with the edge states counter-
propagating on the opposite sides of the contact. It has been predicted that in
the spin-polarized quantum Hall regime (for example, at the filling factor equal
to one), Majorana zero modes are formed at the ends of the trenches. Realizing
these devices requires fundamental understanding of the coupling between the
quantum Hall states and superconductor, as well as the development of
fabrication techniques to design extremely clean interfaces between the
superconducting contacts and the quantum Hall host material. Graphene has much
to offer in that regard: a tunable band-structure and a remarkable electronic
quality, which results in the appearance of the spin-polarized quantum Hall
states at relatively low magnetic fields. Once formed, the Majoranas zero modes
could be connected by gateable edge-state links, allowing one to controllably
fuse (hybridize) them. Multiple copies of these excitations could be fabricated
on the same mesa, enabling their braiding. The planar nature of the host
material should facilitate making multiple copies of these devices, enabling
future scaling and integration with conventional read-out electronics. Last but
not least, the measurements are expected to reveal the fascinating physics of
non-abelian anyons, which have properties distinctly different from any
conventional quasiparticles. These topological excitations are relevant to a
whole class of hybrid topological devices and could lead to breakthroughs that
help make quantum computing a reality.