* 1743082
* EAGER:   PPER Evaluating potential for lake water quality decline by partnering with citizen scientists
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Stephen Norton, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2019
* USD 98,620.00

Challenges to maintaining high water quality in Maine lakes include predicting
the responses of lake ecosystems to variations and the extent of engagement of
residents in lake stewardship activities. The long-term goal of this research
project is to advance a fundamental understanding of processes that control the
susceptibility of lakes to environmental factors. Citizen scientists are being
trained to collect the data that projects researchers are using to characterize
the environmental characteristics of the local environment. The cross-
disciplinary approach to the research project, especially with respect to
stakeholder engagement in implementing best management practices, can act as a
model for other states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
engage citizen scientists to collect water and sediment samples from 25 Maine
lakes simultaneously several times during the summer season across a continuum
of oligotrophic to eutrophic lakes. The synthesis of data allows the project
researchers to formulate a scientific basis for the changes in lake water
quality and to develop a predictive model for the epilimnetic phosphorus
concentrations. Through workshops and pre- and post-project surveys with citizen
scientists and lake residents, the researchers are articulating processes by
which changes to lake water quality are influenced by natural and anthropogenic
factors and identifying cognitive and behavioral factors that affect the human
system. The project researchers are training citizen scientists in proper sample
collection practice and developing surveys to assess lake stewardship activities
and engagement. Afterwards, the researchers are implementing lake stewardship
workshops to share the project findings. The development of the predictive lake
phosphorus model involving lake stakeholders will advance knowledge within the
field of limnology and will allow the development of an adaptive management
process whereby the interaction between the social and biophysical components
are enhanced.