* 1743301
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Risk Management in Unpredictable Environments
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2019
* Tristram Kidder, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2019
* USD 20,359.00

The archaeological record is uniquely positioned to inform modern strategies for
social adaptation to current and future climate because of its deep time
perspective of how a wide range of societies successfully or unsuccessfully
adapted to changing environmental conditions. However, archaeological research
is rarely incorporated into current debates because the archaeological evidence
for human response to environmental change is typically at a scale too large
(e.g., subsistence shifts, changing settlement patterns, and migration) for the
average person to find meaningful to everyday life. This project takes advantage
of a unique opportunity to study localized variation within the archaeological
context of the largest pre-Columbian settlement in North America to determine
human decision making to changes related to fluctuating water tables at yearly,
decadal, semicentennial, and centennial scales. By establishing a chronology of
localized variation associated with urban construction history, researchers will
address questions about how urban societal response.

Under the direction of Dr. Tristram Kidder, Ms. Caitlin Rankin will study
construction chronology and localized environmental sequence at a wetland mound
and plaza group within the urban central precinct of the UNESCO World Heritage
Site Cahokia Mounds in southern Illinois. The investigators will collect and
analyze a continuous series of soil samples taken from mound, sub-mound, plaza,
and sub-plaza contexts with a variety of scientific methods including stable
carbon isotope analysis, grain size distribution analysis, loss-on-ignition,
magnetic susceptibility, and soil micromorphology to determine environmental
conditions through time. Archaeological excavations will be conducted at the
edge of mounds and within plaza limits to determine the use and construction
history of the wetland mound and plaza group. Bayesian statistics will be used
to refine a chronology for both environmental and construction history.
Investigators will utilize a risk management perspective to address social
response by determining if the people of Cahokia invested labor to maintain the
space to its original design and function or if they choose to adapt the
function and the design of the space to new environmental conditions. This
project will provide the data for Ms. Rankin's doctoral dissertation.