* 1743237
* NSFDEB-NERC: Mycorrhizal drivers of soil organic matter formation and decomposition
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* William Parton, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2021
* USD 511,813.00

Changes in land cover, such as the transition from grassland to forest, or vice-
versa, have become a common occurrence. Changes in soil microorganisms, such as
fungi associated with plant root structures, can accompany these vegetation
changes. Because the formation and decomposition of soil organic matter is
determined by plant-microbe-soil interactions, the land-cover change may result
in a change in the accrual, storage and physical protection of soil organic
matter. This US-UK collaborative project, using state-of-the-art methods, will
investigate how grasslands and forests, with their different types of symbiotic
root fungi, transform plant residue inputs and soil organic matter. Experiments
will determine whether the transition from grassland to forests enhances or
degrades soils. Additionally, the research will create new computational tools
to model soils to better predict carbon and nitrogen dynamics after land cover
change. This research will help managers identify sustainable land management
decisions through more accurate forecasting of future terrestrial carbon
cycling. In addition to international collaboration, this project will provide
mentoring for post-doctoral scientists and undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will (1) determine the mechanisms by which
temperate grasses and coniferous trees in interaction with their associated
mycorrhizae affect soil organic matter formation and decomposition; (2)
integrate this mechanistic understanding in a new process based model; and (3)
use existing chronosequences of land use change from grassland to forest to
independently verify model projections of long-term changes in ecosystem C
stores. The project consists in an integrated set of greenhouse, field and
modelling studies, with different components carried out in the US and UK.
Continuous 13C isotope-labeling of plant and mycorrhizal biomass will be used to
accurately trace the fate of root exudates and mycorrhizal products as they form
particulate or dissolved organic matter, and then stabilize via physical
occlusion or mineral bonding. In the field, the effects of different mycorrhizal
types on the decomposition of 13C-labeled grass and tree residues, CO2
production, and soil organic matter formation will be determined. Bayesian
inference will be used to parameterize the new model using the experimental
data, and model projections will be evaluated using data on carbon stock changes
collected from a grassland-forest transition chronosequences. The degree of soil
organic matter stabilization by physical occlusion or mineral-association will
be used to evaluate the process-model based findings and inform on the
reliability of the new model as a policy tool for C cycling projections and
ecosystem management.