* 1743010
* EAGER: Advanced Machine Learning Techniques to Discover Disease Subtypes in Cancer
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Ping Chen, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Amarda Shehu
* 06/30/2021
* USD 165,881.00

A significant challenge in the analysis of large-scale genomic and molecular
profiles of cancer is the identification of distinct, molecularly independent
disease subtypes and the association of these with clinically relevant outcomes.
The barriers to identifying molecularly-defined, clinically relevant subtypes
have been the high-dimensionality of the feature space, limited sample sizes,
and low recurrence rate of mutations between patients. The intellectual merits
of this project are to develop theory, algorithms, and implementation for robust
and scalable network-based machine learning and data mining techniques in high-
dimensional gene expression and gene mutation data for disease subtype discovery
in cancer. The results of the project can help to identify individual cancer,
pan-cancer, and sex-specific subtypes to better understand the nature of cancer
and to develop the most efficacious therapeutic strategies. The mathematical and
machine-learning models developed in this study are general biological network-
induced regularization models that are applicable in a broad range of
supervised, semi-supervised, and unsupervised learning
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to design novel
network-based learning models that optimally integrate prior biological
knowledge on gene regulatory mechanisms into learning algorithms. New group-
based and Laplacian-based regularization techniques and restricted manifold
learning in matrix factorization are investigated to design reproducible models
for disease subtyping. This is the first study to build an efficient toolkit for
cancer subtype discovery that fully integrates discrete mutational profiles and
continuous gene expression data. The project provides extensive cross-
disciplinary training in Computer Science, Mathematics, and Engineering. The
models developed during this study can be broadly applied as more precision
genomic medicine data become available.