* 1743991
* EAGER:  PPER:  Validation and Utilization of a New Tool for Citizen-Led Water Quality Monitoring in Agricultural Watersheds
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Keith Schilling, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2018
* USD 88,714.00

This research project tests a new tool that uses a smartphone app to test water
quality. The app relies on the smartphone camera's ability to detect the color
change on a chemical test strip to a much higher level of precision and more
accurately than the human eye. The phone relays the data and test location to a
database for access by the project researchers as well as citizen scientists.
The project goals are to determine the feasibility of using this app to
accurately monitor water quality throughout a watershed, to assess user interest
and engagement in using the app, and to help stakeholders identify water-quality
"hot spots" for the potential implementation of projects to improve water
quality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research project, a water quality
monitoring smartphone app is being piloted with stakeholders in two separate
field campaigns: Clear Creek Watershed (Fall 2017) in eastern Iowa (to collect
preliminary data related to the app's accuracy, ease-of-use, and user
experience) and Clear Creek and the Middle Cedar River watersheds (Spring and
Summer 2018) in Iowa (to introduce the app to watershed management authorities
and other water-quality monitoring volunteers). The two campaigns are providing
sufficient data to determine the new app's potential for citizen-led monitoring
to provide scientifically credible characterization of water quality. The
proposed citizen science project builds on existing hydrology and water-quality
expertise at the IIHR - Hydroscience &amp; Engineering, University of Iowa. IIHR
- Hydroscience &amp; Engineering also recently developed the Iowa Water Quality
Information System, with which anyone with internet access can view real time
water-quality information from sensors deployed across Iowa within its
hydrologic context. Immediate impacts of this project include the use of this
tool to inform selection and placement of hundreds of conservation practices to
reduce flooding and improve water quality in eight Iowa Watershed Approach
project watersheds. The Iowa Department of Natural Resources may also adopt this
new app for use by its volunteer water-quality monitoring program. The long-term
implications for this project are the broader scientific community's potential
adoption of a new water-quality measurement tool that allows anyone with a
smartphone to take accurate measurements of water quality and share that data to
a common online platform with very little effort or cost. The app will help
researchers, state agencies, watershed managers, and the general public better
monitor, understand, and characterize water-quality problems at the local
watershed scale.