* 1743832
* Solar Eclipse Observations with a Dense Network of Single-frequency Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) Receivers
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Joshua Semeter, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 05/31/2018
* USD 83,851.00

This award would use off-the-shelf cell phone technology just recently made
available on the market to construct a single frequency GPS array of sensors
that would be applied to study the ionospheric effects of the solar eclipse
happening on 21 August 2017. This event would provide the opportunity to study
the ionospheric response to a well-characterized modification of the solar
influx. The path of total obscuration crosses the central continental United
States and deployment of the networked instrumentation to Tennessee is planned
for the proposed measurements. The proposed project would deploy a regional
network of dual-frequency and single-frequency Global Navigation Satelite System
(GNSS) receivers with the goal of monitoring total electron content (TEC),
ionospheric drifts, and signal scintillation effects induced by the eclipse. The
proposed project lays the foundation for the use of consumer smartphones to
augment the current GNSS-TEC receiver network to produce a greatly enhanced
space weather monitoring capability. The August eclipse provides an outstanding
opportunity for a proof-of-concept data capture. The project will partially
sponsor one full-time Ph.D. student with the eventual objective of making this
his Ph.D. project, and this project will employ six undergraduates for the
proposed observing campaign.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TEC estimation from single-
frequency GNSS measurements requires resolving carrier-phase ambiguity problem
and mitigating the higher uncertainty introduced by using code delay in the TEC
estimation process. Clusters of such receivers, analyzed collaboratively with
surrounding dual frequency receivers, will enable a value-added enhancement
standard TEC maps. Moreover, the phase information from the single frequency
receivers allows the tracking of irregularity drifts (through a correlation
analysis), and also the tracking of incidents of signal scintillation. This data
fusion approach will be evaluated experimentally in the proposed investigation.