* 1743607
* DCL:  HBCU:EAGER- Study of Biological Interaction between Fungal Cells and Electrospun Nanofibrous Platform
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Lifeng Zhang, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 12/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

DCL; HBCU EAGER: Structural and functional characterization of proteins
associated with silver nanoparticle resistant Escherichia
coli&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, integration of electrospun nanofibers
in commercial products has been growing exponentially. Electrospun nanofibers
have been found in a number of applications such as air filtration, liquid
filtration, performance apparel, drug delivery, scaffold for tissue engineering,
battery separators and etc. The electrospun nanofibers are already exposed (and
will continue being exposed) to our environment through corresponding commercial
products in the form of nano fibrous mat. Inevitably, they will be in contact
with microorganisms in environment, including fungi. However, little is known
about biological interaction between electrospun nanofibrous mat and fungal
cells. Detailed interaction information between fungal cells and electrospun
nanofibrous mat from this research project will create public awareness about
electrospun nanofibers' uses and their impact on environmental microorganism.
Policy makers can also make use of the information to regulate the integration
of electrospun nanofibers in consumer products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to explore viability and growth behavior of a
model fungal cell (yeast) on electrospun polyacrylonitrile nano fibrous mat (as
well as other electrospun nano fibrous mats) by cell morphology, cell number,
and cell metabolic activity. The results will be compared with those from
microfibrous and film counterparts. The project will provide new knowledge
regarding interaction between fungal cells and electrospun nanofibrous materials
by investigating the effect of chemical structure, size, surface roughness,
hierarchical structure of the electrospun nanofibrous mats. The research
outcomes can aid in understanding the mechanism of the biological interaction
and disclose a brand-new way to realize antifungal functionality by simple
physical contact without integrating any antifungal drugs or functional groups.
The acquired knowledge will fill in a largely unknown research field and further
translate to other nano materials that have similar structure, dimension, and/or
morphology as electrospun nanofibrous materials.