* 1744033
* Incoherent Scatter Radar Study of the F1 Region Composition, Coupling, Dynamics and Energetics
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Qihou Zhou, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Liu
* 07/31/2023
* USD 261,524.00

The ionosphere is the electrically conductive layer of the atmosphere that
extends from 100 km to the edge of space. This research addresses the F1 layer
of the ionosphere that spans 130-230 km. This region is populated by molecular
ions at the lower levels and atomic ions at the upper boundary. This mixture of
constituents has led to the F1 region being less studied than other parts of the
ionosphere where the composition is simpler. However, F1 electric fields and ion
drifts are highly variable in space and time, so understanding this region is
clearly important for electromagnetic wave propagation, space weather
prediction, and their ramifications for communications and positioning
industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Incoherent scatter radars (ISR) are the
primary instruments to study the F1 layer. Radar signals ("echoes") can yield
information about wind and temperature, but the process suffers from a lack of
uniqueness, as different combinations of ion mass and electron/ion temperatures
can present with the same echo power. The Principal Investigator (PI) will
combine ion and plasma emissions observed by the ISR at Arecibo to infer
temperature, composition and velocity without the traditional assumptions that
have constrained previous efforts. He will examine altitude, seasonal and solar
activity dependences, and the balance between photochemical and dynamical
processes that maintain F1. This work contributes to our fundamental
understanding of ionospheric physics, while showcasing new strategies for mining
ISR measurements. The PI's efforts affirm Arecibo Observatory's reputation for
scientific excellence as the facility transitions from National Science
Foundation (NSF) management to its new administration by the University of
Central Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.