* 1744254
* Emergence in Disordered, Interacting and Living Systems a the Aspen Center August 12, 2017
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Piers Coleman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 12/31/2017
* USD 10,000.00

The meeting on "Emergence in disordered, interacting and living systems" to be
held at the Aspen Center for Physics, August 12th, 2017 will bring together
world leaders in the area of emergence in disordered, interacting, and living
systems to discuss grand challenges in the area that face the community today.
The occasion of the conference will also be used to mark the achievements of
Professor Elihu Abrahams, whose work has shaped our understanding of this area
of science, both in the context of condensed matter physics and in the life
sciences. The conference will focus on forward-looking research talks and panel
discussions, and will be supplemented with presentations with historical
perspective, examining the areas of science where Professor Abrahams has made
seminal contributions. This event will provide a unique opportunity to summarize
the current status of understanding of emergent behavior in condensed matter and
living systems. The presentations and discussions at this event will be
published online on the conference web-page. The perspective provided by this
meeting will help to frame the big questions and directions for research in this
area for future researchers to push back the frontiers of
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Disorder and noise in interacting many-body
systems are fundamental to areas of science as diverse as quantum computing and
in general electronic devises and in biology in cell function and brain neuronal
networks. They serve as models for the physical principles and dynamical
processes that living systems exploit to perform their functions. Elihu Abrahams
is a pioneer in the theoretical foundations of our understanding of disordered
and interacting systems, extending the concepts beyond his main specialty of
quantum condensed matter physics to areas including spin glasses and neural
networks. The conference will focus on these areas and the PI will discuss the
latest experimental and theoretical developments. In line with a long-standing
tradition of Aspen workshops, a significant fraction of the speakers and
participants will be junior scientists. The PI will specifically recruit junior
speakers and a diverse group of participants from many universities. The meeting
site is accessible for people with disabilities and when registering for the
conference such people will be able to identify any special needs so that the
conference organizers can accommodate those needs.