* 1744552
* EAGER:   What drives speciation in Nearctic aphids?
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Nathaniel Hardy, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 12/31/2020
* USD 149,578.00

One out of every three species of insects is a plant-eating insect, but most
plant-eating insect species feed on only a few plant species. Although this
phenomenon is clearly relevant for basic and applied biology, it is currently
not well understood. This project addresses this issue by exploring patterns of
biological diversity in the sap-sucking bug species of North America.
Specifically, it tests the idea that both the high species diversity and the
narrow diets of plant-eating insects are the result of co-evolutionary
interactions with plants. These interactions are analogous to an arms race;
plants evolve diverse defenses against plant-eating insects, which, in turn,
evolve diverse (and specific) ways of overcoming those defenses. This idea has
been central to explanations of plant-eating insect diversity for more than half
a century. But until recently, researchers have lacked the resources to test it.
This project will pull together those resources, and give us an unprecedented
opportunity to advance our understanding of the forces that generate biological
diversity. This project will provide education and training opportunities for
biology students and instructors at multiple career levels, and from multiple
backgrounds. The goal is to train biodiversity scientists, and to improve access
to biodiversity science for underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to identify ecological factors that drive host-use evolution and
speciation in plant-eating insects. It uses Nearctic aphids as a model system
and has three objectives: 1) Use DNA sequence data to estimate phylogenetic
relationships among ~500 aphid species. 2) Use more than a quarter of a million
specimen records and the primary research literature to characterize the niche
of each Nearctic aphid species. 3) Use comparative statistical analyses to test
hypotheses about the evolution of aphid species and niches. Corollary objectives
are to improve aphid systematics and gain insights into the general evolutionary
processes that beget biodiversity. This research may enable researchers to gain
insights into economically important aspects of aphid biology, such as disease
vector capacity and invasiveness. In turn, these may lead to better strategies
for excluding and controlling aphid populations, which could increase the
efficiency and sustainability of U.S. agriculture.