* 1744775
* Sino-US Forum/Workshop on Environment-Enhancing Food, Energy and Water Systems,  June 13 - 15, 2018, Beijing China
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Yuanhui Zhang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

1744775 (Zhang). This workshop will focus on the paradigm of Environment-
Enhancing Food, Energy and Water Systems (EE-FEWS) that addresses critical
problems by generating significant amounts of bioenergy and food via
bio/chemo/thermo conversion and multicycle reuse of nutrients and wastewater in
the biowaste stream. At the same time, EE-FEWS seeks to enhance environmental
quality by capturing carbon and cleaning wastewater. The U.S. has an estimated
79 million dry tons of sustainably collectable livestock manure and food
processing waste. Through the EE-FEWS approach, this biowaste stream has the
potential to be amplified via multi-cycle nutrient and wastewater reuse to
240-800 million tons of mixed algal-bacteria feedstocks that can be converted
into 120-400 million tons of biocrude oil via hydrothermal liquefaction (HTL),
while cleaning an estimated 7.9 billion tons of wastewater. Additionally, food
would be produced without the need for additional reactive fertilizer or water.

This workshop is targeted to contribute significant advancements in sharing and
advancing knowledge of the following: utilizing readily available biowaste and
biomass inputs; improving efficiency for biowaste/biomass conversion (including
thermochemical, biochemical and biological); demonstrating that nutrients in the
original biowaste can be efficiently separated in the conversion process and
reused multiple times, thus amplifying biomass to produce unprecedented amounts
of biocrude; and establishing that the chemicals of environmental concern in the
original biowaste can be substantially removed/converted through conversion and
wastewater treatment processes. The workshop will involve a broad range of
education and outreach opportunities from K-12 to graduate studies, for under-
represented minorities, industry and the general public. The educational goal is
to educate a new generation of scientists and engineers equipped with a solid
foundation and broad perspectives for addressing issues related to the nexus of
Food-Enegy-Water (FEW). By recycling nutrients and extracting hydrocarbons in
waste streams, producing high value foods, capturing carbon and cleaning water
by growing algae, the goal is to be able to produce needed energy and food, and,
at the same time, reuse water and enhance the quality of the environment. The
dissemination plan is to utilize a workshop website, email lists, professional
contacts, etc. to reach out and enhance the awareness of the (FEW) nexus
challenge, to develop relevant technologies, and to contribute to the
sustainability of society. The workshop is scheduled to be held June 13-15, 2018
in Beijing.