* 1744216
* CAREER:  Toward an Understanding of Secondary Aerosol Formation, Particle Ageing in Droplets, and Cloud Processing
* GEO,AGS
* 01/03/2017,12/31/2019
* Akua Asa-Awuku, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2019
* USD 308,113.00

Aerosols play an important role in air quality and Earth's radiative balance.
Organic constituents of aerosols are ubiquitous but their formation properties
are not well understood. Aqueous-phase processes are known to affect the
composition of the atmospheric multiphase systems and are an important pathway
for secondary aerosol formation. However non-idealities due to organic aerosol-
water interactions and processes in cloud droplets are complex; current models
do not reproduce observations in the laboratory or field. The principal
investigator (PI) will develop a unique measurement capability to investigate
secondary aerosol formation and particle ageing via cloud processing in both the
laboratory and field. Ambient or artificially generated aerosols will be sampled
and characterized for number size distributions with a scanning mobility
particle analyzer and chemical composition with a high-resolution aerosol mass
spectrometer both before and after processing through a continuous flow stream-
wise thermal gradient chamber. The fractions of particles that are activated to
cloud-condensation-nuclei (CCN) as a function of supersaturation and
corresponding changes in volatility, surface tension, and other properties of
aerosols that result from cloud processing will be measured. Methods to separate
and characterize interstitial aerosol and activated droplets and to recycle
processed aerosols through the CCN chamber will be developed. Results based on
this measurement capability will fill critical gaps in understanding of the
chemical evolution of aerosol scavenged in cloud droplets. The PI and her
students will leverage existing facilities at a state-of-the art air pollution
laboratory at the University of California, Riverside Bourns College of
Engineering- Center for Environmental Research and Technology (CE-CERT). This
facility will also provide opportunities for her research team to interact with
the broader research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will address
important questions and advance knowledge in air quality, climate, and health.
The new measurement capability will be incorporated into the long-term research
plans of an early-career PI from an underrepresented group in the geosciences.
As a faculty member at one of the most ethnically and economically diverse
public research institutions in the United States, the PI will act as a role
model and mentor to students from a broad range of backgrounds. The PI will
develop an integrated research and education program based on supervisory,
situational, and informal mentoring techniques targeting graduate,
undergraduate, and K-12 students. Graduate students will be supported through
participation in the research effort and will disseminate findings at scientific
conferences and via reviewed publications. The project will also fund two
undergraduate research fellowships, one of which would target students from
educationally and/or economically disadvantaged backgrounds. The PI will
continue her current research-mentoring relationships with local high school and
underrepresented students. Finally, through collaboration with the California
Science Project, the PI will offer 5-day summer workshops for K-12 teachers with
a focus on climate change.