* 1744327
* EAGER:   The Surrogate System Hypothesis for Joint Mechanics
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Matthew Brake, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 07/31/2019
* USD 199,998.00

This project is aimed at understanding the fundamental physics governing the
behavior of mechanical joints in engineered structures. Mechanical joints are
essential and integral parts of engineered systems and yet the physics governing
them is largely unknown. This lack of knowledge prevents engineers and designers
from developing predictive models of a jointed structure that can be used to
guide its design. As a result, jointed structures are often overdesigned to
prevent failure from occurring. In low consequence applications, such as an
office chair, home electronic appliance, etc., overdesign of the jointed
interface has little practical consequence. For high consequence applications,
such as aero-turbines for passenger jets, the fuselage of rockets, defense
applications, or the frame of an automobile, overdesign can have significant
ramifications in terms of fuel efficiency and safety. If a predictive model of
jointed structures existed (i.e. one that predicts both the stiffness of a joint
and how much energy it dissipates), then joints could be properly designed
contributing their appropriate weight to the structure, with the potential of
reducing fuel consumption. A second outcome is that the predictive model could
be used in design of jointed interfaces to dissipate energies that might
otherwise damage other components of the assembly, such as sensitive electronics
within a rocket. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
project seeks to address this gap in predictive capability by developing a
rigorous framework, the surrogate system hypothesis, in which a jointed
interface can be characterized out of context (avoiding complications associated
with high manufacturing expenses for the real system or multiple sources of
contamination in measurements such as from other joints within the system) and
then used to predict the response of the joint within the system of interest
with high accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The surrogate system hypothesis states
that a surrogate structure that contains the same joint as the system of
interest can be used to deduce the properties of the joint. These properties,
once accounting for the properties of the surrogate structure, can then be
substituted directly into the system of interest as a spatially discrete joint
model (as opposed to a modal model). The goal of this project is to test the
surrogate system hypothesis to determine if, under varied loading conditions and
in realistic structures, it is supported by experimental evidence. The
experimental investigations must, by nature of the hypothesis, be in combination
with numerical modeling efforts, which will be built upon recently matured
reduced order modeling techniques from the dynamic substructuring community for
studying the response of a jointed structure. The work is divided into several
objectives: testing the surrogate system hypothesis in new regimes in order to
challenge its underlying assumptions, determining the bounds of the hypothesis'
limitations, and demonstrating proof-of-concept on a realistic system with more
complex geometries. If the surrogate system hypothesis finds support, it will
enable several significant advances for contact mechanics in addition to the
design and optimization of assemblies. This research will enable a new approach
for predictive models of joints based off of well-characterized surrogate
systems. Once a predictive approach is developed, it will be possible to detect
potential failures at the design phase before hardware is manufactured. The
ramification of this research is that, if successful, this hypothesis indicates
that micro- and nano-scale effects, such as the distribution of asperities, are
secondary to determining the dynamics of a structure behind the macro-scale
features such as geometry and mean roughness.