* 1744604
* EAGER: Biomimetic wireless system design for IoT networks: from sensors to brain controlled applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Tongtong Li, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2019
* USD 150,000.00

The Internet of Things (IoT), which networks versatile devices for information
exchange, remote sensing, monitoring and control, is finding promising
applications in nearly every field. Motivated by the human circulation system,
this project introduces innovative methodologies that can regulate the design
and analysis of future IoT networks, and provide more reliable human-device
interface, including brain-controlled applications. Potentially, it can make
significant contributions to the establishment of an ideal human-device platform
for Smart Home, Smart Grid, health monitoring, national security, e-commerce, as
well as many future applications that can benefit from fast and reliable human-
device communications. Moreover, by integrating the technological advances
resulting from this project into the curriculum development and outreach
activities at Michigan State University, significant impacts are expected from
this project on training a highly-skilled and diverse workforce in the areas of
wireless communications and IoT networking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to develop a unified framework for network modeling and characterization,
and to develop innovative techniques for IoT network design, management and
performance evaluation, so as to enable the future human-device user interface.
More specifically, this project plans to: 1) develop a unified framework to
characterize the convergence of network centric management and ad hoc
flexibility. The new framework includes all the existing networks as special
cases, and makes quantitative network performance evaluation more tractable and
systematic; 2) develop innovative network design and performance analysis
methodologies based on the unified framework. Optimal topology design will be
provided for throughput maximization. Stability, delay and efficiency analysis
will be conducted to provide benchmarks on network performance evaluation.
Diversity enhancement and dynamic routing protocol design will be carried out to
reinforce network security and reliability; 3) develop innovative machine
learning based overlapping user grouping techniques for massive multi-input
multi-output systems. These new techniques can greatly increase the system
capacity and ensure full coverage for all the IoT devices; and 4) apply the
advanced tools in communications to perform multi-level computational brain
analysis, and to achieve more accurate brain signal extraction. Multi-level
brain analysis will result in better understanding on brain functions,
dysfunctions and brain processing capacity. Accurate brain signal extraction
lays the foundation for the development of reliable interface between the human
mind and brain-controlled devices, which will be new members in the IoT family.
Transformative research in this project includes new IoT network design,
management and performance evaluation techniques, as well as the new user
interface between human mind and brain-controlled devices.