* 1744785
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Remote Characterization of Microbial Mats in Taylor Valley, Antarctica, through In Situ Sampling and Spectral Validation
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* John Barrett, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Vernet
* 07/31/2021
* USD 119,473.00

Microbial mats are found throughout the McMurdo Dry Valleys where summer
snowmelt provides liquid water that allows these mats to flourish. Researchers
have long studied the environmental conditions microbial mats need to grow.
Despite these efforts, it has been difficult to develop a broad picture of these
unique ecosystems. Recent advances in satellite technology now provide
researchers an exciting new tool to study these special Antarctic ecosystems
from space using the unique spectral signatures associated with microbial mats.
This new technology not only offers the promise that microbial mats can be
mapped and studied from space, this research will also help protect these
delicate environments from potentially harmful human impacts that can occur when
studying them from the ground. This project will use satellite imagery and
spectroscopic techniques to identify and map microbial mat communities and
relate their properties and distributions to both field and lab-based
measurements. This research provides an exciting new tool to help document and
understand the distribution of a major component of the Antarctic ecosystem in
the McMurdo Dry Valleys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
establish quantitative relationships between spectral signatures derived from
orbit and the physiological status and biogeochemical properties of microbial
mat communities in Taylor Valley, Antarctica, as measured by field and
laboratory analyses on collected samples. The goal wioll be met by (1) refining
atmospheric correction techniques using in situ radiometric rectification to
derive accurate surface spectra; (2) collecting multispectral orbital images
concurrent with in situ sampling and spectral measurements in the field to
ensure temporal comparability; (3) measuring sediment, water, and microbial mat
samples for organic and inorganic carbon content, essential biogeochemical
nutrients, and chlorophyll-a to determine relevant mat characteristics; and (4)
quantitatively associating these laboratory-derived characteristics with field-
derived and orbital spectral signatures and parameters. The result of this work
will be a more robust quantitative link between the distribution of microbial
mat communities and their biogeochemical properties to landscape-scale spectral
signatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.