* 1744526
* NSF INCLUDES DDLP: SPICE (Supporting Pacific Indigenous Computing Excellence) Data Science Program for Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Rosalia Gomez, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2020
* USD 299,996.00

The University of Texas at Austin's Texas Advanced Computing Center, Chaminade
University of Honolulu (CUH), and the Georgia Institute of Technology will lead
this NSF INCLUDES Design and Development Launch Pilot (DDLP) to establish a
model for data science preparation of Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander
(NHPI) students at the high school and undergraduate levels. The project is
premised on the promise of NHPI communities gaining access to, and the ability
to work with, large data sets to tackle emerging problems in the Pacific. Such
agency over "big data" sets that are relevant to Pacific issues, and
contemporary skills in data science, analytics and visualization have the
potential to be transformative for community improvement efforts. The effort has
the potential to advance knowledge, instructional pedagogy and practices to
improve NHPI high school and undergraduate students performance in and
attraction to STEM education and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team
will work to: 1) Increase interest and proficiency in data science and
visualization among NHPI high school and undergraduate students through a summer
immersion experience that bridges computation and culture; 2) Build data science
capacity at an NHPI serving undergraduate institution (CUH) through creation of
a certificate program; and 3) Develop and expand partnerships with other
organizations with related goals working with NHPI populations. The month-long
summer training for 20 NHPI college students, and five NHPI high school
students, takes place at CUH and focuses on data science, visualization, and
virtual reality, including working on problem sets that require data science
approaches and incorporate geographically, socially- and culturally-relevant
research themes.