* 1744038
* PREEVENTS Track 1: Fire Prediction Across Scales Conference at Columbia University
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2018
* Katia Fernandes, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 01/31/2018
* USD 31,500.00

Fire is a natural ecological process, a land use tool, a destructive force, and
an important source of trace gas and aerosol emissions to the atmosphere.
Realistic models of fire activity and behavior are necessary for operational
fire management, and to understand past and future changes in fire activity.
Developing such models, however, requires taking into account vegetation cover,
land use practices, fire management capacity, extreme weather, and climate
variability, which represent a broad range of temporal and spatial scales. This
meeting will provide a forum for researchers working across these scales to
interact. The objectives are to summarize the state of the art in fire modeling
and prediction, identify areas where significant progress can be made in the
next 10 years, and to connect researchers with fire management
practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expectation is that decision makers will
be provided with an understanding of how well fire can be predicted for the
purposes of protecting life and property and maintaining healthy ecosystems, at
present and in the future. For the purposes of this conference, decision makers
range from operational fire managers needing to predict the behavior of a single
wildfire, to health professionals needing to understand possible smoke impacts,
to policy-level planners trying to understand how much fire there should be on
the landscape. The broad impact of this conference will be to establish a
baseline for these stakeholders to understand how well fire activity and its
consequences can currently be quantitatively simulated and how this can be
improved in the next 10 years.