* 1744755
* A Mechanistic Study of Bio-Physical Interaction and Air-Sea Carbon Transfer in the Southern Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Takamitsu Ito, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* David Sutherland
* 04/30/2022
* USD 308,388.00

The Southern Ocean serves as the planet's major uptake region for the oceanic
uptake of increasing levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2). The current
generation of coupled climate models (atmosphere-ocean-land) are used to make
future climate projections, but are known to exhibit significant biases in
observed ocean carbon uptake. These numerical models are known to lack the
resolution (space and time) to adequately represent many of the mesoscale
processes and features known to effect important roles in air-sea exchange. To
account for the ocean mesoscale (10km - 100km) phenomena, such as jets, fronts,
meanders and eddies known to be crucial for bio-physical interactions of CO2
fluxes, this project will progressively increase model resolution from coarse to
finer grid spacing, furthering our understanding of mesoscale
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will focus on regions of interest, the
austral South Pacific, and the Drake Passage. Both regions are to some extent
well observed. These two regions are topographically constrained pathways
constituent pathways of the Atlantic Circumpolar Current, and exhibit enhanced
eddy activity. The numerical output will be compared with observations and a
suite of bio-geochemical tracers will be used to examine biophysical interaction
processes, occurring at fronts and eddies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from
the study can provide process and specific metrics and diagnostics to assess and
calibrate the global climate carbon models. A Ph.D. and an undergraduate intern
will be trained and gain research insight.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.