* 1744067
* Pacific Decadal Variability: Modulation of Global- to Regional-scale Climate over the Last Millennium
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2022
* Stacy Porter, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 02/28/2022
* USD 225,760.00

This project will use climate model simulations to assist the paleoclimate
community with the interpretation of ice core records and provide a valuable,
basin-wide paleo history of Pacific climate variability which will be made
available to the broader scientific community. Results from this work are
expected to reveal how the interactive effects between the underlying background
state of the Pacific and individual El Niño/La Niña events have changed over the
longer context of Earth's climate history. Thus, enhanced knowledge of Pacific
decadal variability and its historical effects on both global and regional
climate will help guide precautionary efforts taken to ameliorate their
anticipated economic and societal impacts in the future. This team of
researchers continuously and consistently disseminate their research results
through the Education and Outreach Program at The Ohio State University's Byrd
Polar and Climate Research Center, dedicated to providing climate information to
students, the public and policymakers at all levels. In addition, this project
provides support, training, and mentoring for a female postdoctoral researcher
representing the next generation of the scientists in this
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pacific Ocean surface temperatures oscillate between
warm and cold phases every few decades, and these multi-decadal shifts in the
background state of the Pacific Ocean affect both regional and global climate.
On the regional scale, the underlying warm or cold background state of the
Pacific Ocean modulates how individual El Niño/La Niña events affect temperature
and precipitation in specific areas. To better predict the impacts of El Niño
events on global climate, it is essential to know the background state of the
Pacific Ocean. However, our current understanding of this behavior is limited
due to relatively short modern instrument observational records. Thus, other
methods, such as modeling and/or the use of paleoclimate proxy data, are often
used to define Pacific Ocean temperatures prior to the instrumental period. The
key goal of this project is to establish a history of Pacific decadal
variability and its global climatic influences for the past millennium using a
combination of global climate model simulations and readily available ice core
records from four different regions around the Pacific Basin. Each ice core
provides records of local to global scale climate primarily through annual layer
thicknesses (accumulation), stable water isotopic ratios (temperature), and
concentrations of both insoluble dust and major anions and cations (atmospheric
chemistry). Each record provides distinct insights on precipitation and
temperature which will be used to reconstruct the history of basin-wide Pacific
variability. The model simulations will serve to improve interpretation of the
ice core data and advancing the understanding of underlying mechanisms driving
the observed ice core responses to Pacific climate variability. The use of the
ice core records also helps evaluate and possibly enhance model capabilities to
physically represent critical processes responsible for local climate
variability across the Pacific.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.