* 1744356
* Workshop: Understanding Emerging Technologies and the Future of Work
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Shlomo Zilberstein, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 119,392.00

Intelligent, interactive, and highly networked machines are a growing part of
work and the workplace. Automation is moving from the factory floor to knowledge
and service occupations. The potential benefits of technology include increased
productivity and more job opportunities. But technology connected to work can
also carry substantial social costs. The workshop supported by this award will
promote the convergence of education, social and behavioral sciences,
computational sciences, and engineering with stakeholders. This diverse group
will define key research challenges that focus on the intersection of humans,
technology, and work. Convergence is the deep integration of knowledge,
theories, methods, and data from multiple fields to form new and expanded
frameworks for addressing scientific and societal challenges and opportunities.
Two workshops will address the future of work at the human-technology frontier.
The workshops will focus on the challenges of shaping emergent technologies that
are equitable. They will also consider how the technologies will engage a wider
range of people in the workforce of the future. The results of the workshops
will include reports, communication materials, and the organization of
interdisciplinary panels at professional scientific
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific focus of this workshop effort is on
understanding the social and technical dimensions of new technologies. The goal
is to develop a research agenda that will help us understand the challenges of
shaping emergent technologies in ways that result in good jobs for a wide range
of U.S. workers. This includes a workshop that will bring together expert
scientists to consider (1) how the changing organization of work and technology
affects income inequality; (2) how decisions are made in developing artificial
intelligence and processes for human-technology partnerships; (3) how to develop
methods for assessing emerging technologies in terms of likely work satisfaction
and inequality in employment outcomes; and (4) how workforce development and
economic systems can help make high-paying stable jobs widely available. The
second workshop will include stakeholders and will focus on how to use these
ideas at the local level.