* 1744634
* I-Corps: Visualizing Physiological Synchrony
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2017
* Matthew Goodwin, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide
software, training, and services relating to measuring, tracking, and
understanding interpersonal physiological interdependence - a biological measure
of social engagement. Though this research area dates back more than half a
century, new technologies including wearable physiological monitors, advanced
statistical modeling, and smart phone computing have sparked rapid advancements
in its potential application. Consistent findings in the scientific literature
indicate that interdependence between people's autonomic nervous systems are
indicative of psychosocial processes including engagement, empathy, emotional
contagion, leadership, and teamwork. Such physiological interdependencies have
been observed across a wide range of populations, contexts, and conditions,
using different physiological measures and analytical approaches. Such findings
allow interpretive conclusions to be made about social interactions using
statistical models of relationships between peoples' physiology. This technology
will potentially benefit treatment providers who deliver psychotherapy to mental
health and intellectual/developmental disability segments of the behavioral
health market, and to clinical trials researchers in the pharmaceutical industry
evaluating medications with indications for mental health.

This I-Corps project further develops approaches in the rapidly expanding area
of social psychophysiological research, interpersonal physiology.
Phenomenologically, when people interact, interdependencies between their
physiological activities reflect their social relationships. These physiological
relationships occur at dyadic and group levels. Due to the interpretability of
physiological relationships, conclusions regarding social dynamics can be made
through physiology. Through this method, continuously shifting interpersonal
dynamics can be observed and quantified in ways that allow anyone to understand
when, how, and to what degree one person is impacting another. Individuals or
industries seeking to gain increased understanding of their own or others
interpersonal engagement could benefit from this biologically-based objective
method of assessment.