* 1744467
* NSF INCLUDES DDLP:The Alabama Alliance for an Inclusive Middle Grades Computer Science Preparation through Makerspaces in the Alabama Black Belt Region
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Shaik Jeelani, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,998.00

This NSF INCLUDES Design and Development Launch Pilot (named ALCSE-INCLUDES)
project will develop and implement an innovative computer science (CS) education
model that will provide all 8th grade students in 3 districts in Alabama's
'Black Belt' with exciting and structured hands-on activities intended to make
CS learning enjoyable. The course will use an educational style called "learning
CS by making" where students will create a CS-based product (such as a robot)
and understand the concepts that make the product work. This hands-on approach
has the potential to motivate diverse student populations to pursue higher level
CS courses and related disciplines during and after high school, and to join the
CS workforce, which is currently in need of more qualified workers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ALCSE-INCLUDES Launch Pilot will unite the efforts of
higher education institutions, K-12 officials, Computer Science (CS)-related
industry, and community organizations to pursue a common agenda: To develop,
implement, study, and evaluate a scalable and sustainable prototype for CS
education at the middle school level in the Alabama Black Belt (ABB) region. The
ABB is a region with a large African-American, low-income population; thus, the
program will target individuals who have traditionally had little access to CS
education. The prototype for CS education will be piloted with 8th grade
students in 3 ABB schools, using a set of coordinated and mutually reinforcing
activities that will draw from the strengths of all members of the ALCSE
Alliance. The future scaled-up version of the program will implement the
prototype in the 73 middle schools that comprise ALL 19 school districts of the
ABB. The program's main innovation is to provide CS education using a
makerspace, a dedicated area equipped with grade-appropriate CS resources, in
which students receive mentored and structured hands-on activities. The goal is
to engage ALL students, in learning CS through making, an evidence-based
pedagogical approach expected to reinforce skills and promote deep interest in
CS.