* 1744816
* I-Corps: Bioprocess producing high-value caproic and caprylic bio-oil from fermentation and organic waste streams
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2017,11/30/2017
* Tom Schryver, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 11/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
commercialization of high value bio-oil from low value feedstocks, especially
dairy process and other agricultural waste streams. The enabling fermentation
bioprocess, called the carboxylate platform, produces a bio-oil consisting
primarily of caproate (C6) and caprylate (C8), which are medium chain
carboxylates (MCCs). Using ethanol containing feedstocks, the carboxylate
platform delivers a sustainable MCC product with five times the market value of
the feedstock. Use of a dairy process waste stream holds the promise of
converting a feedstock acquisition cost to a substantial revenue through waste
remediation. In addition, MCCs are currently extracted from palm oil, an
industry which is raising significant ecological concerns due to large scale
deforestation and greenhouse gas emissions. In their raw form, MCCs currently
have direct use as an animal feed supplement, but once refined, can also be used
in the manufacture of detergents, care products, plastics, coatings, and
pharmaceuticals, among many other applications.

This I-Corps project will explore the commercialization of a fermentation
bioprocess which produces a bio-oil consisting primarily of caproate (C6) and
caprylate (C8). This bioprocess, called the carboxylate platform, has
demonstrated long-term stable production of bio-oil, has proven resistant to
system disturbances, and is compatible with a variety of feedstocks. Using an
ethanol-containing feedstock obtained from the bio-ethanol industry, rates has
been achieved that are competitive with those of methane production from
anaerobic digestion. The carboxylate platform adapts knowledge from anaerobic
digestion, a widely used and scalable bioprocess using an open culture to
generate methane gas from organic waste. The bio-oil produced by the carboxylate
platform has a 30 times higher value per carbon than methane, making this
platform an attractive alternative to anaerobic digestion for organic waste
remediation. Especially promising is the possibility of converting dairy process
waste to this valuable bio-oil. A key goal of this project is to identify
manufacturing partners to optimize the extraction system to concentrate the bio-
oil. Currently, this portion of the process is a critical driver of the capital
cost. While the current platform is economically competitive, a less capital-
intensive extraction system will lead to far greater profitability.