* 1744819
* I-Corps: Crowdsource sensing of earthquakes
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Richard Allen, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project it to reduce the
impact of future earthquakes. This smartphone-based crowdsource sensing
application provides earthquake alerts and shaking hazard data. The vision is to
provide earthquake early warning around the globe, and collect data on building
performance. Warnings can be used to slow and stop trains reducing the
likelihood of derailment, to isolate hazardous chemicals and machinery to reduce
damage, to move data to safe storage, and to signal individuals to move to a
safe place. Shaking data recoded in buildings can also be used to assess the
performance of a building during an earthquake. Recorded shaking in smaller non-
damaging quakes can be used to predict building performance in larger events.
The data recorded by application enabled phones can potentially be used by
structural engineers to assess buildings, and can be used by the insurance
industry to set premiums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project develops a
global smartphone-based seismic network. The technology uses machine learning
techniques to distinguish between earthquakes and other sources of shaking as
recorded on personal/private smartphones, and is embedded in the application
that has been downloaded by over 250,000 users around the world. When a phone
detects an earthquake, it notifies a central server. The server confirms the
earthquake based on multiple phone detection, and estimates the size and
location. An alert could then be issued to users. At the same time, the phone
records the ground shaking during the earthquake. This timeseries data can be
used for a range of purposes including fundamental research on earthquake
processes, and characterization of buildings.