* 1744524
* Building a Network for Education and Employment in Environmental Stewardship of Indigenous Lands
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Timberley Roane, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 12/31/2020
* USD 298,484.00

For the United States to maintain its leading role on the world economic stage,
it is essential to strengthen the American workforce in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM). Our current prosperity and our future
success hinge on recruiting, training, and employing the creative and
industrious STEM professionals who drive the innovation economy. Strengthening
the American STEM workforce depends, in part, on broadening participation to
students from demographics that have traditionally been underrepresented in
STEM. This NSF INCLUDES Launch Pilot project will foster recruitment, training,
and employment for indigenous STEM students, where the term "indigenous"
comprises the terms Native American, American Indian, Alaskan Native, and
Hawaiian Native. Specifically, this project will support the design and
development of a first-of-its-kind network focused on environmental stewardship
of indigenous lands. The network will comprise both tribal and government
partners and will be organized by three faculty at the University of Colorado-
Denver. Student recruitment, training, and employment will be organized around
the unifying principle of land stewardship. The focus on land stewardship has
been selected not only because it demands the expertise of STEM professionals,
but also because land stewardship is among the top motivations for indigenous
students considering STEM careers. Accordingly, this work is important on
several fronts: It addresses the recognized need for STEM professionals; it
broadens participation to students from underrepresented groups; and it provides
a test bed for collective action by a first-of-its-kind network of tribal,
government, and university partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed network
will work together to design, deploy, and debug a unique educational program
giving students an opportunity to train for employment as tribal liaisons in the
environmental field. In particular, this program will address the need for
culturally-sensitive, scientifically-trained individuals who can serve as tribal
liaisons between tribal and non-tribal organizations, which will allow them to
prevent, minimize, or manage environmental incidents through their understanding
of STEM principles and organizational dynamics. All students in this educational
program will earn a regular four-year STEM degree, but a key feature of the
program is that they will also participate in training and internships designed
to provide background with nontechnical matters such as cultural awareness,
environmental regulations, and organizational dynamics. Additionally, this
educational program is designed to support recruitment of indigenous students by
(1) providing a clear vision of a high-impact, culturally-relevant professional
career and by (2) providing a cultural connection with obtaining a college
degree. Taken together, the network aims to increase enrollment, retention,
graduation, and alumni activity by indigenous students. Best practices and
strategies for collective impact will be used to document achievement of the
network in increasing the enrollment, retention, graduation, and alumni activity
of indigenous students in higher education and in STEM careers. Continuous
feedback will be collected to assess partner engagement and durability, and
student satisfaction, performance, and progress. The network is expected to be
sustainable because it addresses a demonstrated need; it is expected to be
scalable because scientifically aware, culturally-sensitive individuals who can
serve as tribal liaisons are needed not only regionally, but nationally.