* 1744671
* EAGER:   Transparent electrode device architecture for high efficiency tandem colloidal quantum dot photovoltaics
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Alexi Arango, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 12/31/2018
* USD 80,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical &lt;br/&gt;The emergence of lightweight,
flexible, efficient, and affordable solar cell modules could revolutionize
energy generation from the sun. Among the contending technologies, photovoltaics
employing lead sulfide nanocrystalline films have been increasing in efficiency
at one of the most rapid paces ever seen. However, two aspects limit the
efficiency of these cells: how far electrons can move through the lead sulfide
film and how many material defects exist in the nanocrystals. Tandem solar cells
(multiple solar cells grown on top of one another) can circumvent these
limitations because multiple thin cells can be stacked to achieve strong
absorption across the whole cell. Surprisingly, previous attempts at fabricating
two-layer tandem photovoltaics using lead sulfide nanocrystals have not achieved
the dramatic gains in efficiency that would be expected. This project presents
modeling data showing that at least five layers of cells must be stacked before
significant enhancements in efficiency will be observed. A proof-of-principal
device will be fabricated consisting of two solar cells connected with a
transparent conducting metal oxide layer. The research will take place at Mount
Holyoke College, a women's undergraduate college with a remarkable history of
educating women in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;The PI
will fabricate a lead sulfide colloidal quantum dot photovoltaic in a tandem
structure in order to enhance absorption in the critical long-wavelength region
of the solar spectrum. Dramatic gains in the power conversion efficiency of
colloidal quantum dot photovoltaics have been achieved over the past decade, but
many of the best devices still suffer from low absorption in the infrared, a
consequence of weak oscillator strength at the first excitonic transition peak,
often resulting in more than a 50% reduction in absorption alone. The mismatch
between the carrier diffusion length (ranging around 100 nm) and the thickness
needed to absorb an appreciable amount of the solar spectrum (ranging around 500
nm) accounts for the shortfall in absorption. Preliminary modeling demonstrates
that a five-junction tandem structure can achieve full absorption while allowing
the maximum thickness of the lead sulfide layer in each sub cell to stay within
100 nm, achieving a straightforward, attainable pathway to realistic
efficiencies approaching 19% and theoretical efficiencies approaching 28%.
Tandem structures are an effective method of increasing absorption already
employed in small molecule organic PV and elsewhere, but never before have had
researchers assembled the tools needed to effectively construct five or more
tandem junctions. The PI will fabricate a proof-of-principle tandem structure by
employing a custom low-damage sputtering technique for the deposition of metal
oxide transport layers and transparent conductors at the recombination zone, an
integrated fiber-optic spectrophotometer for accurate absorption measurements
coupled with careful optical modeling, an interconnected glovebox system for
seamless device fabrication, and a revolutionary Thermo-reflectance imaging
technique to map current flow and electric field non-uniformities.