* 1744812
* EAGER: SSDIM: Data Generation for the Coupled System Composed of the Beef Cattle Production Infrastructure and the Transportation Services Infrastructure in Southwestern Kansas
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Scott DeLoach, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 296,172.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will generate
simulated data to model the behaviors of the interdependent beef production
system and transportation infrastructure in southwestern Kansas, with due
consideration of key social and economic factors. This process involves: i)
modeling of the system as a multilayer network; ii) designing of an agent-based
model incorporating all collected data and considering key social and economic
aspects; iii) assessment of interdependencies between the beef production and
transportation infrastructures, iv) evaluation of different scenarios and their
impact on the infrastructure performance. The generated data will be organized
and publicly shared with the final goal of increasing the understanding of these
coupled systems. Benefits of this work include improved understanding of how to
prevent and contain risks to these systems, thus contributing to the goal of
greater safety and economic viability. Mentoring and training of a graduate
student in the conduct of interdisciplinary research is an important component
of the research. Project data and software will be publicly shared through
websites and results disseminated through academic conferences and journals. The
Center for Engagement and Community Development of Kansas State University will
be utilized to distribute project results to target stakeholder audiences
through the organization of a workshop in a critical location for the beef
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a theoretical perspective, the expected
outcomes will provide novel insights into the structural characteristics and the
interdependencies of coupled infrastructures. New methods and models will be
developed and made publicly available for scientists in the field to use in
other regions and other contexts. From an application perspective, the data
generated in this project will advance current knowledge of the beef production
and transportation systems. Furthermore, the significant economic and social
aspects of these interdependent systems will provide foundational elements for
cross-disciplinary analysis in the domains of network science and social
organization.