* 1744651
* Collaborative Research: The Tectonic and Magmatic Structure and Dynamics of Back-arc Rifting in Bransfield Strait: An International Seismic Experiment
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* William Wilcock, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 510,679.00

One of the fundamental processes in plate tectonics is the rifting or separating
of continental crust creating new seafloors which can widen and ultimately form
new ocean basins, the latter is a process known as seafloor spreading. The
Bransfield Strait, separating the West Antarctic Peninsula from the South
Shetland Islands, formed and is presently widening as a result of the separation
of continental crust. What is unique is that the system appears to be
approaching the transition to seafloor spreading making this an ideal site to
study the transitional process. Previous seafloor mapping and field surveys
provide the regional structure of the basin; however, there exists a paucity of
regional seismic studies documenting the tectonic and volcanic activity in the
basin as a result of the rifting. This would be the first local-scale study of
the seismicity and structure of the volcanoes in the center of the basin where
crustal separation is most active. The new seismic data will enable scientists
to compare current patterns of crustal separation and volcanism at the
Bransfield Strait to other well-studied seafloor spreading centers. This
collaborative international project, led by the Spanish and involving scientists
from the U.S., Germany and other European countries, will monitor seismicity for
one year on land and on the seafloor. An active seismic study conducted by the
Spanish will image fault and volcanic structures that can be related to the
distribution of earthquakes. This study supports eight undergraduates from
Queens College, CUNY, an ethnically-diverse institution, to conduct field work
as members of the scientific party on board the R/V Hesperides and will
contribute to the analysis of the data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Back-arc basins are
found in subduction settings and form in two stages, an initial interval of
continental rifting that transitions to a later stage of seafloor spreading.
Studying the transitional process is important for understanding the dynamics
and evolution of subduction zones, and in locations where back-arc rifting
breaks continental crust, it is relevant to understanding the formation of
passive continental margins. The Central Bransfield Basin is unusual in that the
South Shetland Islands have lacked recent arc volcanism and it appears
subduction is ceasing, but this system has broad significant because it appears
to be nearing the transition from rifting to seafloor spreading. This award will
support the U.S. component of an international initiative led by the Spanish
Polar Committee to conduct a study of the seismicity and volcanic structure of
the Central Bransfield Basin. The objective is to characterize the distribution
of active extension across the basin and determine whether the volcanic
structure and deformation of the rift are consistent with a back-arc basin that
is transitioning from rifting to seafloor spreading. The U.S. component of the
experiment will contribute a network of six hydroacoustic moorings to monitor
regional seismicity and 15 short-period seismometers to study the distribution
of tectonic and volcanic seismicity on Orca volcano, one of the most active
volcanoes in the basin. An active seismic study across closely spaced
multichannel seismic lines across the rift will provide the data necessary to
link earthquakes with fault structures enabling a tomography study of Orca
volcano and provide insight into how the volcano's structure relates to rifting.
This research will constrain the distribution of active rifting across the
Central Bransfield Basin and determine whether the patterns of faulting and the
structure of volcanic portion of the rift are consistent with a diffuse zone of
rifting or a single spreading center that is transitioning to the production of
oceanic crust. The Bransfield Basin is an ideal site for a comparative study of
seismic and hydroacoustic earthquake locations that will improve the
understanding of the generation and propagation of T-wave signals and contribute
to efforts to compare the result of T-wave studies with data from traditional
solid-earth seismic studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.