* 1744436
* NSF INCLUDES DDLP: Growing STEM engagement and participation in Native Pacific Islander communities
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Cheryl Sangueza, University of Guam
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 09/30/2020
* USD 302,676.00

The University of Guam (UOG) NSF INCLUDES Launch Pilot project, GROWING STEM,
addresses the grand challenge of increasing Native Pacific Islander
representation in the nation's STEM enterprise, particularly in environmental
sciences. The project addresses culturally-relevant and place-based research as
the framework to attract, engage, and retain Native Pacific Islander students in
STEM disciplines. The full science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) pathway will be addressed from K-12 to graduate studies with partnerships
that include the Guam Department of Education, Humatak Community Foundation,
Pacific Post-Secondary Education Council, the Guam Science and Discovery
Society, the Society for the Advancement of Chicanos/Hispanics and Native
Americans in Science (SACNAS) and the University of Alaska-Fairbaanks. As the
project progresses, the project anticipates further partnerships with the
current NSF INCLUDES Launch Pilot project at the University of the Virgin
Islands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pilot activities include summer internships for
high school students, undergraduate and graduate research opportunities through
UOG's Plant Nursery and the Humatak Community Foundation Heritage House. STEM
professional development activities will be offered through conference
participation and student research presentations in venues such as the Guam
Science and Discovery Society's Guam Island-wide Science Fair and SACNAS.
Faculty will be recruited to develop a mentoring protocol for the project
participants. Community outreach and extension services will expand public
understanding in environmental sciences from the GROW STEM project. Project
metrics will include monitoring the diversity of partners, increases in
community engagement, Native Pacific Islander participation in STEM activities,
the number of students who desire to attain terminal STEM degrees and the number
of community members reached by pilot STEM extension and outreach activities.
Dissemination of the GROWING STEM pilot project results will occur through the
NSF INCLUDES National Network, partner annual conferences, and local, regional
and national STEM conferences.