* 1744362
* Investigating the Origin of Molecular Signature Emissions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Alexander Li, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Alexander Li of the Department of
Chemistry at Washington State University is developing new classes of
fluorescent molecules with novel optical properties. These molecules are useful
probes and imaging reagents that enable cutting-edge technologies in medical
diagnostics and cell imaging. The project lies at the interface of organic
chemistry and photo-physics and is well suited for STEM educations at all
levels. This project closely integrates research and education and provides the
highest level of educational training for students ranging from K-12 to post-
graduate students, including those underrepresented in sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identifying a single molecule goes beyond single-molecule
detection and represents the ultimate limit in chemical analysis. To analyze a
single molecule requires that the signals originated from this molecule must
carry enough fingerprint signatures so that its molecular structural identity
can be confirmed. Current fluorescent molecules do not offer fingerprint
signatures in their single-molecular data. As a result, fluorescence can detect
a single molecule, but cannot identify its molecular structure or determine
whether it is due to positive signal or noise. To address this problem, this
project develops molecules with signature emission by learning the design rules
for such molecules, unveiling the role of light-molecule interactions in
signature emission, determining the one-photon process or two-photon process for
the signature mechanism, and testing signature emission in various environments
to reveal the impacts of environmental factors.