* 1744446
* NSF INCLUDES DDLP:Diversifying Access to Urban Universities for Students in STEM Fields
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2017,12/31/2019
* Jennifer Iriti, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Monya Ruffin
* 12/31/2019
* USD 299,903.00

Many urban universities offer precollege STEM programs aimed at broadening
participation in STEM. These programs are designed to increase students'
scientific content knowledge and skills, promote STEM engagement, increase self-
efficacy, and prepare underserved and underrepresented minority high school
students for success in undergraduate programs. However, even after
demonstrating significant knowledge gains and success in these programs,
students are often unable to authenticate their knowledge gains to receive
favorable consideration on college applications. In fact, there is currently no
systematic credentialing mechanism to assess and validate the scientific rigor
of and competency gains within STEM precollege programs for college admissions
purposes. This NSF INCLUDES Design and Development Launch Pilot seeks to address
this gap by developing and testing credentialing and badging processes for four
STEM precollege programs. Working with College Admissions Officers and project
partners, the University of Pittsburgh endeavors to employ a collaborative
impact approach to build and document the collaborative infrastructure needed to
support STEM precollege program authentication processes. This will seed the
development of a networked improvement community that supports all aspects of
the work from participant support to the collaborative impact to the greater
network of urban education university ecosystems involved in the pilot.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a two-year period, this pilot will examine a
mechanism to strengthen the STEM pathway for disadvantaged and underrepresented
minority students to enter postsecondary STEM programs and eventually STEM
careers. Building on two social innovation theories, the technical approach will
focus on four specific aims: (1) create a community engagement framework to
recruit underserved and underrepresented high school students to STEM precollege
programs, (2) develop a STEM Success Matrix that identifies student competencies
acquired in precollege programs that prepare students for collegiate success in
STEM, (3) credential precollege programs using the STEM Success Matrix, and (4)
develop a student badging system for precollege program participants using the
STEM Success Matrix. Four University of Pittsburgh STEM precollege programs will
serve as the context for development and testing with support from a range of
partners representing the broader Pittsburgh STEM ecosystem. Approximately 300
high school students are expected to participate in the pilot, across the four
precollege programs. Data will be collected via participant surveys and
interviews. Formative and summative evaluations will be conducted by an
experienced, external evaluator. Shareable metrics, tools, and processes will be
developed and disseminated using various platforms and mechanisms. If
successful, this pilot could be transformative - changing admissions
considerations by credentialing STEM precollege programs and increasing student
interest and motivation in STEM through student badging. It would also transform
the STEM ecosystem of underserved and underrepresented minority students by
creating an important STEM pathway from precollege to undergraduate admissions
and ultimately, STEM Careers. This pilot could serve as a baseline for a more
expansive alliance with other urban education ecosystems or assisting others
interested in establishing their own collaborative infrastructure and networked
improvement community model to achieve similar results.