* 1744864
* Collaborative Research: Landscape Evolution in the McMurdo Dry Valleys: Erosion Rates and Real-time Monitoring of Rock Breakdown in a Hyperarid, Subzero Environment
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Martha Eppes, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 04/30/2023
* USD 178,523.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The McMurdo Dry Valleys region of Antarctica is
one of the coldest, driest, and windiest places on the planet, and is often used
as a comparison for the surface of Mars. It is also the largest ice-free region
of Antarctica, and thus its deposits and landforms contain unique records of
past climate not accessible elsewhere in the Antarctic continent or the world.
In order to accurately interpret any geologic feature, however, we must
understand how it forms and changes through time. In particular, in the Dry
Valleys, we have a poor understanding of the rates and causes of one of Earth's
most fundamental geologic phenomenon - physical rock breakdown. For example, the
Dry Valleys lack moisture, which is thought to play a key role in rock breakdown
in most other locations on the planet. What serves to fracture rocks in this
seemingly inert environment? This project aims to answer that question by
'listening' as rocks crack in the Dry Valleys. We will instrument boulders with
sensors that act as miniature seismographs, recording even the smallest
microcracking on and within the rocks. At the same time, we will monitor the
weather and environment around the rocks to record the conditions that trigger
cracking events. While we collect these data, we will gather rock samples from
deposits of different ages (from thousands to millions of years old) in the Dry
Valleys. Measurements on these samples will allow us to see how quickly rocks
breakdown and how their characteristics change over geologic time. The combined
datasets will allow future scientists to more accurately understand the
paleoclimates and landscapes of Antarctica, and possibly even Mars. This project
will also serve to support two female investigators in a field where women are
still largely underrepresented. The project will also provide unique exposure
and experience to students, ranging from elementary students to the
undergraduate and graduate students who will be working directly on various
aspects of the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Rocks
in the McMurdo Dry Valleys experience some of the lowest erosion rates on Earth.
However, our current understanding of the relative role that different
weathering factors (moisture, freezing temperatures, thermal cycling, salt
crystallization or hydration, and wind abrasion) play in these and other
environments is limited. Further, in the Dry Valleys, there has been no
systematic evaluation of the variance in weathering and associated rock erosion
rates, which may change significantly as a function of subaerial exposure
duration, lithology, and texture. This research seeks to (1) characterize the
primary drivers of rock breakdown, (2) better quantify erosion rates, and (3)
determine the lithological and environmental factors that influence weathering
and erosion in the Dry Valleys. Rock breakdown (cracking) will be recorded in
real-time on in situ boulders using a custom acoustic emission monitoring
system. By coupling acoustic emission data with micrometeorological measurements
at and near rock surfaces, this study will directly test hypotheses relating to
the environmental drivers of rock breakdown under this unique polar desert
climate over short (minute to monthly) timescales. Cosmogenic nuclide techniques
including a novel combination of 6 isotopes (Be-10, Al-26, He-3, Ne-21, Cl-36,
C-14) together with rock property measurements (e.g., strength, elastic moduli,
thermal properties) will be used to elucidate the complex relationship between
long-term (kyr to Myr) boulder erosion rates, lithology, rock properties, and
subaerial exposure duration. By synthesizing these measurements with short-term
cracking data from the acoustic emission system, the proposed work will
thoroughly examine which lithological and environmental factors and grain-scale
processes are driving geomorphic evolution in the Dry Valleys. By constraining
boulder erosion rates and determining their sensitivity to rock properties and
age, the results will be directly applicable to cosmogenic nuclide exposure age
studies in this region. Additionally, the resulting information on weathering
processes and their relationship to rock morphology in the Dry Valleys can be
used to address hypotheses as to formation of similar rock morphologies on Mars.
The Project Investigators will participate in an elementary school outreach
program run by Gonzaga University, and the project will support an undergraduate
and graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.