* 1744724
* RAISE: Neighborhood Environments as Socio-Techno-bio Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Martha Tellez-Rojo, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,168,826.00

This inter-disciplinary RAISE award is jointly funded by the Cultural
Anthropology Program, the Environmental Engineering Program, the Biological
Anthropology Program, the Science, Technology, and Society Program, the Office
of Integrative Activities, the Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences
Directorate, and the Engineering Directorate. The overarching goal is to develop
methodological tools for understanding complex, dynamic socio-techno-biological
systems connected through feedback loops between socio-economic conditions,
environments, and human biological trajectories. This will be done by engaging a
team of environmental engineers, anthropologists, and epidemiologists in a
multi-faceted case study of water trust. The researchers have chosen water trust
as a focus for developing these integrative methodologies because environmental
engineers have found that the deterioration of trust in water can be as
important as water quality in determining whether people access safe water.
However, understanding why this is so requires combining environmental,
anthropological, and health research. This will model an approach amenable to
use in other locations and with other systems, which will contribute to a more
general understanding of linked complex systems across engineering and the
social and life sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will collect
data on linkages between water trust, real-time water quality, neighborhood
environments, inequality, and health. The research will be carried out in
fifteen neighborhoods in Mexico City, which is an appropriate site for the
research because neighborhoods there have distinct identities and the
researchers have access to longitudinal data on residents' health trajectories.
Also, because it has many water challenges, Mexico City is a good testbed for
probing technical, social, and biological interactions and feedbacks at a
neighborhood-systems level. The researchers will collect data In a sample of
households in 15 neighborhoods. Data will include: qualitative ethnographic data
(water use, trust in water quality, water provisioning structures, social
cohesion, security, food environments, and built environments); quantitative
socio-economic data using a neighborhood assessment scale; environmental
engineering data, including, grab sampling to measure water quality
characteristics (such as toxicants, viruses, trace organics, and antibiotic
resistance genes) that are linked to biological alterations in humans; and real-
time high-resolution sensor measurements of basic water quality parameters
(temperature, pressure, turbidity, and chlorine residue). They will also collect
urine samples from all household residents to monitor movement of contaminants
through residents' bodies; engage residents as citizen scientists through text
messaging about water quality, system breakdowns, and availability; and leverage
existing longitudinal molecular epidemiological data previously collected on
mother child/pairs in these neighborhoods. These data will be compiled to model
the interlinked and feedback relationships between human behaviors, built
environments, and biological processes in the creation of water trust.