* 1744989
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: A Multi-scale Approach to Understanding Spatial and Population Variability in Emperor Penguins
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Michelle LaRue, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 06/30/2023
* USD 295,097.00

The emperor penguin is an iconic seabird that is found in colonies distributed
around the entirety of the Antarctic coastline. Emperor penguins are an
important indicator species for the health of the Southern Ocean because their
reliance on sea ice for major parts of their life cycle means that their
population can be influenced by changes in the extent and duration of sea ice
around Antarctica. Although baseline data exists on emperor penguin
distributions and overall population size, data on how population size varies at
individual colonies is limited to only a few locations. Thus, knowledge about
how changes in local or regional environmental conditions impacts local or
global population status is poorly understood. By combining established methods
in satellite remote sensing with ground and aerial surveys of several colonies
across the continent, this project will generate population estimates for the 54
known emperor penguin colonies. Decadal scale population trend data will be
combined with environmental variables (e.g., sea ice extent and duration among
others) to reveal which conditions influence population fluctuations at regional
and continental scales. The project will engage with international
collaborators, train post-doctoral associates and future scientists, and develop
citizen science and K-12 outreach programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
on emperor penguin populations will quantify penguin presence/absence, and
colony size and trajectory, across the entire Antarctic continent using high-
resolution satellite imagery. For a subset of the colonies, population estimates
derived from high-resolution satellite images will be compared with those
determined by aerial surveys. This validated information will be used to
determine population estimates for all emperor penguin colonies through
iterations of supervised classification and maximum likelihood calculations on
the high-resolution imagery. The effect of spatial, geophysical, and
environmental variables on population size and decadal-scale trends will be
assessed using generalized linear models. This research will result in a first
ever empirical result for emperor penguin population trends and habitat
suitability, and will leverage currently-funded NSF infrastructure and hosting
sites to publish results in near-real time to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.