* 1744792
* Collaborative Research: Assessing Drivers of Climate Model Biases on the Pacific Continental Shelf of Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Christopher Little, Atmospheric and Environmental Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 07/31/2020
* USD 246,032.00

Oceanographic processes in the Pacific sector of coastal Antarctica exhibit
global interactions, including contribution of Antarctic ice-sheets to sea level
rise, changes in the Earth's radiative balance, air/sea gas exchange through
sea-ice variability, deep water formation, and Southern Ocean biological
productivity. Atmosphere-ocean general circulation models (GCMs) are useful
tools for understanding the complex interactions between global climate, the
Antarctic coastal ocean, the cryosphere (sea ice, ice shelves, and grounded,
marine-based ice sheet), and Antarctic ecosystems.

Current-generation GCMs exhibit substantial biases in their projections of
present-day hydrography and sea ice state. Previous projections of the coastal
cryosphere have applied simple bias corrections. However, this approach does not
remedy the underlying physical and numerical errors responsible for these
biases. This project seeks the relevance of biases to the interpretation of GCM
projections by identifying their local and/or remote origins and their variation
across regions and with different climate models. It will leverage the wealth of
new simulations becoming available through the Coupled Model Intercomparison
Project, phase 6 (CMIP6), and will focus on the rapidly-changing Pacific sector
of the coastal Antarctic.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.