* 1744146
* EAGER: Novel Instrumentation for Extracting and Modeling of Flow Structure in Turbulent Boundary Layers
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Mark Sheplak, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 130,000.00

Development of new, more efficient aerodynamic vehicles is a constantly ongoing
process. There are many areas of improvement that can be targeted, including
reduced drag, enhanced maneuverability, and reduced noise levels. Although there
is a long track record of research in aerodynamics, many of the basic properties
of fluid flows are not completely understood. For instance, how forces along the
surface of a body in motion relate to velocity in the surrounding air. Part of
the reason is a lack of proper tools for measuring these flow interactions,
which limits the experiments that can be performed. This project looks to
develop new tools for the measurement of the flow-generated friction in multiple
directions such that they can be combined with existing tools that estimate flow
velocity with an ultimate goal of generating comprehensive experimental models
of the turbulent motions. Information revealed from these efforts will enhance
understanding of fundamental turbulent flows, which can be generalized to other
more complex interactions. Furthermore, broad advances in sensor technology can
be used by other research groups in their future endeavors, enabling increases
in the next generation of aerodynamic performance.

A full understanding of the interplay between wall forces and freestream fluid
velocity within turbulent flow fields remains elusive and its study requires new
technologies. Specifically, the temporal relationship between fluctuating wall
shear stress and large scale motion of coherent turbulent structures in a
boundary layer, among others. A key limitation to experimental validation of
various models is insufficient measurement instrumentation, especially in multi-
dimensional flows. Microelectromechanical system (MEMS) based transducers are
developed to address this gap, including extending wall shear stress measurement
capabilities from single-axis to time-resolved vectors. Specifically, a dual-
axis, differential capacitive floating element skin friction sensor possessing a
hydraulically smooth package is proposed. The novel sensor will provide the
opportunity to sample the velocity field triggered by high-shear events allowing
for greater insight into numerous open questions on turbulent boundary layers,
including eddy formation, propagation, and the accuracy of the horseshoe vortex
model. It will also provide the ability to make time-resolved vector
measurements of wall shear stress at the microscale, which does not currently
exist. Development of the novel MEMS sensors will continue to expand on the
growing suite of transducers tailored for fluid applications, leading to
instrument grade tools for aerodynamicists to utilize elsewhere.