* 1744248
* Language Documentation Technologies and Methodologies Workshop for the American Anthropological Association Meeting
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2019
* Jennifer Davis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 06/30/2019
* USD 16,579.00

The documentation and description of indigenous languages has its early roots in
anthropology, especially in linguistic anthropology, where founders of the field
such as Edward Sapir and Franz Boas advocated collecting data in Native American
and other indigenous languages in order to examine their linguistic features and
cultural components. However, since the establishment of linguistics as a
separate academic field in the last century, the majority of work focusing on
the documentation and description of these languages has been produced by
linguists. This is especially true for the technological and methodological
components of language-centered documentation research. Language documentation
in indigenous and endangered language communities and related research
increasingly requires specialized skills at each stage of research: development,
collection, analysis, and archiving. Yet, universities do not uniformly offer
methods courses covering these skills for students. To address this gap, this
project will result in a workshop targeting anthropologists with introductory
training in the specialized skills and methodologies necessary for language
documentation in Indigenous and endangered language communities at each stage of
research: development, collection, analysis, and archiving. Broader impacts
include the training of graduate students, non-academic anthropologists, members
of underrepresented groups in language documentation and data management, the
public availability of workshop training materials, and a wider dissemination of
practices designed to foster best practices for public access to data, including
an understanding of contexts when wider access may not be appropriate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Led by two early career researchers, the proposed
"Language Documentation Technologies and Methodologies Workshop," will bring
contemporary documentation methodologies and experienced instructors from the
Institute on Collaborative Language Research, or CoLang, to offer this training
at the 2017 American Anthropological Association (AAA) meeting. With an annual
attendance of six to seven thousand, the AAA meeting provides a number of
benefits as a location for training in the field of endangered language
documentation and description. It has scholars at all stages of their careers
from early graduate students to full professors. Critically, it also includes
non-academically affiliated community members, practicing and applied
anthropologists, and instructors from a wide range of US and international
institutions including tribal and community colleges, and minority serving
universities. Potential participants in the workshop represent a very wide range
of ethno-racial, political, and socio-economic backgrounds, and the workshop
will facilitate training not only to students and faculty in anthropological
fields, but also as to the teachers and mentors of students learning to do
research in an expansive network of educational institutions. Anthropology's
commitment to in situ ethnographic methods of research and long-term
relationships with communities participating in research makes anthropologists
prime candidates for indigenous or endangered language documentation. While
ethnographic research has produced, and continues to produce massive amounts of
data within endangered language communities, long-term archiving and dimensions
of academic and community access to those collected data are rarely discussed
during academic training. Training in contemporary methodologies ensures the use
of best practices in ethical models and higher quality fieldwork materials,
which serves the greater scientific community and the general public.