* 1744411
* INCLUDES DDLP: Water Network for Team STEM (WaNTS)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Ethan Allen, Pacific Resources for Education and Learning
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,900.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a Design and Development Launch
Pilot (DDLP) of the NSF INCLUDES program. The goal of the project is to enhance
the knowledge and applicability of science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) for a broad cross-section of people living in the
U.S,-Affiliated Pacific Islands. The focus will be on water resources, which is
an extremely important topic for this region and equally relevant nationally.
The project will engage local community groups and schools in water monitoring,
sampling, and analysis, in order to promote the benefits of science education
and careers among a population that is underrepresented in these areas.
Moreover, the project will improve the capabilities of the island residents for
making decisions about sustainable use and protection of these scarce resources.
A functioning network will be established among the islands that will have a
positive impact on the health and well-being of the residents.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project will use water as a highly relevant topic in
order to involve a wide range of individuals in both general STEM learning and
the basic scientific principles as applied to water resources. Specific aspects
include engaging K-12, higher education, informal educators and community
members to manage water resources in a sustainable fashion that will reduce
disaster risk. In addition, the project will empower local communities through
water literacy to make better informed, evidence-based decisions that balance
the needs of diverse stakeholder groups. The overarching goal is to further
advance the inclusion of underrepresented learners in STEM fields. Benefits to
society will accrue by: increasing STEM learning opportunities for ~6,500
students from underserved and underrepresented Indigenous Pacific Islanders that
will enhance their eligibility for STEM careers; building community resiliency
through a collective impact network to resolve emerging water crises; and
fostering collaboration among different constituencies in remote communities to
make better-informed decisions that reflect the needs and constraints of diverse
interests.