* 1744139
* EAGER: Exploring Mathematics Graduate Teaching Assistants'  Developmental Stages for Teaching
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Mary Beisiegel, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ferrara
* 08/31/2020
* USD 296,258.00

Mathematics plays a central role in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) disciplines, and student success in undergraduate mathematics
courses is a crucial ingredient in meeting the Nation's need to prepare and
sustain a globally competitive STEM workforce. However, mathematics courses
often create barriers to student progress in obtaining degrees in STEM areas. To
address this national problem, this project will focus on a research study to
explore two critical issues in undergraduate mathematics education: (1) how
future mathematics faculty members are prepared for teaching and (2) the format
of mathematics teaching in undergraduate classrooms. These two issues are
directly related to one another. How future mathematics faculty are prepared to
teach mathematics is a determining factor in the quality and style of
mathematics teaching in undergraduate classrooms. Unfortunately, all too often,
this teaching does not have a positive impact on undergraduate students.
Mathematics graduate teaching assistants (MGTAs) often receive minimal training
for a career of teaching mathematics and, as a result, their teaching practices
remain rooted in lecture-based instruction. Lecture-based mathematics teaching
in undergraduate mathematics has been shown not to be the best form of
instruction for the majority of students, indicating that there is critical need
for research-based professional development programs for MGTAs. Yet, few studies
have investigated MGTA needs for professional development at different points in
their graduate programs. This study will fill this gap in the research by
following MGTAs as they progress through their graduate programs. The findings
will generate new knowledge to inform STEM departments across the country how to
better prepare graduate students for teaching undergraduates, which, in turn,
will lead to a better prepared United States STEM workforce.

A fundamental goal of the project is to create a model of MGTAs' developmental
stages for teaching that researchers and practitioners will be able to use to
design effective, long-term professional development programs that will result
in mathematics instruction that improves student outcomes in undergraduate
mathematics courses. To investigate MGTAs' developmental stages for teaching,
surveys and interview protocols will be created to capture any changes in
knowledge, beliefs, views of mathematics, and teaching. The surveys will have
open-ended questions that inquire into MGTAs' thoughts about teaching and
learning mathematics and what influences the way they think about teaching.
Other items will address their epistemic beliefs and self-efficacy. An interview
process will provide a deeper view of their teaching practices, their most
recent teaching experiences, whether they feel that they are receiving adequate
support, and what other support they feel they need. MGTAs will be surveyed and
interviewed for the duration of their graduate programs to determine any changes
to their views of teaching and their need of support for teaching. Their
responses to the survey and interview questions will be analyzed using the
stages of deductive thematic analysis. A long-term goal of this study is to use
this new knowledge to design a research-based, scaffolded training program model
that will attend to the stages mathematics graduate students go through as their
teaching and thoughts about teaching evolve.