* 1744109
* EAGER:  Negotiated Resource Sharing Strategies to Facilitate New Product Introductions
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,12/31/2018
* Reha Uzsoy, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2018
* USD 107,376.00

The introduction of new products is an important basis for competition in many
industries. Effective management of new product introductions requires
collaboration and coordination between different units such as sales and
marketing, manufacturing, and product engineering. Each unit controls some
critical resources and information, but depends on resources and information
from other units to perform its function. The resulting competition for
manufacturing capacity between units with different objectives, often arbitrated
by a central decision maker, may result in delayed, suboptimal decisions. This
EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project studies the
opportunity for new, decentralized approaches that encourage information sharing
among functional units to provide better alternatives to centralized control.
The project will yield new insights into multiparty negotiation as well as
contributing to the national welfare through insights into how to better manage
new product introduction in industrial, non-profit and defence environments. The
award will provide support for a graduate student working with the PI.

This project will evaluate the merits of two novel approaches to structuring
decentralized decision making. The first will involve the emerging field of
algorithmic game theory to develop computationally efficient approximation
algorithms for determining equilibrium solutions for these problems. The second
will involve the study of combinatorial auctions, where each unit bids for
manufacturing capacity across different time periods. The extensive literature
on game theory and combinatorial auctions present an opportunity to develop
novel formulations of this problem. Several streams of research address
different aspects of the problem, but none is currently capable of modelling
even simplified versions of the problem in all aspects. Hence at the current
stage of knowledge it is not clear what direction a concerted attack on this
problem with these tools should take. The objective of this EAGER project is to
clarify this issue, identifying the most promising lines of attack while
eliminating those unlikely to succeed.