* 1744887
* 2017 GRC Carbon Capture, Utilization &amp; Storage - Innovative Carbon Management Pathways for a Sustainable Future
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2018
* Ah-Hyung Alissa Park, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2018
* USD 30,000.00

1744887 (Park). This Gordon Research Conference (GRC) and the accompanying
Graduate Research Seminar (GRS) on Carbon Capture, Utilization, and Storage
(CCUS) will facilitate research collaborations that effectively cross the
boundaries of the natural sciences, engineering, and the social and economic
sciences to develop new understanding, theories, models and technologies as well
as assessment tools new technologies and their implementation plans for global
communities. Discussion of emerging ideas and findings in this area will
stimulate cutting edge research in the field, and eventually contribute to new
approaches to capture and safely store anthropogenic CO2, while investigating
captured CO2 conversion to chemicals and fuels as one of the long-term
alternatives. Topics will include a full range of materials studies involving
chemical and physical interactions with CO2 at multi- time and spatial scales
ranging from molecular level to geological scales, with particular emphasis on
their interrelations with the current and novel energy conversion systems as
well as policy and social aspects of CCUS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last
few decades, science and technologies have been advanced to capture CO2 and
store it safely and permanently. Unfortunately, while each field has very active
programs in various aspects of CCUS, CO2 capture (mostly chemists, chemical
engineers and material scientists) and CO2 storage (mostly geologists,
geochemists and civil engineers) groups have not been interacting with each
other. The communication between CCUS and science policy researchers has been
even more limited. Thus, the interdisciplinary nature and the openness of
GRC/GRS format in terms of sharing unpublished data will ensure the great
broader impacts of this conference.