* 1744004
* EAGER:  PPER:   Microplastic AWARENESS Program: Amplifying Water-quality Analysis Research Experiences for Northwest Indiana Educators, Students and Society
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,10/31/2018
* Julie Peller, Valparaiso University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 10/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

Microplastics are small plastic particles (less than 5 millimeters in diameter)
in the environment, and they can come from a variety of sources. This research
project is designed to utilize citizen scientists from a local middle school to
collect data on microplastic pollution and integrate its detection into water
quality monitoring. Project researchers will train and work with undergraduate
science education research students, local teachers, and students (citizen
scientists) in water quality research to study microplastic pollution in the
Lake Michigan watershed. Citizen scientists will be trained to 1) conduct
traditional water quality monitoring procedures, 2) quantify and study the
transport and fate of microplastic pollutants and 3) determine the extent of
microplastic materials consumed by common macroinvertebrates in the watershed.
This large data set collection, which can be compiled effectively using citizen
scientists, is also necessary for microplastic pollution mitigation strategies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microplastic pollution is created from a number of sources
and is defined as plastic waste materials less than 5 millimeters in diameter.
This pollution is considered a threat on a global level due to the abundance,
persistence and mobility of these plastic materials. While many studies have
been performed on microplastic pollution have in the marine environment, recent
scientific reports conclude that more research is necessary, especially in
freshwater ecosystems. The project researchers are expanding upon traditional
water quality monitoring by quantifying and analyzing the microplastic pollution
in the local Lake Michigan watershed through the development of a citizen
science program. The research includes investigations on the degree of uptake of
microplastics by common macroinvertebrates in local headwater streams and the
probable effects on these organisms. The full extent of microplastic pollution
on organisms and humans is not yet known and additional research is required to
address many unknown aspects of these pollutants. The project includes training
of citizen scientists from a local public middle school. The project also
provides an opportunity for the community to take part in critical research on
current stresses to freshwater systems. Undergraduate science major students are
taking part in the multi-disciplinary research and are being challenged with
teaching research methods to the middle school citizen scientists as part of
their teacher education preparation.