* 1744993
* Collaborative Research: Snapshots of Early and Mid-Pleistocene Climate and Atmospheric Composition from the Allan Hills Blue Ice Area
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Michael Bender, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,121,394.00

Bubbles of ancient air trapped in ice cores have been used to directly
reconstruct atmospheric composition, and its links to Antarctic and global
climate, over the last 800,000 years. Previous field expeditions to the Allan
Hills Blue Ice Area, Antarctica, have recovered ice cores that extend as far
back as 2.7 million years, by far the oldest polar ice samples yet recovered.
These ice cores extend direct observations of atmospheric carbon dioxide and
methane concentrations and indirect records of Antarctic climate into a period
of Earth's climate history that represents a plausible geologic analogue to
future anthropogenic climate change. The results demonstrate a smaller glacial-
interglacial variability of climate and greenhouse gases, and a persistent
linkage between Antarctic climate and atmospheric carbon dioxide, between 1 and
2 million years ago. Through this project, the team will return to the Allan
Hills Blue Ice Area to recover additional ice cores that date to 2 million years
or older. The climate records developed from these ice cores will provide new
insights into the chemical composition of the atmosphere and Antarctic climate
during times of comparable or even greater warmth than the present day. Project
results will help answer questions about issues associated with anthropogenic
change including the relationship between temperature change and the mass
balance of Antarctic ice and the relationship between atmospheric greenhouse
gases and global climate change.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Earth has been cooling,
and ice sheets expanding, over the past ~52 million years. Superimposed on this
cooling are periodic changes in Earth's climate system driven by variations in
the eccentricity, precession, and obliquity of Earth's orbit around the Sun.
Climate reconstructions based on measurements of oxygen isotopes in
foraminiferal calcite indicate that, from ~2.8 to 1.2 million years before
present (Ma), Earth's climate system oscillated between glacial and interglacial
states every ~40,000 years (the "40k world"). Between 1.2-0.8 Ma and continuing
to the present, the period of glacial cycles increased in amplitude and
lengthened to ~100,000 years (the "100k world"). Ice cores preserve ancient air
that allows direct reconstructions of atmospheric carbon dioxide and methane.
They also archive proxy records of regional climate, mean ocean temperature,
global oxygen cycling, and the aridity of nearby continents. Studies of
stratigraphically continuous ice cores, extending to 800,000 years before
present, have demonstrated that atmospheric carbon dioxide is strongly linked to
climate, and it is of great interest to extend the ice-core record into the 40k
world. Recent discoveries of well-preserved ice dating from 1.0 to 2.7 Ma from
ice cores drilled in the Allan Hills Blue Ice Area (BIA), Antarctica,
demonstrate the potential to retrieve stratigraphically discontinuous old ice at
shallow depths (&lt;200 meters). This project will continue this work by
retrieving new large-volume ice cores and measuring paleoclimate properties in
both new and existing ice from the Allan Hills BIA. The experimental objectives
are to more fully characterize fundamental properties of the climate system and
the carbon cycle during the 40k world. Project results will have implications
for Pleistocene climate change, and will provide new constraints on the
processes that regulate atmospheric carbon dioxide, methane, and oxygen on
geologic timescales. Given a demonstrated age of the ice at the Allan Hills BIA
of at least 2 million years, the team will drill additional cores to prospect
for ice that predates the initiation of Northern Hemisphere glaciation at the
Plio-Pleistocene transition (~2.8 Ma).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.