* 1744455
* NSF INCLUDES DDLP American STEM Alliance Network Improvement Community
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Michael Marder, American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Phillips
* 09/30/2019
* USD 299,979.00

The NSF INCLUDES Design and Development Launch Pilot: American STEM Alliance
Network Improvement Community focuses on the broadening participation challenge
of providing equitable access to STEM education in high-need, majority Hispanic
and Native American communities. The project will apply both collective impact
and network improvement community collaborative change strategies in their
effort with three school districts in the Southwest serving majority Hispanic
and Native American communities (San Antonio, TX, Farmington, NM, and Andarko,
OK). The proposed model of collaborative change for this project combines the
stakeholder engagement focus of collective impact with the strategic, iterative
improvement emphasis of the networked improvement community approaches. The
American Institutes of Research (AIR) and the American STEM Alliance (ASA)
provide leadership for this effort. A key feature of this project is that it
brings new ways of community engagement, data driven decision making, and
institutional collaboration to an existing Alliance with an established
reputation with the target population. The rapid cycle study design proposed by
this project will contribute to understanding how communities can develop
stronger, more evidence based approaches to addressing the grand challenge of
broadening participation across a variety of contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to develop and test a contextually, and culturally
relevant approach to addressing inequities in STEM education. The project
proposes to promote equitable access to a coherent continuum of support in STEM
education pathways. The Carnegie STEM Excellence Pathway provides the tools and
resources for the participating districts to identify a problem of practice and
create an intervention to address that problem using a data-driven framework,
proven tools/techniques, and continuous feedback. The project evaluation focuses
on documenting the collaborative change strategies, continuous improvement
cycles, and their contribution to the changes in institutional policy and
practice required to create increased access to rigorous STEM courses for
Hispanic and Native American high school students.