* 1744474
* NSF INCLUDES DDLP: Indigenous Math Circles Communities
* MPS,OMA
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Henry Fowler, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,761.00

This NSF INCLUDES Design and Development Launch Pilot is to expand the Navajo
Nation Math Circle model to other sites, and to develop and launch a network of
math circles based on the NNMC model. The Navajo Nation Math Circle model is a
novel approach to broadening the participation of indigenous peoples in
mathematics that, ultimately, seeks to improve American Indian students'
attitudes towards mathematics, persistence with challenging problems, and grades
in math courses. Navajo Nation Math Circles bring teachers, students, and
mathematicians together to work collaboratively on challenging, but meaningful
and fun, math problems. Through this NSF INCLUDES project, additional math
circles across the Navajo Nation will be launched and a mirror site in
Washington State serving additional tribes (such as Puyallup, Muckleshoot,
Tulalip, and Stillaguamish) will be established.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Originating approximately a century ago in Eastern Europe as a means
to engage students in mathematical thinking, math circles bring teachers,
students, and math professionals together to work collaboratively on
challenging, but relevant and interesting, math problems. Navajo Nation Math
Circles, established math circles in various Navajo Nation communities, are the
foundation of this INCLUDES project. One goal of this effort is to launch a
network with the capacity to support the replication and adaption of math
circles in multiple sites as an innovative strategy for encouraging indigenous
math engagement through culturally enriched open-ended group math explorations.
In addition, the Navajo Nation Math Circle model will be expanded to new math
circles in the Navajo Nation, as well as in Washington State to serve additional
tribes. Cells in the network will implement key elements of the Navajo Nation
Math Circle model, adapting them to their particular contexts. Such elements
include facilitation of open-ended group math explorations, incorporating
indigenous knowledge systems; a Mathematical Visitor Program sending
mathematicians to schools to work with students and their teachers; inclusion of
mathematics in public festivals to increase community mathematical awareness; a
two-week summer math camp for students; and teacher development opportunities
ranging from workshops to immersion experiences to a mentoring program pairing
teachers with mathematicians.