* 1744417
* Convergence NNA: Adaptive Capacity and Resilience in the New Arctic: Identifying Pathways to Equitable, Desirable Outcomes for People and Nature Through Convergence
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Craig Allen, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 12/31/2019
* USD 99,864.00

The investigators will conduct a series of workshops that will employ a complex
systems framework to gain insight into system dynamics and overall resilience in
the Arctic region. Resilience represents the capacity of a community to buffer
and adapt to stress and shocks, and thus navigate and even shape change. The
workshops will integrate resilience theory and research methods with Indigenous
community observations and practice. This integration is needed to address the
societal concerns associated with the rapid pace of environmental change in the
'New Arctic.' Diverse expertise will be represented, and the workshop
participants will include Arctic Indigenous scholars and community members from
climate-affected Alaskan communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This series of
workshops will employ a complex systems framework to gain insight into system
dynamics and overall resilience, which can be defined as the capacity to buffer
and adapt to stress and shocks, and thus navigate and even shape change. The
workshop will integrate resilience theory and research methods with Indigenous
community observations and practice, which is needed to address the societal
concerns in the 'New Arctic.' Merging expertise from multiple disciplines
through a complex system approach is a robust way to conduct convergent research
on a Pan-Arctic scale. Further, the iterative structure of the workshops with
local community inclusion and the plan to integrate knowledge from six themes
will enhance the convergent outcomes of the workshops. The meaningful inclusion
of Indigenous scholars and community members in the workshops makes the project
more convergent in that it is not only transdisciplinary science but seeks out
issues and information important to Arctic and mid-latitude Tribal communities.
This project promotes convergence by addressing the societal concern of
achieving resilience for Arctic communities and by integrating diverse fields of
science through a complex systems approach and through engagement with
Indigenous scholars and community members. The range of expertise represented by
the participants includes ecosystem science, social science, climatology and
system science.