* 1744431
* NSF INCLUDES DDLP: Aligning for Impact: Computer Science Pathways Across Contexts
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Bryan Cox, Georgia Department of Education
* Standard Grant
* Fay Cobb Payton
* 01/31/2020
* USD 289,992.00

Aligning for Impact: Computer Science Pathways Across Contexts [CS-PAC] is an
NSF INCLUDES Design and Development Launch Pilot. It broadens participation of
students who are underrepresented in computer science by using the convening and
policy-making power of the Georgia State Department of Education to coalesce
school district leaders to implement K-12 computer science education. The
project provides a national model for how to work toward systemic change. With
the State Department of Education's coordination, several school districts will
collaboratively seek improvements in their own student participation rates. The
coordination of data reporting and analysis, resources, communications, and
policy promote more equitable participation in computer science education.
Research emerging from this project informs other states about how to
collaboratively shape computer science education policy and policy
implementation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a Collective Impact approach to
systemic change, the project creates sustainable institutional change at the
community, state, and national levels. Qualitative and quantitative data provide
descriptions about how to utilize alignment strategies within Collective Impact
in three different contexts: rural, suburban, and urban. Outcomes utilize a
regression discontinuity analysis to justify successful implementation as well
as qualitative analysis of implementation efforts that were deemed most
effective by all stakeholders. The project outputs directly affect over 88,000
students across five districts and indirectly affect over 1.7 million in Georgia
alone. The culminating project goal is the development of a coherent framework
for aligning K-12 computer science education pathways.