* 1744229
* 2018 Physics Research and Education Gordon Research Conference and Gordon Research Symposium
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2018,08/31/2018
* Nancy Ruzycki, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Steven Turley
* 08/31/2018
* USD 49,500.00

The significance of this conference is to provide a forum for presentation and
discussion of the latest research in emerging energy topics and the teaching and
learning of energy. This award will support participation of a diverse group of
graduate students, postdoctoral researchers and early career investigators to
attend the 2018 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) and the preceding Gordon
Research Symposium (GRS) in Physics Research and Education. The teaching of
energy is considered by physicists to be an important core concept to understand
the material world, and by inviting cutting-edge scientists to speak on topics
in energy research -- from energy harvesting to energy flow modeling --
transformative topics in energy research are made available for use as
application examples in the teaching of undergraduate physics students and the
general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within the theme of "Energy as a Subtle
Concept", workshop topics are broken into fundamental and contemporary groups
and each session is represented by both a physics education and scientific
researcher. The conference goals are as follows: a) introduce participants to
cutting edge research in the field of physics and education related to the theme
of energy, b) foster knowledge of new methods of energy research and pedagogical
research on energy in order to provide new models for use in teaching by
conference participants, c) encourage discussions and potential collaborations
between conference participants in order to broaden the energy ecosystem to
include scientists, educational researchers, and instructors, d) provide
mentorship opportunities for conference participants, and e) create a community
of practice around the teaching and learning about energy. The conference will
be preceded by a two-day Gordon Research Symposium entirely planned and executed
by a group of post-docs and graduate students who are rising leaders in energy
related research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.