* 1744011
* EAGER: BRAIDING: Braiding Majorana bound states in atomic chains on a superconducting island
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Stevan Nadj-Perge, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Majorana bound states are localized at the
edge of a one-dimensional topological superconductor. These excitations are
viewed as a starting point for topological quantum information processing. This
award supports experimental research activity aiming to address the key
challenges related to establishing control of Majorana bound states. This
particular implementation avoids technical challenges related to physically
moving Majorana bound states and, due to the small size of the superconducting
island, has intrinsic protection against errors. If successful, this research
activity has a potential to make transformative breakthrough in the field of
quantum science and technology. The research aspect of this project is
accompanied by a multifaceted educational program for graduate and undergraduate
students as well as outreach program targeting high-school students and science
teachers from the Pasadena School District. The research advances of the project
will be broadly disseminated through research articles, seminars, courses and
public lectures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports experimental efforts aiming towards a demonstration of a topological
quantum bit based on Majorana bound states realized in magnetic atomic chains
placed on a superconducting island which is integrated into a mesoscopic
interferometer circuit. In this scheme, reading out the quantum information
encoded in Majorana states and performing quantum logical operations can be done
by measuring electron parity using interferometry. This particular
implementation combines the advantages of theoretical proposals which avoid
technical challenges related to physically moving Majorana bound states with
intrinsic protection against the quasi-particle poisoning which is considered to
be major limiting factor for the coherence times of topological quantum systems.
In order to realize this experimental platform several approaches for
integration of atomic assemblies accessible using scanning probe microscopy into
a nano-fabricated mesoscopic interferometer device will be explored. If
successful, this highly focused research activity has a potential to make
transformative breakthrough in the fields of quantum science and technology. The
research aspect of this project is accompanied by a multifaceted educational
program for graduate and undergraduate students as well as outreach program
targeting high-school students and science teachers from the Pasadena School
District. The research advances of the project will be broadly disseminated
through research articles, seminars, courses and public lectures.