* 1744958
* Collaborative Research: Do Ocean Wave Impacts Pose a Hazard to the Stability of West Antarctic Ice Shelves?
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Yong Wei, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 05/31/2021
* USD 90,640.00

Understanding and being able to more reliably forecast ice mass loss from
Antarctica is a critical research priority for Antarctic Science. Massive ice
shelves buttress marine terminating glaciers, slowing the rate that land ice
reaches the sea and, in turn, restraining the rate of sea level rise. To date,
most work has focused on the destabilizing impacts of warmer air and water
temperatures, resulting in melting that thins and weakens ice shelves. However,
recent findings indicate that sea ice does not protect ice shelves from wave
impacts as much as previously thought, which has raised the possibility that
tsunamis and other ocean waves could affect shelf stability. This project will
assess the potential for increased shelf fracturing from the impact of tsunamis
and from heightened wave activity due to climate-driven changes in storm
patterns and reduced sea-ice extent by developing models to investigate how wave
impacts damage ice shelves. The modeling effort will allow for regional
comparisons between large and small ice shelves, and provide an evaluation of
the impacts of changing climate and storm patterns on ice shelves, ice sheets,
glaciers, and, ultimately, sea level rise. This project will train graduate
students in mathematical modeling and interdisciplinary approaches to Earth and
ocean sciences.

This project takes a four-pronged approach to estimating the impact of
vibrations on ice shelves at the grounding zone due to tsunamis, very long
period, infragravity, and storm-driven waves. First, the team will use high-
resolution tsunami modeling to investigate the response of ice shelves along the
West Antarctic coast to waves originating in different regions of the Pacific
Ocean. Second, it will compare the response to wave impacts on grounding zones
of narrow and wide ice shelves. Third, it will assess the exposure risk due to
storm forcing through a reanalysis of weather and wave model data; and, finally,
the team will model the propagation of ocean-wave-induced vibrations in the ice
from the shelf front to and across the grounding zone. In combination, this
project aims to identify locations along the Antarctic coast that are subject to
enhanced, bathymetrically-focused, long-period ocean-wave impacts. Linkages
between wave impacts and climate arise from potential changes in sea-ice extent
in front of shelves, and changes in the magnitude, frequency, and tracks of
storms. Understanding the effects of ocean waves and climate on ice-shelf
integrity is critical to anticipate their contribution to the amplitude and
timing of sea-level rise. Wave-driven reductions in ice-shelf stability may
enhance shelf fragmentation and iceberg calving, reducing ice shelf buttressing
and eventually accelerating sea-level rise.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.