* 1744031
* CAREER: Environmental Sustainability of Next Generation Lithium Ion Batteries for Electric Vehicles
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Chris Yuan, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2021
* USD 504,625.00

1351602 (Yuan). The research objectives of this CAREER grant are to investigate
the environmental sustainability of next generation lithium ion batteries (NG
LIBs) and to create a sustainability analysis tool for sustainable design and
manufacturing of NG LIBs for battery-powered electric vehicles (BEVs),
collaborating with General Motors, Johnson Controls, and PE International. More
specifically, the research objectives of this career grant include: (1) Modeling
and investigations of NG LIB manufacturing emissions; (2) Experimental
investigations of nano-particle emissions from NG LIB manufacturing through in
situ and ex situ techniques; (3) Thermodynamic energy modeling and validation of
NG LIB manufacturing; (4) Closed loop sustainability management of NG LIB
technologies through recycling and sustainability analysis tool development. The
long-term educational goal is to establish a comprehensive educational program
on environmental sustainability of BEVs. To fulfill this goal, the educational
objectives of this CAREER grant are to provide cutting-edge research-based
knowledge and educational resources for environmental sustainability of NG LIBs.
The educational plans of this proposal include: (1) Students' education and
training through curriculum development and research participation; (2)
Industrial professionals? education and outreach through industrial seminars,
short course and conference seminars;(3) General public education and awareness
through online videos, public radio programs and website downloadable materials.
Major innovations of the project include the development of process-based
mathematical models and tools validated through experimentation for
understanding and improving the environmental sustainability of NG LIB
technology. The project aims to lead to the development and application of NG
LIB technology in large-scale industrial production with reduced environmental
impacts and economic costs. NG LIB is under development using nanotechnologies
which have significant sustainability issues in real production. Moreover, nano-
wastes and nano-particle emissions from NG LIB productions may pose severe risks
of exposure for both occupational and public health. In addition, NG LIB
production is very energy-intensive, which contributes not only to the
environmental impacts, but also to the high costs of NG LIB products. This
project aims to reduce NG LIB manufacturing wastes and emissions (including
nano-particle emissions), improve the energy efficiency, and enhance the
sustainable development of NG LIB technology for future large-scale applications
on EVs. Environmental sustainability performance of NG LIB technologies is
significant and must be fully investigated and improved before large-scale
application in future EVs. The research results will be broadly disseminated
through academic journals, conference proceedings, internet media, etc., and
will improve people's understanding about the potential environmental impacts of
NG LIB technology and assist in developing a sustainable infrastructure for NG
LIB production for EVs. In practice, the research results will be applied by
industrial partners (GM and JC). The educational impact includes involving high
school students and teachers, developing a new course on sustainable design and
manufacturing, integrating the research results into two current UWM courses
(enrolling more than 120 students/year), teaching a short course in the UWM
School of Continuing Education for local and national industrial professionals,
offering the course materials through UWM's online MS program, holding seminars
at leading industrial companies (GM and JC) and premiere conference workshops
(ISSST), sharing the materials in such national high-impact databases and
websites as NSDL and NCLT, and offering video and public radio programs for the
general public. This project will train one postdoc, one Ph.D. student and two
undergraduate students (with the support of NSF REU and UWM SURF programs).
Underrepresented students will be recruited from UWM student professional
societies. The educational materials will be shared with the PI's collaborators
in both the U.S. and China.