* 1744708
* Biotechnology in American High Schools: Then and Now
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* David Micklos, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2018
* USD 49,953.00

As part of an early grant from the NSF's Advanced Technological Education (ATE)
Program, the DNA Learning Center (DNALC) conducted a nationwide survey of 4,100
high school biology teachers. This purposive sample took a snapshot of
biotechnology/molecular genetics instruction in American high schools in 1998
using unique datasets from the 1980s and 1990s. This research project will
repeat that study to see where biotechnology instruction stands two decades
later. This survey will help the education community see how far biology
instruction has come over the last 30 years, and where it needs to point for the
next 30 years. The 1998 study showed that the early adoption of biotechnology
lab instruction was concentrated in schools located in high wealth suburban zip
codes. It is important to see if, today, hands-on biotech instruction has
broadened to include poorer and more diverse urban populations. It is also
expected that the study will correlate changes in teacher attitudes and behavior
with funding and educational trends over this period of time such that the study
results can provide insights for educational policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
1998 DNALC survey possesses unique datasets from the 1980s and 1990s. Many of
the teachers who responded to those surveys have since retired. This study
offers the rare opportunity to compare two generations of biology teachers. The
previous generation pioneered the introduction of new labs that illustrated the
basic concepts of molecular genetic manipulation, mostly using the microbial
model E. coli. The current generation of teachers faces the challenge of
bringing biology instruction into the age of whole-genome analysis of humans and
other organisms. The proposed survey will compare lab instruction and student
exposures to four major techniques of biotechnology/molecular genetics that were
measured in the original survey: bacterial transformation, DNA restriction
analysis, polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and DNA sequencing. Responses will be
compared across a range of variables in the original study, including:
Constraints (student ability, administrative support, parental support,
syllabus, textbooks, lab space, equipment/supplies, class size, class and prep
time); Behaviors/Performance (four biotech labs, lab prep methods, kit use, lab
"field trips," funding amount and sources, opportunities for training, number of
Internet-enabled computers, Internet use, information sources); and Demographics
(school enrollment, percent minority/disadvantaged, biology class size, length
of lab period, age/sex/race, ethnicity, years teaching, certification/highest
degree, professional development, extracurricular activities). Additionally, the
data from at least 600 teachers trained at week-long workshops conducted from
1987-1996 will be included. These surveys had identical or comparable questions
as the nationwide survey, but also included semantic differentials - which
provide a unique way to measure attitudes. Teachers rated their reactions to
"recombinant DNA, biotechnology" and "myself as a biology teacher" on 18 scales
of polar adjectives ("important-unimportant," "messy-neat," "dangerous-safe,"
etc.). Responses clustered in dimensions of potency, activity, and evaluation -
providing a validated way to track shifts in teacher attitudes. Case-controlled
analysis will provide an informative comparison between historic and current
cohorts. Participants at each time point will be sorted into matched groups
based on school and teacher demographics. By analyzing the data in this manner,
a number of confounding variables will be eliminated to better understand how
biology teaching practices have changed.