* 1744954
* Surface Energy Balance on West Antarctica and the Ross Ice Shelf
* GEO,OPP
* 11/15/2018,10/31/2021
* Dan Lubin, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* David Sutherland
* 10/31/2021
* USD 564,583.00

Atmospheric warming has been a major factor in the loss of ice shelves on the
Antarctic Peninsula. In West Antarctica, oceanic warming is presently regarded
as the largest source of stress on both the ice-shelves and at the grounding
lines of the ice sheets. The loss of ice shelf buttressing and grounding line
retreat may have already induced irreversible loss of Thwaites Glacier. To
advance predictive models more data is needed regarding both water-induced
fracturing on an ice shelf and marine ice cliff instability near the grounding
line. This project will help advance understanding of atmospheric circulation
and solar radiation over West Antarctica and the Ross Ice Shelf that lead to
surface melting. In support of this project, and incorporating Antarctic science
from this work, UCSD educators will sponsor a workshop series for exemplary
middle and/or high school science teachers designed to address this need.
Teacher participants will be carefully selected for their demonstrated
leadership skills and will eventually become part of an cadre of "master"
science teachers who will serve as local leaders in disseminating strategies and
tools for addressing the NGSS (Ca Next Gen. of Sci. Eng. Stds.) to teachers
throughout the county.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the summer field seasons
requested, UCSD scientists will deploy a suite instruments to measure
downwelling and net shortwave and longwave fluxes, sensible and latent heat
fluxes, and near-surface meteorology. This suite of instruments will be self-
reliant with power requirements and will be supportable in the field with a
single Twin Otter aircraft. The investigators plan to deploy this suite as a
remote ice camp with a field party of 2-3 personnel, making measurements for at
up to one month during each of the sampled summer field seasons. These
measurements will be analyzed and interpreted to determine mesoscale conditions
that govern surface melt in West Antarctica, in the context of improving coupled
climate model parameterizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.