* 1744089
* RAPID: Sources and ecosystem significance of dust inputs during extremely wet and dry years in the Sierra Nevada, California
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Emma Aronson, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 12/31/2019
* USD 40,000.00

Investigators have shown that, during drought, dust is important to soils in the
Sierra Nevada, California (CA) and it is entering the Sierra from both the
Central Valley (CA) and from the Gobi Desert, China, and that both sources bring
in high-nutrient dust. These results are based on analyses of dust collected at
the peak of the recent 2012-2016 drought, raising the question of whether the
same trends would be observed during a wet year. Here, the team will collect new
dust samples monthly to bi-monthly during the summer of 2017, following the
recent wet winter of 2016-2017, from the same four elevations of the Southern
Sierra Critical Zone Observatory that were used in previous research. In
addition, they will collect shallow topsoil samples for comparison. They will
then begin to describe the microbial community of the dust and soil from 2017,
and to analyze the origin of dust entering the Sierra in the dry seasons of
2015, a dry year, and 2017, a wet year. The research will involve three graduate
students and a postdoctoral scientist, as well as underserved minority
undergraduates from both University of California (UC) Riverside and Merced,
both Hispanic Serving Institutions. This project will be an excellent
opportunity for educational and professional development. Additionally, the
participating postdoctoral scientist takes part in a residential summer
institute in Earth System Science for American Indian and Alaska Native high
school students at UC Irvine. The research from this project will be
disseminated during the summer institute in an effort to interest students in
the interplay between climate and Earth surface processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dust has long been recognized as a vital source of
nutrients in slowly eroding tropical ecosystems where intense weathering limits
nutrient inputs from underlying bedrock. Investigators' recent work along an
actively eroding montane landscape in the Sierra Nevada, California (CA)
revealed large contributions of dust from both regional and transoceanic
sources; growth-limiting nutrients (e.g., phosphorus) were determined to be
supplied at rates on par with those from underlying bedrock weathering. This
work also shows that microbial communities in dust varied between elevations,
and community composition contained very few overlapping sequences with co-
located soil communities. Also, the contributions from the Central Valley to
mid-elevation sites increased substantially over the summer dry period,
suggesting that the relative importance of regional dust sources to these
ecosystems increases as the time since the last significant precipitation event
increases. Analyses thus far have been based on dust inputs collected (2014) at
the peak of the recent 2012-2016 drought, raising the question of whether
findings are sensitive to changes in dust sources and emissions. The proposed
work will begin to evaluate this question by analyzing the provenance and
nutrients of dust collected during another drought-year summer (2015), and
collecting new samples throughout the summer of 2017, after a wet year, with the
goal of analyzing them in the near future.