* 1744700
* RUI:   Utilization of a Thio-Bromo Substitution Reaction for the Preparation of a New Class of ROMP Hydrogels
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Chris Hobbs, Sam Houston State University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 217,956.00

Hydrogels are polymeric networks that are not soluble in water but instead swell
in the presence of water. Because of this property, they have broad applications
in the biomedical fields. Professor Christopher Hobbs' group at Texas A&amp;M
University-Kingsville explores new routes toward the preparation of functional
hydrogels. Specially, his research group develops a highly efficient and
precious metal-free reaction for the synthesis and modification of hydrogels.
This project provides interdisciplinary research experience to many
underrepresented undergraduate students, delivering a vital stepping stone
toward careers in fields of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM). Additionally, Professor Hobbs organizes Polymer Chemistry Workshops, in
which high school teachers learn methods and experiments that can be used to
introduce aspects of polymer chemistry in their science classes in the hopes of
recruiting a new, diverse generation of young students to STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the utilization of a
facile, catalyst-free substitution reaction between thiols and alpha-bromo
esters for the preparation of a new class of hydrogels. The process employs
thio-bromo substitution reactions to convert alpha-bromoester-containing
polynorbornenes and poly(oxanorbornene)s to polymers with functionality (e.g.,
hydroxyl, amino, and ionic groups) known to instill water-swellability to
macromolecular architectures. Cross-linking of the resulting polymers with
dithiols produces a new class of hydrogels. While the preparation of alpha-
bromoester-containing polynorbornenes and poly(oxanorbornene)s by Ring Opening
Metathesis Polymerization (ROMP) requires the use of a ruthenium catalyst, the
conversion of these polymers to hydrogels involves metal-free reactions that
minimize the use of precious metals. With the support from the NSF
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program, Professor Hobbs' group
conducts research to examine the effectiveness of this synthetic approach and
the dependence of the hydrogel properties on the polymeric backbone, side chain
groups, and cross-linker identity.