* 1744407
* A Systematic Review of the Literature on How Students Respond to Active Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 11/15/2017,10/31/2019
* Cynthia Finelli, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 10/31/2019
* USD 99,739.00

This project addresses one of the primary barriers to undergraduate STEM
instructors' widespread use of active learning: fear of negative student
reactions. It has been estimated that there are between 400 to 500 published
studies providing empirical evidence of student affective reactions to active
(evidence-based) learning in physics, engineering, biology, chemistry, computer
science, mathematics and geosciences. Many of these studies provide estimates of
the impact of faculty shifts to evidence-based instruction. This project will
synthesize these affective responses across a variety of educational settings,
class sizes, and instructional interventions to increase our understanding of
the extent of both student resistance and acceptance. A goal is to present
compelling strategies for overcoming student resistance to evidence-based
learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will conduct a systematic
literature review that addresses the following research questions: &lt;br/&gt;1)
What evidence is used to measure student affective responses to active
(evidence-based) learning? What are the relative strengths and weaknesses of
each type of evidence? &lt;br/&gt;2) Are there patterns of student affective
responses in the published literature? Specifically, is student response
influenced significantly by instructor strategies, course content, class size,
assessment methods, and the type of evidence-based instruction? &lt;br/&gt;3)
Overall, are student reactions to active learning instruction generally positive
or negative?