* 1744221
* Student Travel Grant for RTSS'17 Ph.D. Student Poster Forum on Real-Time Aspects of Internet of Things and Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Frank Mueller, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

IEEE Real-Time Systems Symposium (RTSS) is the premier conference in the area of
real time systems, presenting innovations in the field with respect to theory
and practice. RTSS provides a forum for the presentation of high-quality,
original research covering all aspects of real-time systems theory, design,
analysis, implementation, evaluation, and experiences. RTSS 2017 will continue
making RTSS an expansive and inclusive symposium, looking to embrace new and
emerging areas of real-time systems research.

This proposal is to organize, in conjunction with the symposium, a Ph.D. student
poster forum (i) to discuss the set of interdisciplinary research problems that
arise in the context of IoT and CPS, (ii) to determine commonalities and
fundamental differences between the IoT and CPS domains, (iii) to identify novel
applications that become feasible due to the integration of local vs. hosted
computing, local vs. hosted storage, communication, and interaction with the
physical world at scale, and (iv) to define an initial system architecture that
addresses some of these research problems. The primary goal is to help students
(and the real-time community) recognize that IoT and CPS systems are different
from each other as well as historically over-engineered real-time embedded
systems of the past, and to provide a forum by which students can discuss their
proposal for addressing the complicated aggregate systems issues that arise in
this context.

Forums of this sort have significant educational value for graduate students. It
encourages the students to begin seriously thinking about their personal future
research agenda and opens pathways to burgeoning ideas. There is a plan to
reward best submissions as well as encourage students with financial
difficulties to participate, both merit-based and need-based stipends will be
provided to offset participation costs. The project includes broadening
participation criteria as part of the recruitment strategy.