* 1744602
* Collaborative Research: Sea ice as a driver of Antarctic benthic macroalgal community composition and nearshore trophic connectivity
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Katrin Iken, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Maria Vernet
* 08/31/2022
* USD 187,428.00

The western Antarctic Peninsula has become a model for understanding cold water
communities and how they may be changing in Antarctica and elsewhere. Brown
macroalgae (seaweeds) form extensive undersea forests in the northern portion of
this region where they play a key role in providing both physical structure and
a food (carbon) source for shallow water communities. Yet between Anvers Island
(64 degrees S latitude) and Adelaide Island (67 S latitude) these macroalgae
become markedly less abundant and diverse. This is probably because the habitat
to the south is covered by more sea ice for a longer period, and the sea ice
reduces the amount of light that reaches the algae. The reduced macroalgal cover
undoubtedly impacts other organisms in the food web, but the ways in which it
alters sea-floor community processes and organization is unknown. This project
will quantitatively document the macroalgal communities at multiple sites
between Anvers and Adelaide Islands using a combination of SCUBA diving, video
surveys, and algal collections. Sea ice cover, light levels, and other
environmental parameters on community structure will be modelled to determine
which factors have the largest influence. Impacts on community structure, food
webs, and carbon flow will be assessed through a mixture of SCUBA diving and
video surveys. Broader impacts include the training of graduate students and a
postdoctoral researcher, as well as numerous informal public education
activities including lectures, presentations to K-12 groups, and a variety of
social media-based outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Macroalgal communities are
more abundance and diverse to the north along the Western Antarctic Peninsula,
perhaps due to the greater light availability that is associated with shorter
period of sea-ice cover. This project will determine the causes and community
level consequence of this variation in algal community structure. First,
satellite data on sea ice extent and water turbidity will be used to select
study sites between 64 S and 69 S where the extent of annual sea ice cover is
the primary factor influencing subsurface light levels. Then, variations in
macroalgal cover across these study sites will be determined by video line-
transect surveys conducted by SCUBA divers. The health, growth, and
physiological status of species found at the different sites will be determined
by quadrat sampling. The relative importance of macroalgal-derived carbon to the
common invertebrate consumers in the foodweb will be assessed with stable
isotope and fatty acid biomarker techniques. This will reveal how variation in
macroalgal abundance and species composition across the sea ice cover gradient
impacts sea floor community composition and carbon flow throughout the food web.
In combination, this work will facilitate predictions of how the ongoing
reductions in extent and duration of sea ice cover that is occurring in the
region as a result of global climate change will impact the structure of
nearshore benthic communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.