* 1744043
* RUI: Study of Exotic Neutron-Rich Nuclei at Westmont College and at NSCL, MSU
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Warren Rogers, Indiana Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 09/30/2019
* USD 150,682.00

The main goal of this program is to advance the understanding of the fundamental
nature of atomic nuclei, with undergraduate student participation as an integral
component. The principle investigator and team of undergraduate students will
investigate the structure of light neutron-rich atomic nuclei that do not exist
naturally in nature but must be produced at an accelerator facility.
Understanding these nuclei is important for advancing our understanding of how
the protons and the neutrons bind together in nuclear systems that are very near
the limits of existence. As the research program advances to the study of
heavier nuclei, results will provide important information for the understanding
of explosive astrophysical environments such as supernovae and neutron star
mergers. Much of the research will be conducted at Westmont College, which
includes student training in and the use of instrumentation and data analysis
techniques, and at the National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory at Michigan
State University, where students participate in state-of-the-art nuclear physics
experiments. Major instrumentation used in experiments include the Modular
Neutron Array (MoNA) and the Large-area multi-Institutional Scintillator Array
(LISA), both constructed and tested by undergraduate students from several
institutions in the MoNA collaboration. In addition to the science goals, an
important goal of this program is to provide transformational research
experiences for the participating undergraduate students that can have a
positive influence on decisions they make for future study and careers in
physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported by this award addresses
directly some of the main questions driving the field of nuclear science today.
Properties of ground and excited states of neutron-rich nuclei will be
investigated using the Modular Neutron Array (MoNA), the Large multi-
Institutional Scintillator Array (LISA), and the Sweeper Magnet and its
associated suite of charged particle detectors, all located at the National
Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory at Michigan State University. Goals of the
program include a conclusive measurement of the 10He ground state resonance
energy, precise measurement of the 26O ground state lifetime, analysis of the
2-neutron cascade decay of excited states of 24O, and a systematic study of
neutron scattering in the MoNA detector bars at the LANSCE facility at Los
Alamos National Laboratory. This research program will help advance knowledge of
nuclear structure far from stability, including better understanding of neutron-
rich nuclei near the dripline, neutron halo systems, and exotic forms of nuclear
decay including multiple neutron decays and 2-neutron radioactivity.