* 1744392
* Engaging Students in Biodiversity Collections through a Network of Natural History Collections Clubs: A SPNHC 2017 workshop
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Travis Marsico, Arkansas State University Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2018
* USD 49,622.00

Many universities across the United States house collections of natural history
specimens. These collections were built over time by researchers, professors,
and students, and they often are the best representation of the biodiversity in
the areas immediately surrounding the collections' geographic location. The
first Natural History Collections Club (NHCC) was formed in 2013 by students who
sought to revitalize dilapidated natural history specimens at their institution.
They raised funding and awareness of the research and education value of the
collections on their campus, which in turn led to administrative support and
federal funding for those collections. Since 2013, several other groups of
students have taken up the NHCC model to train students in collections
techniques and raise funding, awareness, and assistance for their local natural
history collections. These clubs collectively form the Natural History
Collections Club Network (NHCCN). The Network will host its first workshop at
the 2017 annual meeting of the Society for the Preservation of Natural History
Collections (SPNHC) in Denver, Colorado on June 18, 2017. The workshop will
encourage other groups to take up the NHCC model on their campus and start a
student club that will join the NHCCN. This workshop will be open to SPNHC
attendees and fourteen outside participants will be invited. Seven pairs of
individuals from seven institutions will be invited to attend the workshop.
These pairs will consist of a faculty member and a student who will then be able
to return to their institution and start a NHCC. This workshop will address
participant diversity by targeting minority-serving institutions to broaden
participation in the fields of biodiversity and collections science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Invitations will target institutions that may benefit most
from joining the NHCCN, such as those that have expressed interest in improving
student involvement in collections, particularly institutions with small
collections and institutions with minority-serving emphases such as Historically
Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), Tribal Colleges and Universities
(TCUs), and Hispanic-Serving Institutions. Emphasis will also be given to small
collections that represent some of the most numerous and widespread collections
in the United States. These collections often contain many records of their
surrounding ecosystems not duplicated in larger facilities, and therefore
contribute significantly to known global biodiversity data. This award utilizes
a cost-efficient way to ensure the maintenance, expansion, and data sharing of
these collections by involving students and recruiting participants from small
collections that are committed to the success and sustainability of those
collections.