* 1744114
* I-Corps: Augmented reality based technologies in treating specific phobia
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Zhandong Liu, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 01/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impacts and commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
progress toward developing a treatment delivery system for individuals with
debilitating fears. The system, based on augmented reality and virtual reality,
addresses significant limitations of other treatment modalities. Approximately
9% of adults in the United States experience a clinically significant phobia
that causes impairments in functioning at high cost to the individual and
society. Despite the functional impairment caused by the debilitating fears
characteristic of Specific Phobia, nearly 2/3rds of individuals do not seek
treatment likely due to the aversive qualities of the most effective treatment,
exposure therapy. Untreated, phobias can have significant economic impact on
society. Therefore, the technology in this project has broader impacts to
society by improving access to treatment through delivery through a more
acceptable modality. Customers are expected to be licensed mental health
practitioners and the product will allow them to expose their patients to
computer generated phobic stimuli via an augmented reality (AR) headset. The
technology will allow clinicians to adopt a therapy delivery system that is more
acceptable to clients, while reducing clinician time and overall treatment
costs.

This I-Corps project will involve conducting customer discovery interviews to
test product-market fit for the development of an augmented reality (AR)
platform that allows people to overcome debilitating fears characteristic of
Specific Phobia. The project is based on research indicating that only a
minority of individuals with this highly treatable disorder obtain intervention
services because typically-delivered exposure therapy has highly aversive
qualities. Approximately 1 in 4 patients reject the treatment when it is
introduced. However, research also indicates that the same treatment delivered
in virtual reality (VR) environments is a highly preferred therapy modality with
a low rejection rate (3%). Unfortunately, this approach is not widely adopted by
therapists because the time to create a complete VR environment with the fear
stimulus is costly, resulting in poor product-market fit. With the rapid
development of AR-based technology and the low-cost of rendering AR environments
relative to VR environments, this I-Corps project offers the benefits of VR-
assisted therapy (lower patient rejection rates/higher patient preference) while
avoiding the barriers to clinician adoption. This technology is expected to
increase patient access to and engagement in treatment, while simultaneously
reducing clinician time and costs spent preparing for individual exposure tasks.