* 1744212
* EAGER:  Experimental Validation of O2/N2 Separation using Metamaterials
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2022
* Martin Maldovan, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 10/31/2022
* USD 194,127.00

Put a dye in water, and it will naturally mix with the water; spray perfume into
the air, and it will naturally mix until it becomes so dilute that it can no
longer be detected. Although these mixing processes occur spontaneously,
complete removal of the dye from the water or the perfume from the air would
require specialized equipment and a large amount of energy. The same is true on
a much larger scale in the production of gasoline from crude oil, a specialized
drug from a microbial broth, or production of purified drinking water from a
natural body of water. Separation of a purified chemical of interest from a
complex mixture requires energy, and when this is magnified on the scales of
industrial process, such as all the gasoline and drinking water used by society,
the amount of energy becomes very large. It is estimated that 10 to 15% of the
world's energy goes into the separation of chemical mixtures into the purified
substances we take for granted in our everyday lives. A number of alternative
separation processes are being explore to reduce this parasitic energy
consumption of purification on a molecular level. One such alternative process
is a membrane separation, which excludes one molecule from a boundary while
letting another pass, for example, excluding the dye while letting only water
pass through. Most membranes work on the premise of either size selectivity or
chemical affinity; chemical affinity means the molecules of the membrane prefer
the substance of interest. This project seeks to develop a unique approach to
membrane selectivity, using anisotropy. The anisotropy will direct one molecule
of interest in one direction within the membrane, for example towards the center
of a cylinder, while the other molecules are directed in another direction, such
as around the center of the cylinder. The guidance of molecule "A" towards a
central area while guiding molecule "B" away from that area will generate a
separation, with the potential for saving a fraction of the parasitic energy
required to complete the separation. This project will create an anisotropic
membrane, moving the concept from purely theoretical to an experimental
demonstration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The anticipated outcome of this project is
a prototype metamaterial membrane from commercially available polymers, and the
first experimental demonstration of mass separation using metamaterials. Using a
metamaterial design based on computations, the project will fabricate a membrane
comprised of concentric cylinders of commercial polymers that provide the
resulting layered structure anisotropic properties that separate air into its
components, i.e. oxygen and nitrogen. The layered structure will be fabricated
by a multiple dip coating of polymer precursor solutions. The polymeric
materials for the prototype were chosen based on commercial availability,
solubility, performance, and ability to impart anisotropy to the layered
membrane. The resulting membrane will be placed in a pressure gradient in a
pressurized cell, with sampling of the product permeate stream via mass
spectrometry. Permeability properties will be measure using flow meters.
Subsequent materials will be developed via integration of the material
performance into computational models. A complementary educational program will
advance scientific development of middle to graduate school students, promote
underrepresented groups in science and engineering, and increase STEM talent
pipeline. The PI will also develop undergraduate level lectures to discuss
technological aspects of mass diffusion in separations and incorporate
computational techniques to solve mass transfer processes. The proposed
education program is expected to play a key role in enhancing STEM talent
pipeline.