* 1744877
* Workshop: Best Practices for using Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) Datasets to determine Robust Evidence of Positive Selection and Convergent Evolution of Polar Organisms.
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2017,11/30/2021
* Scott Santagata, Long Island University
* Standard Grant
* Karla Heidelberg
* 11/30/2021
* USD 49,270.00

This workshop aims to bring together a range of investigators to advance and
coordinate cross-disciplinary approaches for determining genetic adaptations in
polar organisms using datasets derived from Next Generation Sequencing of
organisms DNA (genomes) and RNA (trasncriptomes). In particular, this workshop
will focus on marine invertebrates as a broad taxonomic grouping and focus on
the following efforts. 1) Establishing collaborative research activities that
can test for genes under positive selection from diverse polar organisms using
genomic and transcriptomic datasets. 2) evaluating current analytical methods
for determining positively selected genes among diverse marine organisms 3)
exploring current and novel methodologies for detecting genetic modifications
acquired through convergent evolution in response to similar environmental
conditions and 4) reviewing lab-based protocols for demonstrating the potential
functions of candidate genes identified as being positively selected for by
Antarctic environments. The workshops will also focus discussions and
recommendations to the broader scientific community regarding techniques
amenable to freezing or otherwise preserving samples for future sequencing
inquires. The workshop coordinators will be advertised broadly and recruit
underrepresented groups to participate. Following workshop activities a final
report will be published on the outcomes of the efforts.