* 1744423
* Convergence HTF: From Making to Micro-Manufacture: Reimagining Work Beyond Mass Production
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Francis Quek, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 08/31/2020
* USD 100,000.00

Intelligent, interactive, and highly networked machines --with which people
increasingly share their autonomy and agency--are a growing part of the
landscape, particularly in regard to work. As automation today moves from the
factory floor to knowledge and service occupations, insight and action are
needed to reap the benefits in increased productivity and increased job
opportunities, and to mitigate social costs. The workshop supported by this
award will promote the convergence of multiple fields of inquiry from Computer
Science, Human-Computer Interaction, Electrical and Mechanical Engineering,
Design, Economics, the Social Sciences, Industrial Engineering and Education to
define key challenges and research imperatives of the nexus of humans,
technology, and work. Convergence is the deep integration of knowledge,
theories, methods, and data from multiple fields to form new and expanded
frameworks for addressing scientific and societal challenges and opportunities.
This convergence workshop addresses the future of work at the human-technology
frontier.

The specific focus of this workshop is to foster a discussion about the re-
conceptualization of wealth creation in economically distressed areas by
enabling the production of high quality manufactured goods at scales of hundreds
and thousands in many distributed locations, but in an effective and sustainable
manner. This approach, called "Micro-Manufacture," is grounded in technological
advances that facilitate customized production of artifacts (e.g., 3D printing,
the Internet; mobile devices, etc.). The workshop aims at initiating a
discussion about the feasibility of the micro-manufacturing model. The workshop
will also explore the interplay between Maker-based innovation and the
engineering processes of Micro-Manufacture. To initiate the Micro-Manufacturing
discussion, the perspectives of multiple science, technology, educational and
societal interests need to be included. In particular, it is expected that
research questions emanating from the workshop will require the deep integration
of more than one discipline, from supply chain modeling and product design, to
economics, sociology and education, to name only a few. The expected outcomes of
the workshop will include the formation of a community of researchers with ideas
that cross-cut fields to address Micro-Manufacture; an understanding of how the
multiple related research areas interact and the research that is needed to
enable Micro-Manufacture; and a publication in the form of a collected volume to
inform the research community and broader society of the need, possibility, and
challenges relating to Micro-Manufacture. The broader impacts accrue mainly from
its potential to address society's pressing need for new configurations of work
that may bring employment to a broader range of workers.