* 1744306
* EAGER: Autonomous Self-Healing of Commodity Acrylic Copolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Marek Urban, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2020
* USD 280,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

Polymers exhibit a wealth of useful properties that make these materials
uniquely applicable for a broad range of applications in all areas of technology
and society. If commodity polymers were capable of self-repair upon fracture,
many new applications could be sought out, enabling long-lasting properties, new
functions, and substantial savings. This project seeks to understand the
observed self-healing behavior in a type of commodity polymers (acrylate-based
copolymers) which, in a certain intermediate compositional range undergo
remarkable autonomous repair upon mechanical damage. If this unexplained
observation is understood at a molecular level, it may offer high scientific and
technological payoffs. This project will also explore the design of new
copolymers with self-healing properties, which would reduce their consumption
and have positive ecological impacts. This new fundamental knowledge may be used
to explore other commodity polymers and at the same time train students in an
interdisciplinary manner and prepare them to tackle global technological
challenges.



TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This project aims to elucidate molecular origins of a surprising self-healing in
commodity poly(methyl methacrylate/n-butyl acrylate), p(MMA/nBA), copolymers.
This will be pursued by precisely synthesizing alternating, random, and block
copolymers in the 45/55 - 55/45 MMA/nBA molar compositional range, correlating
with the extent of self-healing, and identifying molecular events that govern
this unique behavior. For that purpose, narrow dispersity copolymers with
variable block sizes will be synthesized using atom transfer radical
polymerization (ATRP) and heterogeneous radical polymerization (HRP). These
experiments will allow to determine the role of the neighboring MMA and nBA
copolymer repeating units on conformational changes during the damage-repair
cycle and subsequent self-repair. The role of free radicals which can be
potentially generated during mechanical damage as a function of copolymer
molecular weight and copolymer topologies, and particularly their role in
rebonding, will also be investigated. Since chain cleavage and/or slippage are
expected to be copolymer-composition dependent, to identify molecular events
responsible for self-healing, in-situ surface/interfacial chemical imaging
(IR/Raman), electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR), and nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) spectroscopy will be utilized. If intrinsic free radicals are
generated during mechanical damage, they will act as dynamic nuclear
polarization (DNP) agents to selectively enhance the magic-angle spinning (MAS)
NMR signals of nuclei at the damage site. These measurements will be conducted
as a function of copolymer topology, molecular weight, and dispersity, and will
provide information about specific atomic-level conformation of the polymer
chains, concentration levels of free radicals, and the nature of chemical groups
at the site of damage. The planned experimental studies will parallel molecular
dynamics simulations which will examine the role of van der Waals and other
interactions on copolymer topologies and self-healing behavior.