* 1744367
* Modeling Caribou Migrations and Traditional Hunting Strategies in a Virtual World Simulation
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* John O'Shea, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 08/31/2023
* USD 168,847.00

Caribou are one of the most significant animals in the Arctic. They are
intimately tied to the people, history, and ecology of the region. This project
will bring together archaeologists, computer scientists, geographers, ecologists
and Alaska Native rights holders to investigate caribou migrations prior to the
dramatic reduction in caribou numbers during the 18th Century. A unique aspect
of this project is the creation of a virtual world model of the past environment
for a portion of ancient Alaska. The researchers will then ask experienced
Alaska Native hunters to enter the virtual world to seek migrating caribou under
different conditions. Using virtual reality googles and similar equipment, the
hunters will be able to experience the model world as if they were actually
there. By following their movements and listening to their descriptions the
researchers will be able tell how well the model is simulating reality. By
comparing the model with the hunting locations chosen by ancient hunters known
from archaeology, the research team hopes to see how conditions of the
environment and of caribou numbers have changed over time. In addition to
informing us about the past, the model will provide a valuable new tool for
ecologists to think about caribou migrations and how they might be altered in
response to future oil and gas development within the region. Beyond the
scientific value of the research, the inclusion of Alaska Native communities in
the design process will provide an opportunity for them to inform the model. The
gaming format developed from the model will provide a valuable (and easily
accessible) educational tool for K-12 students in Alaska, encourage interest in
science and technology (STEM) among Alaska Native students, and provide
opportunities for the involvement citizen scientists more
broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In consultation with Alaska Native communities and
local experts the research team will adapt a virtual world model of caribou
migration developed for the Early Holocene period in the Great Lakes region and
apply it to a portion of modern Alaska. The present proposal has two main goals.
To allow the research team to become acquainted with the Arctic context of the
research and to establish the necessary collaborative contacts particularly
among Alaska Native scholars, to ground the virtual world simulation in Alaska.
Second, to recruit one or more Alaska Native hunters to experience the current
virtual world simulation via an immersive augmented reality system. The placing
of knowledgeable hunters within a virtual world simulation as a means of
exploring the interactions of human actors in modeled environments is an
emerging approach to behavioral research in many fields, and this will be among
the first systematic applications of the approach to anthropology. Through these
activities, the research team will verify the basic elements of the virtual
world simulation and fine tune the augmented reality system for recording the
movements and comments of the hunters as they traverse the model landscape.
These results will also provide important data for better understanding the
Early Holocene occupation of the Great Lakes region and will highlight
differences in hunting strategies and tactics observed in recent and ancient
times. The work will also lay the foundation for a systematic remote sensing
survey of built hunting structures (both recent and ancient) in an
archaeologically under-research portion of Alaska.