* 1744187
* EAGER:   Magnetic Induction Based Communications for Fresh Food  Distribution Monitoring
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Krishna Kant, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 150,000.00

Transportation and distribution of fresh food is a huge and growing enterprise
due to increasing consumption and expectations of "freshness" from the public.
Yet, fresh food transportation and distribution (T&D) is very inefficient in
terms of substantial spoilage and wastage, dismal utilization of T&D capacity,
and large energy and carbon footprint for transportation and storage.
Furthermore, fresh food is almost entirely responsible for large annual
incidence of food borne illnesses in the US and elsewhere. The purpose of this
research is to develop basic communications and localization technologies for
online monitoring of the freshness and contamination in fresh food as it flows
through the T&D system starting at a packaging center up to the retailer or
institutional customer. Fresh food is usually packed in boxes, which are further
stacked into pallets or other bigger packages and carried on carriers (e.g.,
trucks) or stored in warehouses on their way to the distribution endpoints.
Assuming a suitable sensor and a radio deployed in each box, the research
explores the communication of food quality and contamination out to the next
level (e.g., truck or warehouse). This would enable deployment of large scale
information technology infrastructure for monitoring and decision making to
enhance food freshness, safety and traceability, reduce food waste, and increase
T&D utilization and energy efficiency.

The box level communication is quite challenging using normal radio frequency
(RF) mechanisms due to very densely packed radios, a difficult radio propagation
media (tissue, water, salts), and the need for extremely low energy consumption.
The key proposition of this research is that Magnetic Induction (MI)-based
communication can work reliably in this environment with very low energy
consumption. Through actual experiments and simulations, this research will
develop the MI channel model for a variety of situations (e.g., different types
of fresh food products, boxes, box arrangements) and study key issues of
isotropicity, interference, and impact of conductive material (e.g., truck
walls). It will exploit the characterization to study two key functionalities:
(a) use of multihop MI communications to forward sensed data to a "hub node"
located in the truck/warehouse, from where it can use RF communications
technologies for forwarding, and (b) reliable localization, or identification of
the box sending the data. The research will also study mechanisms to maximize
sensor lifetimes to multiple years so that battery change issues are largely
avoided.