* 1744649
* Ice Dynamics at the Intersection of the West and East Antarctic Ice Sheets
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Eric Steig, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 07/31/2023
* USD 845,944.00

The response of the Antarctic ice sheet to climate change is a central issue in
projecting global sea-level rise. While much attention is focused on the ongoing
rapid changes at the coastal margin of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet, obtaining
records of past ice-sheet and climate change is the only way to constrain how an
ice sheet changes over millennial timescales. Whether the West Antarctic Ice
Sheet collapsed during the last interglacial period (~130,000 to 116,000 years
ago), when temperatures were slightly warmer than today, remains a major
unsolved problem in Antarctic glaciology. Hercules Dome is an ice divide located
at the intersection of the East Antarctic and West Antarctic ice sheets. It is
ideally situated to record the glaciological and climatic effects of changes in
the West Antarctic Ice Sheet. This project will establish whether Hercules Dome
experienced major changes in flow due to changes in the elevation of the two ice
sheets. The project will also ascertain whether Hercules Domes is a suitable
site from which to recover climate records from the last interglacial period.
These records could be used to determine whether the West Antarctic Ice Sheet
collapsed during that period. The project will support two early-career
researchers and train students at the University of Washington. Results will be
communicated through outreach programs in coordination the Ice Drilling Project
Office, the University of Washington's annual Polar Science Weekend in Seattle,
and art-science collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a
history of ice dynamics at the intersection of the East and West Antarctic ice
sheets, and ascertain whether the site is suitable for a deep ice-coring
operation. Ice divides provide a unique opportunity to assess the stability of
past ice flow. The low deviatoric stresses and non-linearity of ice flow causes
an arch (a "Raymond Bump") in the internal layers beneath a stable ice divide.
This information can be used to determine the duration of steady ice flow. Due
to the slow horizontal ice-flow velocities, ice divides also preserve old ice
with internal layering that reflects past flow conditions caused by divide
migration. Hercules Dome is an ice divide that is well positioned to retain
information of past variations in the geometry of both the East and West
Antarctic Ice Sheets. This dome is also the most promising location at which to
recover an ice core that can be used to determine whether the West Antarctic Ice
Sheet collapsed during the last interglacial period. Limited ice-penetrating
radar data collected along a previous scientific surface traverse indicate well-
preserved englacial stratigraphy and evidence suggestive of a Raymond Bump, but
the previous survey was not sufficiently extensive to allow thorough
characterization or determination of past changes in ice dynamics. This project
will conduct a dedicated survey to map the englacial stratigraphy and subglacial
topography as well as basal properties at Hercules Dome. The project will use
ground-based ice-penetrating radar to 1) image internal layers and the ice-sheet
basal interface, 2) accurately measure englacial attenuation, and 3) determine
englacial vertical strain rates. The radar data will be combined with GPS
observations for detailed topography and surface velocities and ice-flow
modeling to constrain the basal characteristics and the history of past ice
flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.