* 1744483
* NSF INCLUDES DDLP: American Indian Traditional Science Experience
* O/D,OIA
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2021
* William Swaney, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Bernice Anderson
* 12/31/2021
* USD 299,937.00

The AITSE project, an NSF INCLUDES Design and Development Launch Pilot, will
address broadening participation challenges specifically related to engaging
American Indians in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM)
disciplines. Many Native students decide not to pursue STEM degrees because of
their low proficiency in math and science, perpetuating their
underrepresentation in STEM fields and hindering technological advancements in
their communities. This pilot effort will develop an innovative strategy that
integrates the talents and resources of a diverse set of partners, after-school
hands-on and Indigenous-based learning/research opportunities, and long-term
programming to create a transformative experience to increase Native engagement
in the STEM enterprise. The AITSE Network pilot project partners will include,
but are not limited to, programs affiliated with a state university, Tribal
colleges, Tribal education partners, and regional middle
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use the collective impact
framework to unite a network of partners to improve STEM engagement for
Indigenous youth and their communities. The pilot focuses initially on one
reservation in Montana and will expand to seven additional reservations to
achieve the following project goals: (1) develop a network of cross-sector
partners to collectively impact STEM education in Native populations; (2)
increase the competency and positively influence the attitude of Native students
in math and science, with a preliminary focus on middle school, through
experiential and community-based learning that is culturally relevant, and (3)
build community awareness and investment in STEM in Native communities and
within Native leadership and governance. The expansion of this pilot project
will further develop and reinforce this network to support the success and
inclusion of these students through post-secondary study in a STEM discipline,
as well as translate a coordinated STEM education pathway model that is infused
with indigenous content to Native communities nationwide.