* 1744523
* NSF INCLUDES DDLP:  Project SYSTEMIC (A Systems-Thinking Approach to STEM Ecosystem Development In Chicago)
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Elizabeth Lehman, Project Exploration
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Phillips
* 01/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Project SYSTEMIC (A Systems Thinking Approach to STEM Ecosystem Development in
Chicago) will apply systems thinking to a community-level STEM ecosystem
development effort in one of Chicago's largest and most distressed
neighborhoods. The project aims to broaden participation of African American and
low-income Chicago Public School students (preK-12) in STEM learning
opportunities. The proposed model of collaborative change for this project
builds on the work of two coordinated collective impact initiatives--the Chicago
STEM Pathways Cooperative and Austin Coming Together, a network of local
organizations committed to improving educational and economic outcomes for the
community. A key feature of this project is that it adds innovative,
interactive, visual problem structuring and solving strategies to highlight and
uncover the systemic interdependencies that contribute to the BP challenge for
African American youth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will convene a series
of workshops to engage community stakeholders in the mapping of the STEM
ecosystem. A broad and representative cross-section of community stakeholders
will design and develop evidence-based STEM ecosystem organizing and
implementation strategies. Key outcomes anticipated from this project are the
development of a shared understanding, agenda, activities, and commitment to
collectively address the underlying challenges of STEM access and participation
for African American youth. The goal of this community-driven project is to
develop a viable system model that elevates neighborhood voices, historically
excluded from the problem-solving table and decision-making processes, to
leverage existing assets, build local capacity, increase messaging and awareness
of the value of STEM, identify needed new programs, and develop
coordination/resource sharing mechanisms across partners to support
implementation. The evaluation of this project will be grounded in systems
thinking and culturally-responsive approaches that seek to understand the
diverse perspectives of stakeholders while measuring progress toward project
goals. Evaluation data will be used to assess the problem structuring process,
to evaluate the organizational strategy designed to address the structured
problem, and to support adaptive learning among stakeholders.