* 1744218
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Role of Long-Distance Exchange in the Emergence of Social Complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Richard Burger, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2019
* USD 24,262.00

Michelle Young, a Ph.D. candidate at Yale University, will investigate how
interregional interaction between discrete societies affects sociopolitical
development. The primary focus of this research is interaction through long-
distance exchange networks, however; the investigation will also consider the
spread of religious practices and the formation of new pan-regional social
identities in processes of social and cultural change. Archaeological research
is uniquely poised to examine the relationship between exchange and other forms
of interaction in the processes which led to social complexity by revealing how
these factors played out in ancient societies. What and how do societies
"borrow" from one another, and what impact does outside influence have on local
decision-making and development? Although this study examines one particular
case study in prehistory, it contextualizes its findings using models such as
globalization which are relevant to the way one understands the current,
increasingly more interconnected world. The project has already had significant
impacts on the local community at the field site by providing employment and
education opportunities for rural women and students. The professional training
and development of multiple international students and research opportunities
for interested students and investigators will also be made possible through
this investigation. Results from this project will form the basis of two Ph.D.
dissertations and several conference papers and
publications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Young will compare changes in sociopolitical
organization and long-distance interaction through time at the ancient town of
Atalla, located in a peripheral region of Peruvian highlands. This research will
examine interaction by identifying imported and exported goods through chemical
and geological sourcing of obsidian, petrographic and stylistic analyses of
ceramics and chemical identification of cinnabar, a locally available mineral
pigment. The study will also examine non-commercial influence at Atalla through
cross-cultural comparisons of architecture and domestic and ceremonial
practices. These diverse lines of evidence of interaction will converge with
evidence of a complex settlement, the establishment of monumental architecture,
and emergence of social differentiation, allowing investigators to detect causal
relationships if and where they exist. The investigation will clarify the role
of interregional interaction in the development of local complex social
arrangements.