* 1744956
* Student Travel Support for MVAPICH User group (MUG) Meeting
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2018
* Dhabaleswar Panda, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 07/31/2018
* USD 10,000.00

Modern High-Performance Computing (HPC) systems are rapidly evolving with
respect to processor, networking, and I/O technologies. In such a rapidly
changing environment it is critical that the next-generation engineers and
scientists get exposed to the modern architectural trends of HPC systems and
learn how to use the features of these technologies to design HPC software
stacks, learn about the process of open-source software developments and its
sustainability. The annual MVAPICH User Group (MUG) meeting provides an open
forum to exchange information on the design and usage of MVAPICH2 libraries,
which are open-source, high-performance and scalable MPI libraries to take
advantage of the RDMA technology. Travel funding from this project will enable a
set of students (undergraduates and graduates) to attend the MUG meeting. Their
participation will help them to enter the next-generation HPC workforce with
increased expertise on software design, reuse, and sustainability. The MVAPICH
project focuses on the design of high-performance MPI and PGAS runtimes for HPC
systems. Over the years, this project has been able to incorporate new designs
to leverage novel multi-/many-core platforms like Intel Xeon Phis, NVIDIA
GPGPUs, Open POWER, and ARM architectures coupled with Remote Direct Memory
Access (RDMA) enabled commodity networking technologies like InfiniBand, RoCE,
Omni-Path, and 10/40/100GigE with iWARP. An annual MVAPICH User Group (MUG)
meeting was created four years back to provide an open forum to exchange
information on MVAPICH2 libraries. The funding under this grant aims to achieve
increased participation of undergraduate and graduate students working in the
HPC area (systems and applications) in the annual MUG event. The requested
student travel fund will help in attracting a set of students from a range of US
institutions. The participation in an international event such as MUG will
enable the students to get a global picture of the developments happening in the
rapidly evolving HPC domain and open-source software design. The selection
committee will stress on diversity to attract students from minority and under-
represented groups.