* 1744871
* The Nitrogen Isotopic Composition of Diatom Resting Spores in Southern Ocean Sediments: A Source of Bias and/or Paleoenvironmental Information?
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Rebecca Robinson, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 438,235.00

The chemical composition of diatom fossils in the Southern Ocean provides
information about the environmental history of Antarctica, including sea ice
extent, biological production, and ocean nutrient distribution. The sea ice zone
is an important habitat for a group of diatoms, largely from the genus
Chaetoceros, that have a unique life cycle stage under environmental stress,
when they produce a structure called a resting spore. Resting spores are meant
to reseed the surface ocean when conditions are more favorable. The production
of these heavy resting spores tends to remove significant amounts of carbon and
silicon, essential nutrients, out of the surface ocean. As a result, this group
has the potential to remove carbon from the surface ocean and can impact the
sedimentary record scientists use to reconstruct environmental change. This
project explores the role of resting spores in the sedimentary record using the
nitrogen isotopic signature of these fossils and how those measurements are used
to estimate carbon cycle changes. The work will include laboratory incubations
of these organisms to answer if and how the chemistry of the resting spores
differs from that of a typical diatom cell. The incubation results will be used
to evaluate nutrient drawdown in sea ice environments during two contrasting
intervals in earth history, the last ice age and the warm Pliocene. This work
should have significant impact on how the scientific community considers the
impact of seasonal sea ice cover in the Southern Ocean in terms of how it
responds to and regulates global climate. The project provides training and
research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students. Ongoing research
efforts in Antarctic earth sciences will be disseminated through an interactive
display at the home institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work proposed here
will address uncertainties in how Chaetoceros resting spores record surface
nutrient conditions in their nitrogen stable isotopic composition, the relative
impact of their specific signal with respect to the full sedimentary assemblage,
and their potential to bias or enhance environmental reconstructions in the sea
ice zone. Measurements of nitrogen stable isotopes of nitrate, biomass, and
diatom-bound nitrogen and silicon-to-nitrogen ratios of individual species grown
in the laboratory will be used to quantify how resting spores record nutrient
drawdown in the water column and to what degree their signature is biased toward
low nutrient conditions. These relationships will be used to inform diatom-bound
nitrogen isotope reconstructions of nutrient drawdown from a Pliocene coastal
polyna and an open ocean core that spans the last glacial maximum. This proposal
capitalizes on the availability of Southern Ocean isolates of Chaetoceros spp.
collected in 2017 for the proposed culture work and archived sediment cores
and/or existing data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.