* 1744299
* Workshop: Facilitating Empirical Studies of Judicial Behavior on Constitutional Courts from a Comparative Perspective
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Rebecca Gill, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Bornstein
* 08/31/2018
* USD 86,130.00

This proposal will fund a two day workshop to bring together an
interdisciplinary group of scholars who study high courts from a comparative
perspective. The workshop will introduce scholars to various theories and
methodologies used by the disparate group of scholars at the workshop. Workshop
participants will identify new areas of study in order to move from country- and
region-specific studies to a literature that truly involves comparative
research, with the goal or fostering advancement of scientific theory through
cross-fertilization of research perspectives. In addition to offering
established scholars new perspectives on research, the workshop will facilitate
collaborative research among junior and senior scholars, as well as graduate
students. The workshop will develop a research agenda to bring new theoretical
perspectives to the study of high courts from a comparative perspective.

While the study of courts other than the U.S. Supreme Court has matured and
advanced both theoretically and methodologically, there is no unifying theory or
concerted effort to develop a more integrated body of theoretical and empirical
research of high courts. Studies of unique courts, or at best studies of courts
from particular regions, dominate the various literatures. To address this
limitation in the research, the workshop intends to facilitate truly comparative
research that advances theoretical understanding as well as empirical data
collection and verification. The workshop aims to bring together an
interdisciplinary group scholars from various disciplines who focus on disparate
theories and courts, offering an opportunity for dialogue and collaboration. The
workshop will be hosted by Texas A&M University in Fort Worth, Texas. The agenda
will include an overview of dominant themes from various perspectives, a series
of discussions on methodological and theoretical challenges, as well as theory
building and new directions of research.