* 1744477
* NSF INCLUDES DDLP: EMERGE in STEM (Education for Minorities to Effectively Raise Graduation and Employment in STEM
* O/D,OIA
* 01/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Gregory Monty, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Bernice Anderson
* 09/30/2020
* USD 299,824.00

EMERGE in STEM (Education for Minorities to Effectively Raise Graduation and
Employment in STEM) is a NSF INCLUDES Design and Development Launch Pilot. This
project addresses the broadening participation challenge of increasing
participation of women, the at-risk minority population, and the deaf in the
STEM workforce. The project incorporates in and out-of-school career awareness
activities for grades 4-12 in a high poverty community in Guilford County, North
Carolina. EMERGE in STEM brings together a constellation of existing community
partners from all three sectors (public, private, government) to leverage and
expand mutually reinforcing STEM career awareness and workforce development
activities in new ways by using a collective impact approach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on a local network to infuse career
exposure elements into the existing mutually reinforcing STEM activities and
interventions in the community. A STEM education and career exposure software,
Learning Blade, will be used to reach approximately 15,000 students. A shared
measurement system and assessment process will contribute to the evaluation of
the effectiveness of the collective impact strategies, the implementation of
mutually reinforcing activities across the partnership and the extent to which
project efforts attract students to consider STEM careers.