* 1744159
* I-Corps: Approximate Dynamic Programming and Artificial Neural Network Control for Microgrids
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Shuhui Li, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 12/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to act as a
catalyst in the growth of distributed generation and microgrid industries. This
artificial intelligence based control system will potentially provide an
electrical network that is reliable by reducing outages and restoration costs
with incredibly fast bidirectional power flow, secured with real time
diagnostics, self-healing and adaptive capabilities, and more economical by
reducing equipment failures and minimizing power losses. The product potentially
three broad markets, including utilities, distributed generation and consumer.
The solution will enhance energy generation from renewables, improve microgrid
efficiency, reliability, stability and power quality, and add intelligent
control to conventional power systems. Inverter capabilities are presently a
significant challenge for integrating distributed generation sources. The
proposed innovation would potentially provide an appropriate solution to address
this challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project develops a neural
network control technology for microgrid control and management. Microgrids are
one path for integrating renewable and distributed generation sources into the
grid and can generally support a future smart electricity grid. A key challenge
in microgrid adoption is adequate control of power inverters. Problems include
high oscillations when connecting or disconnecting an energy source, fluctuating
voltage and frequency, malfunctions and reliability, competing control between
inverters, and high harmonic distortions. The proposed innovation uses adaptive
dynamic programming and artificial neural networks to implement microgrid
control. It integrates into one controller the advantages of conventional
control methods, including optimal control, proportional integral control,
predictive control, and sliding mode control. The proposed innovation has the
potential to overcome the limitations of the conventional control technologies
and better meet customer demands and requirements.