* 1744255
* EAGER: Development of a Prototype 2D Acoustic Tomography System for Rapid Temperature Measurements in Diffuse Hydrothermal Effluent
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2017,12/31/2019
* Ralph Budwig, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 12/31/2019
* USD 51,826.00

Mid-ocean ridges, the boundaries between separating tectonic plates, are some of
the most volcanically active features on Earth. Along many ridges, storage of
molten magma in shallow chambers results in heating of seawater stored in the
porous crust. Thermally buoyant, this seawater rises through the crust, is
chemically altered by water-rock interactions, and finally exits the seafloor at
hydrothermal vents. It is now recognized that this type of deep-sea hydrothermal
circulation plays a key role in controlling long-term ocean chemistry, the
thermal and chemical structure of the oceanic crust, and the evolution of unique
and diverse chemosynthetic ecosystems found nowhere else on the planet. However,
quantifying the biological and chemical impact of hydrothermal circulation
requires knowledge of the volume, heat, and chemical fluxes exiting the
seafloor, which are notoriously difficult to quantify. One large source of
uncertainty in flux estimates lies in the widespread distribution of lower-
temperature (&lt;/=100°C) diffuse hydrothermal fluids, which are commonly
transparent and escape through fractures, porous rock, and sediment. It is
estimated that diffuse fluids contribute more to the heat and volume fluxes of
hydrothermal systems than higher temperature (&gt;300°C), "black smoker" style
vents. Existing methods to quantify the flux of diffuse hydrothermal venting are
limited by small measurement areas, measurements of a single quantity (e.g.,
only temperature or only velocity), or are invasive and alter the flow as they
measure it. This project will develop new technologies for improved measurement
of diffuse venting. Researchers will collaborate with University of Idaho,
School of Engineering undergraduate students as part of their senior year
Capstone Design Course to develop a prototype two-dimensional (2D) acoustic
tomography system that can rapidly measure the temperature of anomalously warm,
upwelling diffuse fluids across a ~1 m2 area. Development of these technologies
will lead to future construction of a deep-sea measurement system targeting
diffuse hydrothermal venting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this
project is to develop a prototype two-dimensional (2D) acoustic tomography
system capable of a time series of rapid (1 Hz) measurements of the temperature
of anomalously warm, upwelling fluids at a spatial resolution of centimeters
across a ~1 square meter area. The proposed system will consist of ~20-25
acoustic immersion transducers fixed at known spacing on a square, rigid frame.
A subset of the transducers (~4-6) will emit staggered acoustic chirp pulses and
the system will measure the pulse travel time between the emitting and receiving
transducers. Using travel-time acoustic tomography, these travel times will be
converted to sound speed and finally temperature throughout the 2D domain.
Development will begin with a two-transducer, 1D system to test appropriate
signal frequencies (e.g., kHz or MHz), chirp type (increasing or decreasing
frequency), transducer shapes (e.g., spherical, planar, cylindrical), and
effective measurement rates. Building upon these results, the final prototype
will utilize the optimum transducer shape and pulse frequencies. After
construction, the system will undergo submergence tests at the University of
Idaho with controlled sources of warm, buoyantly rising fluids. To calculate
fluid temperatures, we will evaluate several travel-time inversion methods
including the algebraic reconstruction technique (ART), multiplicative algebraic
reconstruction technique (MART), and simultaneous iterative reconstruction
technique (SIRT). Final results will be compared to thermocouple measurements
distributed throughout the 2D measurement domain.