* 1744490
* NSF INCLUDES DDLP: Leadership and iSTEAM for Females in Elementary school (LiFE): An Integrated Approach to Increase the Number of Women Pursuing Careers in STEM
* O/D,OIA
* 04/01/2018,08/31/2021
* James Lipuma, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bernice Anderson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,473.00

The LiFE Project, an NSF INCLUDES Design and Development Launch Pilot, will
investigate and design a collaborative effort to counter the stereotypical
expectation that boys are "naturally" better at science and math which becomes a
self-fulfilling prophecy, silently shaping the girls'own perceptions of their
ability. LiFE collaborators will address this problem at its source: the early
learning experiences of elementary school girls. The elementary-middle school
period is critical because by 8th grade, many girls have left the STEM pathway
forever. The key to reversing the trend is finding effective ways to showcase
STEM as a collaborative, people-rich space in which girls can participate
together, be themselves, and engage in exploration. Research indicates that
girls prefer collaborative activities that can make a difference in the world.
Partnering with a coalition of economically and racially diverse New Jersey
elementary schools, LiFE will employ "iSTEAM" learning strategies that encourage
girls to apply the tools of various disciplines to investigate and solve real-
world problems in an open environment of innovation, collaboration, and
communication. This approach promises to be especially effective in engaging
girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LiFE will build on a successful Girls Science Club
(GSC) model that introduces girls in grades 3-4 to hands-on iSTEAM exploration
activities using Problem/Project-Based Learning strategies. Additional
activities will leverage the expertise of the project's corporate/government
partners (including Apple and USARMY) to build communication and leadership
skills. LiFE will sustain the GSC's benefits by developing clubs for grades 5-6
involving enriched content and long-term independent projects. Eventually, a
tiered peer network will link girls from elementary school through women college
students and female STEM professionals--each tier mentoring the tiers below.
This network will sustain a crucial "sense of community" to retain women in
STEM. Within LiFE's social innovation framework approach, participating
districts will tailor the GSC to their community while also working together
toward shared common goals. LiFE will study the impact of GSCs on persistence of
girls' interest in STEM into grade 7. Based on this research, LiFE will develop
a cost-effective template that can be replicated across the US. LiFE will bring
problem-based iSTEAM concepts to girls of all academic levels in their
elementary schools years while, having a community focus with participant-
developed projects in a non-competitive environment and leveraging the resources
of academic, corporate and government partners to foster broader participation
by women in STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.