* 1744077
* XPS: DSD: Collaborative Research: NeoNexus: The Next-generation Information Processing System across Digital and Neuromorphic Computing Domains
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Hai Li, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 189,019.00

The explosion of "big data" applications imposes severe challenges of data
processing speed and scalability on traditional computer systems. The
performance of traditional Von Neumann machines is greatly hindered by the
increasing performance gap between CPU and memory, motivating the active
research on new or alternative computing architectures. By imitating brain's
naturally massive parallel architecture with closely coupled memory and
computing as well as the unique analog domain operations, neuromorphic computing
systems are anticipated to deliver superior speed for applications in image
recognition and natural language understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to establish the fundamental framework and design
methodology for NeoNexus -- the next-generation information processing system
inspired by human neocortex. It integrates neuromorphic computing accelerators
with conventional computing resources by leveraging large scale inference-based
data processing and computing acceleration technique atop memristor crossbar
arrays. The computation and data exchange will be carefully coordinated and
supported by the innovative interconnect architecture, i.e., a hierarchical
network-on-chip (NoC). The software-hardware co-design platform will be
developed to address the various design challenges. The project will help
computer architecture and high-performance computing communities to overcome the
ever-increasing technical challenges of traditional architectures and accelerate
the fusion between conventional computing technology and cognitive computing
model. It will also promote the applications of artificial intelligence
technology advances in modern computer architectures and motivate the inventions
at both software and hardware levels. Undergraduate and graduate students
involved in this research will be trained for the next-generation semiconductor
industry workforce.