* 1744883
* Comprehensive Seismic and Thermal Models for Antarctica and the Southern Oceans: A Synthesis of 15-years of Seismic Exploration
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Weisen Shen, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 172,600.00

The geological structure and history of Antarctica remains poorly understood
because much of the continental crust is covered by ice. Here, the PIs will
analyze over 15 years of seismic data recorded by numerous projects in
Antarctica to develop seismic structural models of the continent. The seismic
velocity models will reveal features including crustal thinning due to rifting
in West Antarctica, the structures associated with mountain building, and the
boundaries between different tectonic blocks. The models will be compared to
continents that are better understood geologically to constrain the tectonic
evolution of Antarctica. In addition, the work will provide better insight into
how the solid earth interacts with and influences the development of the ice
sheet. Surface heat flow will be mapped and used to identify regions in
Antarctica with potential melting at the base of the ice sheet. This melt can
lead to reduced friction and lower resistance to ice sheet movement. The models
will help to determine whether the earth response to ice mass changes occurs
over decades, hundreds, or thousands of years. Estimates of mantle viscosity
calculated from the seismic data will be used to better understand the pattern
and timescales of the response of the solid earth to changes in ice mass in
various parts of Antarctica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will advance our
knowledge of the structure of Antarctica by constructing two new seismic models
and a thermal model using different but complementary methodologies. Because of
the limitations of different seismic analysis methods, efforts will be divided
between a model seeking the highest possible resolution within the upper 200 km
depth in the well instrumented region (Bayesian Monte-Carlo joint inversion),
and another model determining the structure of the entire continent and
surrounding oceans extending through the mantle transition zone (adjoint full
waveform inversion). The Monte-Carlo inversion will jointly invert Rayleigh wave
group and phase velocities from earthquakes and ambient noise correlation along
with P-wave receiver functions and Rayleigh H/V ratios. The inversion will be
done in a Bayesian framework that provides uncertainty estimates for the
structural model. Azimuthal anisotropy will be determined from Rayleigh wave
velocities, providing constraints on mantle fabric and flow patterns. The
seismic data will also be inverted for temperature structure, providing
estimates of lithospheric thickness and surface heat flow. The larger-scale
model will cover the entire continent as well as the surrounding oceans, and
will be constructed using an adjoint inversion of phase differences between
three component seismograms and synthetic seismograms calculated in a 3D earth
model using the spectral element method. This model will fit the entire
waveforms, including body waves and both fundamental and higher mode surface
waves. Higher resolution results will be obtained by using double-difference
methods and by incorporating Green's functions from ambient noise cross-
correlation, and solving for both radial and azimuthal
anisotropy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.