* 1744758
* INSIGT: Investigating Shear-margin Interactions with Grounding-line Transitions
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Jenny Suckale, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 07/31/2023
* USD 414,152.00

Antarctica is losing most of its mass through rapid and localized ice flow in
outlet glaciers and ice streams. While the position and width of outlet glaciers
are often largely controlled by the underlying landscape (e.g., ice flow through
gaps in mountains), ice streams flow mostly over sedimentary basins with little
or no topographic control on their lateral boundaries. Despite these
differences, both ice streams and outlet glaciers are potentially prone to
unstable retreat. One of the key mechanisms responsible for this rapid ice loss
is the marine ice-sheet instability, in which continued retreat may be induced
in areas where the bathymetry slopes inland. This instability has been primarily
studied for outlet glaciers with lateral topographic bounds on ice flow.
Consequently, this project explores the effect and applicability of the marine
ice-sheet instability to ice streams without those topographic bounds on their
margins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand whether
and how the mechanism of the marine ice-sheet instability applies to ice
streams. To achieve this goal, the team will study how ice streams respond to
the retreat of the grounding line, where ice loses contact with the bed and
starts floating in the ocean. The team will focus on understanding the coupling
between grounding-line retreat and ice-stream lateral boundaries rather than
initiation of grounding-line retreat. It is hypothesized that both the width and
flow speed of ice streams would be affected by retreat, because ice-stream
dynamics are extremely sensitive to the force-balance between the bed, margins,
and driving stress. More specifically, the team hypothesizes that the bed slope
is less relevant in the case of ice streams than it is for outlet glaciers,
because ice streams have the potential to widen in response to retreat,
exacerbating ice loss even in the absence of a landward sloping bed. This
mechanism, however, depends on the resistance to both widening and flow
acceleration, which is sensitively dependent on the subglacial hydrology between
ice and the sedimentary layer underneath. The team will test its hypothesis
through a customized numerical modeling approach developed for this purpose and
will compare model predictions to observational constraints from past ice flow
in the Siple Coast region of West Antarctica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.