* 1744497
* NSF INCLUDES DDLP Statewide Consortium: Supporting Underrepresented Populations in Precalculus by Organizational Redesign toward Engineering Diversity
* ENG,EEC
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2020
* Derek Brown, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 11/30/2020
* USD 299,994.00

Improving retention rates in postsecondary engineering degree programs is the
single most effective approach for addressing the national shortage of skilled
engineers. Both mathematics course placement and performance are strong
graduation predictors in engineering, even after controlling for demographic
characteristics. Underrepresented students (e.g., rural students, low-income
students, first-generation students, and students of color) are
disproportionately represented in cohorts that enter engineering programs not
yet calculus-ready. Frequently, the time and cost of obtaining an engineering
degree is increased, and the likelihood of obtaining the degree is also reduced.
This educational problem is particularly acute for African American students who
attended select high schools in South Carolina, with extremely high-poverty
rates. As a result, the investigators proposed an NSF INCLUDES Launch Pilot
project to develop a statewide consortium in South Carolina - comprising all of
the public four-year institutions with ABET-approved engineering degree
programs, all of the technical colleges, and 118 high schools with 70% or higher
poverty rates, to pinpoint and address the barriers that prevent these students
from being calculus ready in engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF
INCLUDES Launch Pilot project will map completion/attrition pathways of students
by collecting robust cross-sectional data to identify and understand the complex
linkages between and behind critical decisions. Such data have not been
available to this extent, especially focused on diverse populations. Further, by
developing structural equation models (SEMs), the investigators will be able to
build on extant research, contributing directly to understanding the relative
impact of a range of latent variables on the development of engineering
identity, particularly among African American, rural, low-income, and first-
generation engineering students. Results of the pilot interventions are likely
to contribute to the empirical and theoretical literature that focus on
engineering persistence among underrepresented populations. Project plans also
include developing a centralized database compatible to the Multiple Institution
Database for Investigation of Engineering Longitudinal Development (MIDFIELD)
project to share institutional data with K-12 and postsecondary administrators,
engineering educators, and education researchers with NSF INCLUDES projects and
beyond.