* 1744663
* Collaborative Research: Diversity and ecological impacts of Antarctic mixotrophic phytoplankton
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Rebecca Gast, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Maria Vernet
* 08/31/2022
* USD 332,929.00

Traditional models of oceanic food chains have consisted of photosynthetic algae
(phytoplankton) being ingested by small animals (zooplankton), which were
ingested by larger animals (fish). These traditional models changed as new
methods allowed recognition of the importance of bacteria and other non-
photosynthetic ?protozoa? in more complex food webs. More recently, the wide-
spread existence of mixotrophs (organisms that can both photosynthesize and
ingest food particles) and their importance as microbial predators has been
recognized in many oceanographic areas. In the Southern Ocean, the only two
surveys of mixotrophs have suggested that there may be seasonal differences in
their importance as predators. During the long polar night (winter), the ability
of mixotrophs to ingest particulate food may aid in their survival thus ensuring
a sufficient population in spring to support a phytoplankton bloom once
photosynthesis rates can increase. Thus mixotrophs may provide a critical early
food source upon which zooplankton and larger animals depend on for growth and
reproduction. This project will advance understanding of mixotroph diversity and
their ecological impact within the Southern Ocean microbial food web.
Specifically, efforts will be focused on mixotrophy in the western Antarctica
peninsula region during the austral spring and autumn when there are likely to
be changes in the relative importance of photosynthesis and ingestion to
mixotrophs. The project will provide research opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate students and a post-doctoral researcher. There will be real-time
outreach from the Southern Ocean to the public via blogs and interviews, and to
high school art students through an established program that blends science and
art education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite traditional views of protists as
either "phototrophic" or "heterotrophic," there are many photosynthetic protists
that consume prey (mixotrophy). Mixotrophy is a widespread phenomenon in aquatic
systems and phytoplankton groups with known mixotrophic species, notably
chrysophytes, cryptophytes, prymnesiophytes, prasinophytes and dinoflagellates,
are present and often abundant in Antarctic waters. However, in the Southern
Ocean, the presence of mixotrophic phytoflagellates has been surveyed only
twice: in the Ross Sea during Austral spring 2008 and summer 2011. The primary
goals of the project are to gain better understanding of mixotroph diversity and
their ecological impact with respect to the Southern Ocean microbial food web.
The contribution of mixotrophs to primary production and bacterial consumption
is likely linked to the taxonomic composition of the community and the abundance
of particular species. Abundances of novel mixotrophic species will be evaluated
via qPCR, which will be coupled with assessments of rates of feeding and
photosynthesis with the goal of describing how active mixotrophs direct the
movement of carbon through food webs. These experiments will help the
determination of how viable and widespread mixotrophy is as a nutritional
strategy in polar waters and give direct information on the currently unknown
diversity of mixotrophic taxa under different environmental conditions occurring
in austral spring and autumn. Furthermore, the methods will simultaneously yield
information on the whole communities of protists - mixotrophic, phototrophic and
heterotrophic. In addition, a method to examine aspects of the taxonomic and
functional diversities of the bacterivorous/mixotrophic community will be
employed. A thymidine analog (BrdU) will be used to label DNA of eukaryotes
feeding on bacteria. The BrdU-labeled eukaryotic DNA will be isolated using
immunoprecipitation. High-throughput sequencing of the labeled DNA
(bacterivores) versus unlabeled community DNA will determine the diversity of
bacterivorous mixotrophs relative to other microeukaryotes. Flow cytometric
sorting based on chlorophyll to focus on mixotrophic species. These approaches
will elucidate a gap in current knowledge of the influence of microbial
interactions in the Southern Ocean under different
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.