* 1744268
* Partial Support for the 3rd Optics and Photonics Winter School and Workshop. To Be  Held at the College of Optical Sciences January 4-8, 2018
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Masud Mansuripur, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 02/28/2018
* USD 10,000.00

Optics &amp; photonics are important areas in which there is a growing national
need for work-force development. A challenge is that many undergraduate schools
are focused on traditional science and engineering curricula, to the extent that
their students may not be fully aware of the opportunities for pursuing a career
in optics &amp; photonics. This grant will provide support for the 3rd Optics
&amp; Photonics Winter School and Workshop to be held at the College of Optical
Sciences in Tucson, AZ January 4-8, 2018. The Optics &amp; Photonics Winter
School and Workshop will be aimed at promoting, supporting, and strengthening
optics &amp; photonics education and research in the United States. The Optics
&amp; Photonics Winter School will give undergraduate students an overview of
key and foundational areas of optics and photonics, and how they are intimately
related to specific fields of research, in hopes of encouraging more
undergraduate students to pursue a career in those fields. The Optics &amp;
Photonics Workshop will provide a forum for students and faculty members to
share and/or learn of research and educational activities in optical sciences
taking place at undergraduate institutions as well as broaden their awareness of
career opportunities. Based on lessons learned from previous events, and in an
effort to more fully utilize the unique perspective of our colleagues from
PUI's, an advisory committee consisting of previous PUI participants has been
formed to help with the planning for the 2018 event. The expected impact of the
Optics &amp; Photonics Winter School and Workshop falls in several areas. First
and foremost, the event will promote and enhance optics and photonics education
at the undergraduate level, thus encouraging more students to pursue a career in
this area and making transparent the advantages of a graduate level education in
an optics program. Secondly, the workshop provides faculty and students from
primarily undergraduate institutes (PUI) with the opportunity to network with
colleagues at similar undergraduate institutes, and with attendees from larger
graduate schools and from the photonics industry. As a result, PUI faculty and
students will become more effective ambassadors for the field of optics, and
better positioned to encourage the pursuit of graduate level optics &amp;
photonics education. This ultimately results in a more highly skilled workforce
in optics and photonics to address the technological and scientific needs of our
society. We request $10k in partial support from the NSF. The positive feedback
from the first two events has generated great enthusiasm within the College of
Optical Sciences, among our participants from PUI's, and from various
stakeholders in optics and photonics education. We have made it a priority for
our College to pursue long-term financial support such that it can eventually be
self-sustaining.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of hosting the Optics and
Photonics Winter School is to give undergraduate students an overview of key and
foundational areas of optics and photonics, and how they are intimately related
to specific fields of research, in hopes of encouraging more undergraduate
students to pursue a career in those fields. The workshop is aimed at faculty
members from primarily undergraduate institutes (PUI's) as well as
undergraduates attending the Winter School. The workshop will provide a forum
for undergraduate students and PUI faculty members to share and/or learn of
research and educational activities in optical sciences taking place at
undergraduate institutions. The College of Optical Sciences hosted the 1st and
2nd Optics and Photonics Winter School and Workshop in January 2016 and January
2017, with essential core support from NSF. By most accounts, the first two
winter schools and workshops were a great success. The January 2017 event
brought in 54 undergraduate students for the winter school and 21 faculty from
their home departments for the workshop. More details can be found in the event
website, including the conference program, copies of all lecture notes from the
winter school, and videos of most presentations. See
http://wp.optics.arizona.edu/winter-school-workshop/. We request partial support
of the January 2018 event from the NSF in the amount of $10k.