* 1744271
* EAGER:  Long Term Reliable Neural Recordings and Neuro Modulation Using GHz to THz Ultrasonics
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Ankur Singh, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 07/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

Brain machine interfaces in the broadest sense have potential impacts on
treating diseases and providing new mechanisms for human-machine communications.
Thousands of new cases of spinal cord injury result in almost quarter million
individuals in various degrees of paraplegia, due to automobile accidents,
violent incidents, and other physical traumas. The affected individuals are
treated by surgery and often require prosthetics which are in many ways
primitive owing to a lack of information bandwidth between the brain and the
prosthetic actuators and associated control electronics. This project could lead
to reliable brain machine interfaces to neurons and peripheral axons to covey
greater bandwidth of information over the lifetime of patients. Many patients
suffering from Parkinson's disease can utilize life-long neural interfaces to
feedback control electrical activities both through reliable sensing and
actuation. Ultrasonic methods to reliably express stem cells into healthy
neurons may lead to a targeted approach to repairing damaged parts of the brain
by focused expression of stem cells inside brain and peripheral tissues.
Reliable life-long interfaces will also lead to new ways for society to be
productive. Being able to collect brain signals and using the data to ascertain
processing required in daily life may provide new ways for humans to accomplish
more tasks providing a productivity boost needed for society to progress into
the future. This project will also train an electrical engineering student in
biology and neural engineering producing a multidisciplinary skill-set. The work
will also result in a new course on Science and Technology of GHz to THz
Ultrasonic, generating an online course material aimed from K-12 to graduate
program in Applied Physics, Electrical Engineering, and Biomedical
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impact of electronic interfaces to
neuroscience and neuro therapy is limited by two major challenges. One challenge
is the failure of electrical neural interfaces over long term, and the other is
the lack of technology for non-invasive, localized excitation of axons and
neurons with 1-5Ã¬m resolution for nerve activation and healing using stem cell
therapies. Electrical interfaces consisting of electrodes that sample neuron
generated potentials and currents are regularly used in research, some even with
RF-powered and RF-data linked implantable systems have been developed. However,
the neural probes do not last beyond a few weeks to a few months, as tissue
buildup on the electrodes insulates the signal flow, even with capacitive
readout. This broad exploratory project will lead to the identification of new
effects of high frequency ultrasonics from GHz to THz, applied to neural cells
and tissues. This capability is largely unexplored owing to the difficulty of
conducting high frequency ultrasonic in the laboratory, and have the results
translated to actual use in animal models and eventually into humans. By using a
technology that enables miniaturization into CMOS chips, new ultrasonic effects
may be discovered that can be translated into practice for life-long viable
neural interfaces. These effects include new modes of ultrasonic absorption in
ultrahigh frequency ranges, and in neural environments with time varying
chemical and physical changes. Using the very small wavelengths in the 10s of
microns to nanometer range, ultrasonic waves can be focused to individual neural
components such as a single axon of a nerve bundle, without invasive probes.