* 1744006
* EAGER:  PPER Developing Drought-Resilient Communities by Utilizing Acrylic Concrete Structures for Rainwater Harvesting
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Joel Mejia, Angelo State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2019
* USD 99,997.00

This research project uses both citizen science and crowdsourcing in the design,
construction, and utilization of acrylic concrete structures for rainwater
harvesting in San Angelo, Texas, an area prone to persistent droughts. By
engaging citizens in water sampling and water quality testing this project gains
insight into leaching of acrylic concrete leachate in these rainwater harvesting
systems and aids in the development of low-cost, sustainable rainwater
harvesting systems that can support human consumption of this harvested water.

In this research project, citizen scientists participate by collecting rainwater
in their backwards, submitting measurements of captured rainwater through a
mobile friendly platform, responding to surveys and interviews on the rainwater
system, and participating in community workshops for continued and adaptive
project design. Through this engagement process this research project seeks to
expand the literature on engaging with vulnerable populations in citizen science
water quality projects by considering local epistemologies and socioeconomic
status in project design and implementation. This project has three goals to
advance emerging rainwater harvesting technology: 1) advance the state of design
and manufacturing of acrylic concrete that is used as a low-cost, sustainable
rainwater harvesting system, 2) advance understanding of acrylic concrete
leachate in the captured rainwater expand its use from irrigation purposes to
human consumption, and, 3) fill a gap in the literature on how local knowledge
in vulnerable populations plays an important role in water centric citizen
science. The project design has continuous community outreach, engagement and
assessment through three workshops titles, "construction", "water", and, "next
steps", that recruit and take participants through the research project, step by
step. The project is generating a framework to facilitate engagement of
community members and vulnerable populations in engineering through civil
engineering research.