* 1744348
* Convergence HTF: Future Workforce Implications of Autonomous Trucks: Workshop on the Sociotechnical Research Challenges, Benefits, and Opportunities
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Jeff Hickman, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Meghan Houghton
* 08/31/2018
* USD 94,204.00

The landscape of jobs and work is changing rapidly, driven by the development of
new technologies. Intelligent, automated machines and services are a growing
part of jobs and the workplace. The potential benefits of these technologies
include increased productivity, job satisfaction, and new opportunities. But,
technology connected to work can also come with risks. The workshop supported by
this award will identify research imperatives related to the effects of emerging
autonomous trucks on the U.S. economy and, more specifically, how autonomous
trucks will affect the current and future trucking workforce. The workshop will
promote the convergence of computer science, transportation and civil
engineering, autonomy, economics, education, law, psychology, and sociology to
define key challenges and research opportunities at the nexus of humans,
technology, and work. This convergence workshop will employ deep integration of
knowledge, theories, methods, and data from multiple fields to form new and
expanded research frameworks. The results will include identification and
sharing of new research directions and tools to understand and harness the value
of autonomous vehicle technologies on the trucking workforce, while mitigating
potential negative consequences. This convergence workshop addresses the future
of work at the human-technology frontier. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Specifically,
this workshop seeks to develop a holistic and integrated research agenda for
investigating the impact of emerging autonomous vehicle technologies on the
trucking workforce from both technical and social dimensions. The transportation
system is expected to undergo major changes with the introduction of autonomous
vehicles. By 2050, 80% of vehicles will likely be autonomous vehicles. This is
expected to result in an estimated 21,700 lives saved and 4.2 million fewer
crashes each year as well as reduced traffic congestion, increased fuel
efficiency, and increased productivity. As a disruptive yet beneficial
technology, autonomous vehicles, ranging from driver assistance to fully
automated vehicles, will also have implications for the trucking workforce. The
introduction of AVs may also create new job opportunities for science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics employees, including the skilled
technical workforce, contributing to the development of enabling technology.
This workshop will integrate perspectives from different domains to identify the
challenges, barriers, research needs, and potential solutions related to
autonomous trucks. Although previous efforts have focused on individual
components or isolated systems with respect to the deployment of autonomous
trucks, the proposed workshop will develop a fully integrated, system-wide
approach to address this topic. The workshop attendees will represent a group of
experts that will identify the optimum strategies and techniques to address the
impacts of autonomous truck deployment on the U.S. economy. One of the primary
outcomes will be a report describing research and education opportunities for
academia, in concert with public and private sector stakeholders. The proposed
workshop and future research agenda will ultimately benefit all road users and
consumers in addition to those working in the trucking industry.