* 1744502
* NSF INCLUDES DDLP: Expanding Diversity in Energy and Environmental Sustainability through the creation of learning opportunities for minority students in the Mid-Atlantic region
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Gabriel Gwanmesia, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2019
* USD 298,592.00

This NSF INCLUDES Design and Development Launch Pilot, "Expanding Diversity in
Energy and Environmental Sustainability (EDEES)", will develop a network of
institutions in the United States mid-Atlantic region to recruit, train, and
prepare a significant number of underrepresented, underserved, and
underprivileged members of the American society in the areas of alternative
energy generation and environmental sustainability. Researchers from Delaware
State University (DSU) will lead the effort in collaboration with scientists and
educators from the University of Delaware, Delaware Technical Community College,
University of Maryland, and Stony Brook University. The program comprises a
strong educational component in different aspects of green energy generation and
environmental sciences including the development of a baccalaureate degree in
Green Energy Engineering and the further growth of the recently established
Renewable Energy Education Center at our University. The program comprises an
active involvement of students from local K-12 institutions, including Delaware
State University Early College High School. The character of the University as a
Historically Black College (HBCU) and the relatively high minority population of
the region will facilitate the completion of the goal to serve minority
students. The program will also involve the local community and the private
sector by promoting the idea of a green City of Dover, Delaware, in the years to
come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of EDEES-INCLUDES pilot comprises the
enrollment of at least twenty underrepresented minority students in majors
related to green energy and environmental sustainability. It also entails the
establishment of a baccalaureate degree in Green Energy Engineering at DSU. The
program is expected to strengthen the pathway from two-year energy-related
associate degree programs to four-year degrees by ensuring at least five
students/year transfer to DSU in energy-related programs. The pilot is also
expected to increase the number of high school graduates from underrepresented
groups who choose to attend college in STEM majors. Based on previous experience
and existing collaborations, the partner institutions expect to grow as an
integrated research-educational network where students will be able to obtain
expertise in the competitive field of green energy. The pilot program comprises
a deep integration of education and research currently undergoing in the
involved institutions. In collaboration with its partner institutions, DSU plans
to consistently and systematically involve students from the K-12 system to
nurture the future recruitment efforts of the network. A career in Green Energy
Engineering is using and expanding up existing infrastructure and
collaborations. The program will involve the local community through events,
workshops and open discussions on energy related fields using social networks
and other internet technology in order to promote energy literacy.