* 1744626
* A Changing Electoral Politics in Western Democracies: Comparing the 2017 British Election to France, Germany, the United States, and Southern Europe within the Comparative National
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2018
* Erik Nisbet, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2018
* USD 54,188.00

The system of stable and consensual democracy in Britain is fraying at the
edges. Anti-establishment populist political movements are on the rise, the
traditional bases of party support have shifted, the public is deeply divided on
many issues, most visibly Brexit, and Scotland is threatening a second
independence referendum. However, these kinds of startling developments in
political behavior and party system structure are not unique to Britain. Rather,
they seem to be symptomatic of changes in many other established western
democracies. This project proposes a study of British voters in the June 8, 2017
general election. That enterprise is an interesting topic in its own right. It
also provides an opportunity to compare voting behavior in one country with that
in seven other western democracies. The project is a part of the larger
Comparative National Election Project (CNEP), which consists of surveys on
recent national elections in the United States, France, and four Southern
European countries, along with an upcoming 2017 post-election survey in Germany.
The CNEP's common core survey design allows for systematic comparison across the
eight cases. The CNEP survey in Great Britain will produce significant impacts
by leveraging data collection from seven other western democracies, and through
a collaborative network of country and cross-national election experts. The
project holds the potential to shed insights on factors that can help strengthen
democracy, encourage citizen participation and engagement, improve political
communication, and address negative consequences resulting from political
polarization. The team will disseminate data and findings widely. The
investigators plan to publicize their findings to the public via media
interviews, university publicity, essays on such platforms such as The
Conversation and the Washington Post's Monkey Cage blog, white papers, and
community talks.

A survey of voters in the British general election on June 8, 2017 provides the
opportunity for theoretically-driven comparative research examining contemporary
voting behavior in the four largest (or core) western democracies: the United
States, France, Germany, and Great Britain, all of which have held national
elections within the a year of each other. Parallel surveys of the 2016
presidential election in the United States and the May 7 second-round French
presidential election have been completed, and a parallel survey of the
September federal legislative elections in Germany is in the works. These
studies all utilize the common core questionnaire that has been at the center of
49 post-election surveys in 27 countries over the past three decades under the
auspices of the Comparative National Elections Project (CNEP). Use of a common
questionnaire and the availability of four CNEP surveys of elections recently
held in southern Europe greatly facilitates comparative analysis. The strength
of the proposed project is the systematic comparative analysis it allows of
voting behavior across these eight western democracies, at least three of which
have undergone substantial party-system realignment in recent years. Additional
analytical insights concerning certain core CNEP concerns, such as attitudes
toward democracy, will be gained by selective comparative analysis of these
eight political systems with several semi-democratic countries (e.g. Turkey)
that have been surveyed in the last three years using the core CNEP
questionnaire. The primary aim of the research is to seek to explain the
fundamental challenges to established patterns of voting behavior and the
structure of party systems that emerged in recent years. The team does so
focusing on factors such as responses to economic stress, changing patterns of
political intermediation, demand for and satisfaction with democracy, and
political polarization. Beyond enabling analysis of British voters in 2017, the
CNEP British survey will have a strong multiplier effect by leveraging data
collection from the 3 core western democracies and 4 southern Europe countries,
as well as by drawing upon a network of country and cross-national election
experts. The outcomes are expected to include a volume charting new patterns of
electoral politics in core western democracies and southern Europe, papers and
peer-reviewed publications analyzing the major underlying factors impacting
stability and change in party support in the core western democratic countries
and the public release of the British dataset after an embargo period.