* 1744359
* Convergence HTF: Making "The Future of Work" Work: A Convergence Workshop on Experiments in Tech Work-Maker Culture, Coworking, Cooperatives, Entrepreneurship &amp; Digital Labor
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Silvia Lindtner, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 01/31/2023
* USD 99,185.00

Intelligent, interactive, and highly networked machines -- with which people
increasingly share their autonomy and agency -- are a growing part of the
landscape, particularly in regard to work. As automation today moves from the
factory floor to knowledge and service occupations, insight and action are
needed to reap the benefits in increased productivity and increased job
opportunities, and to mitigate social costs. The workshop supported by this
award will promote convergence by bringing together computer scientists,
engineers, and social and behavioral scientists with practitioners and
stakeholders to define key challenges and research imperatives at the nexus of
humans, technology, and work. Convergence is the deep integration of knowledge,
theories, methods, and data from multiple fields to form new and expanded
frameworks for addressing scientific and societal challenges and opportunities.
This convergence workshop addresses the future of work at the human-technology
frontier.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will focus on developing a
convergent research agenda aimed at understanding how experiments with new forms
of work, such as makerspaces, co-working spaces, incubators, and tech
entrepreneurship, are transforming the nature of work, the labor force, and many
industries. It will bring together scholars from a diverse set of disciplines,
including computer science, anthropology, economics, science and technology
studies, sociology of work/labor, and engineering along with stakeholders
(entrepreneurs, makers, crowd-workers, and educators) to explore this challenge
space and develop convergent approaches to studying it. The workshop will
explore questions such as: Which tools, methods, and practices support the
prototyping of alternative work models? How might we anticipate and address
their unintended consequences? What might be missing in science, technology,
engineering, and math education that could better prepare various generations of
American workers for a future of life-long learning? This workshop will also
identify concrete methods and approaches that enable the partnership and
collaboration between such otherwise distinct practices and domains of tech work
and research. The workshop's agenda is creatively structured and will facilitate
extensive interaction among all participants. The diversity of participants will
ensure the group develops a comprehensive research agenda that incorporates both
the technical and the social dimensions of these forms of tech work and explores
both technical and social solutions.