* 1744156
* 2017 Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS) Workshop on Emerging Frontiers in Engineering; Ithaca, New York
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Ernest Fontes, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 06/30/2019
* USD 12,000.00

This award supports participation by members of the Engineering community in the
2017 Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS) Workshop on Emerging
Frontiers in Engineering on June 7, 2017 in Ithaca, New York. This workshop aims
to bring together internationally recognized experts as well as promising young
scientists interested in exploring new techniques being developed for the
engineering sciences to better exploit next-generation high energy synchrotron
x-ray sources. This workshop supported by this award will be held adjacent to
the 2017 CHESS Users' Meeting, in parallel with a workshop exploring "CHESS
Workshop on Emerging Frontiers in Biology," and adjacent to the annual meeting
of the Interdisciplinary Consortium for Research and Educational Access in
Science and Engineering (INCREASE), an organization that promotes research and
education at minority-serving institutions. The format of the workshop has been
designed to maximize interaction among attendees through presentations, poster
sessions, extended question and answer sessions, and networking activities.

The 2017 Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS) Workshop on Emerging
Frontiers aims to identify the most compelling and significant challenges in
engineering today, and do so with an audience that combines instrument builders
at synchrotron facilities and members of the engineering modeling community that
can benefit from these new data. The attendees will explore "what if" scenarios,
and how the on-going development of upgraded x-ray beamlines at CHESS could
provide better, new and/or unique facilities to the engineering community.