* 1744094
* Conference: Large-Scale Land-Use Transformations: Implications for Social-Ecological Systems and Resilience
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Jennifer Hodbod, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 10/31/2017
* USD 4,919.00

This project brings together researchers from various disciplines working on
linked ecological and social change to examine the effects of large-scale land-
use change associated with developments such as plantation agriculture and the
construction of dams on environmental and socio-economic sustainability. The
project will focus on the Omo-Turkana Basin and support a workshop allowing
local and international researchers to share experiences and synthesize existing
knowledge about developments in the region using a social-ecological resilience
framework. The workshop will open up opportunities for future multi-disciplinary
research by supporting the formation of an umbrella organization for ongoing
research in the region, strengthening linkages between researchers, and allowing
members to develop collaborative research agendas. International students and
early career researchers are also well represented, enhancing the network's
capacity for future growth. A wider outcome of the workshop and network will be
to inform decision-makers in the region of the results of on-going research,
contributing scientifically robust evidence to better inform debate among
policymakers and the public. In addition to a multi-disciplinary, landscape-
scale situation analysis, the workshop will generate a series of policy briefs
to facilitate the dissemination of outputs to non-academic audiences.

The project engages the concept of resilience and will use the workshop to
advance the idea of resilience assessment. An objective of the workshop and
research network will be to ascertain whether the large-scale land-use change
occurring in the Omo-Turkana region supports the economic and social goals
declared by project planners, or whether economic growth is being prioritized
over the quality and resilience of environmental and social systems. Given the
landscape-wide impact of development in the Omo-Turkana Basin, a theoretical
basis is required that integrates contributions from multiple disciplines and
therefore represents all elements of a social-ecological system. Resilience is
one such theory, and this project will contribute to the literature by using the
strong representation of social and political sciences in the network to better
address equity and power relations within a resilience framing. Such a framing
has generalizable relevance for other contexts, and as such, should be useful to
science and society well beyond the specific case at hand.