* 1744499
* NSF INCLUDES DDLP: Diversifying Future Leadership in the Professoriate in Computing at Research Universities
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2017,01/31/2018
* Valerie Taylor, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 01/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

The goal of FLIP (Diversifying Future Leadership in the Professoriate), an NSF
INCLUDES Design and Development Launch Pilot, is to address the broadening
participation challenge of increasing the diversity of the future leadership in
the professoriate in computing at research universities as a way to achieve
diversity across the field. According to the 2016 CRA Taulbee Survey, only 4.3%
of the tenure-track faculty at PhD-granting universities are from
underrepresented minorities. This challenge is important to address because
diverse faculty contributes to academia in the following critical ways: serve as
excellent role models for a diverse study body, bring diverse backgrounds to the
student programs and policies developed by the department, and bring diverse
perspectives to the research projects and programs. Further, the focus is on
research universities, because in practice, key national leadership roles, such
as serving on national committees that impact thefield of computing, often come
from research universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The shared purpose and broad
vision of the FLIP launch pilot is to increase faculty diversity in computing at
research universities by increasing the diversity of PhD graduates from the top
producers of computing faculty. The focus is on four underrepresented groups in
computing: African Americans; Hispanics; Native Americans and indigenous
peoples; and Persons with Disabilities. The long-term goal is to pursue this
vision through strategic partnerships with those institutions that are the top
producers of computing faculty and organizations that focus on diverse students
in STEM, as well as partnerships that collectively adopt proven strategies for
recruiting, graduating, and preparing a diverse set of doctoral students for
academic careers. The purpose of the pilot is to establish a unified approach
across the different partners that will build upon proven strategies to develop
novel practices for increasing the diversity of the PhD graduates from key
institutions, thereby increasing the faculty diversity in computing at research
universities. For the pilot, FLIP will focus on recruitment and admissions and
professional development for current PhD students.