* 1744637
* Workshop on the Dynamic Interaction of Embodied Human and Machine Intelligence; Marconi State Historic Park, Marshall, California; June 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Ramesh Balasubramaniam, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Robert Scheidt
* 07/31/2019
* USD 49,995.00

This award will support an interdisciplinary workshop to study how humans and
intelligent machines, such as robots, may behave while physically interacting
with each other, in contrast to situations where they only exchange information.
These questions will become increasingly important as humans begin to come into
frequent physical contact with intelligent machines, such as when navigating
shared spaces, riding in or walking near autonomous vehicles, or interacting
with caregiving or physical therapy robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop
will gather experts from cognitive neuroscience, behavioral science, dynamics
and control, robotics, optimization, and computer science to define key
challenges in analyzing the dynamic behavior of systems of embodied human and
machine intelligences. Due to rapidly developing capabilities in machine
learning, and wide scale deployment of autonomous and intelligent robotic
systems, humans in the near future will regularly find themselves physically
interacting with intelligent technology. Such intelligent technology might
include home assistance robots, physical therapy robots, autonomous vehicles,
and smart buildings. The dynamics of physically coupled of humans and
intelligent machines have so far received little study, despite the potential
for unexpected behavior.