* 1744346
* Convergence NNA: Preparing for a Northwest Passage, a Workshopon the Role of New England in Navigating the New Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Katharine Duderstadt, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 11/30/2018
* USD 41,958.00

Part 1. The proposed workshop will consider how changes in the Arctic will have
regional impacts on New England's economic, environmental, and social dynamics.
These impacts could involve changes in trade, fisheries, tourism, coastal
ecology, air and water quality, animal migration, and regional communities.
Special emphasis will be placed on an eventual ice-free Northwest Passage, which
could stimulate new trade markets and increase ship traffic, and drive changes
in infrastructure and economic opportunities in the Gulf of Maine. The workshop
will bring together researchers and students from many fields, including
environmental science, geology, atmospheric science, geography, coastal and
marine science and engineering, and policy studies to approach these questions
in an integrated manner. The workshop will promote convergence by focusing on
the societal issues associated with future changes in the Arctic driving changes
in New England and by organizing participants in a manner that will foster new
holistic approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2. The
proposed workshop will consider how changes in the Arctic will have regional
impacts on New England's economic, environmental, and social dynamics -
especially as they relate to trade, fisheries, tourism, coastal ecology, air and
water quality, animal migration, and human demographics. Special emphasis during
the workshop will be placed on an eventual ice-free Northwest Passage and the
potential for this to stimulate new trade markets and increase ship traffic.
Further, the workshop will consider how these changes could transform the needed
infrastructure and economic opportunities in the Gulf of Maine, as well as
impact ecosystems. The workshop will provide a forum for researchers and
students from diverse disciplines such as environmental science, geology,
atmospheric science, geography, coastal and marine science and engineering, and
policy studies to forge a new convergent research agenda to address emergent
impacts and opportunities Arctic change poses for lower latitude regions.