* 1744970
* Deglacial to Recent Paleoceanography of the Sabrina Coast, East Antarctica: A Multi-proxy Study of Ice-ocean Interactions at the Outlet of the Aurora Subglacial Basin
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Amelia Shevenell, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 366,158.00

Glacial retreat in West Antarctica is correlated with ocean warming; however,
less is known about the ocean's effect on East Antarctica's glaciers including
Totten Glacier located on the Sabrina Coast. The retreat of Totten Glacier has
global significance as the glacier drains a sector of the East Antarctic Ice
Sheet that contains enough ice to raise global sea levels by as much as 3.5
meters. This study looks to determine the influence of ocean temperatures on
East Antarctic glaciers, including Totten Glacier, over the last ~18,000 years
by studying seafloor sediment around Antarctica. These sediments, or muds,
include the remains of microscopic marine organisms as well as tiny particles
originating from eroded Antarctic bedrock. These muds provide a record of past
environmental changes including ocean temperatures and the advance and retreat
of glaciers. Scientists use a variety of physical and chemical analyses to
determine how long ago this mud was deposited, the temperature of the ocean at
that location through time, and the relative location of glacial ice. In this
project, researchers will refine and test new methods for measuring ocean
temperature from the sediments to better understand the influence of ocean
temperatures on East Antarctic glacier response. Results will be integrated into
ice sheet and climate models to improve the accuracy of ice sheet modeling
efforts and subsequent sea level predictions. Results from this project will be
disseminated at scientific conferences, in the scientific literature, and more
broadly to the general public via the St. Petersburg Science Festival and at the
Oceanography Camp for Girls. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The influence of ocean
temperatures on East Antarctic glaciers is largely unknown. This research
focuses on ice-proximal Antarctic margin paleoceanographic proxy calibration and
validation, which will improve understanding of past ocean-ice sheet
interactions on a variety of timescales. In this project, researchers from the
University of South Florida will (1) further develop and refine two ocean
temperature proxies, foraminifer Mg/Ca and TEX86, for use in ice-proximal
Antarctic continental margin sediments and (2) investigate deglacial to present
(~18-0 ka) ocean-ice interactions at the outlet of the climatically sensitive
Aurora Subglacial Basin. The proposed research utilizes sediment trap, sediment
core, and physical oceanographic data previously collected from the Sabrina
Coast continental shelf during NSF-funded cruise NBP14-02. Studies of existing
sediment cores will integrate multiple paleotemperature, meltwater/salinity,
nutrient, bottom water oxygen, and sea ice proxies with geophysical and
lithologic data to understand past regional ocean-ice interactions. While the
recent international Antarctic research focus has been on understanding the
drivers of West Antarctic Ice Sheet retreat, models suggest it would be
imprudent to ignore the East Antarctic Ice Sheet, which is proving more
sensitive to climate perturbations than previously
realized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.