* 1744440
* NSF INCLUDES DDLP: Southeastern Compact for Inclusive Student Transitions in Engineering and Physical Sciences (SCI-STEPS)
* MPS,OMA
* 09/15/2017,12/31/2019
* William Robinson, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 12/31/2019
* USD 298,416.00

Physical science and engineering remain the least diverse of all STEM fields---
with regard to women, underrepresented minorities, and persons with disabilities
---across all levels of STEM education and training. SCI-STEPS is an NSF
INCLUDES Design and Development Launch Pilot that will address this persistent
challenge by developing a complete end-to-end pipeline (or system of pathways)
from the beginning of college to the PhD, and then into the workforce. Many
isolated efforts to broaden participation have shown promise, but they have not
produced big enough impact. SCI-STEPS represents a concerted set of coordinated
interventions---consciously facilitated, systemically linked, and purposefully
disseminated. SCI-STEPS represents a broad regional network among major research
universities, Historically Black Colleges and Universities, comprehensive
universities, community colleges, national labs, and major scientific
organizations. The goal of the network is to ensure that underrepresented
individuals in the physical sciences and engineering can get from their starting
point in STEM higher education---freshmen at 2-year or 4-year college---through
the higher education pathways leading to an appropriate terminal degree and
employment in the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Women, underrepresented
minorities, and persons with disabilities collectively represent the majority of
college-age individuals entering higher education with an expressed interest in
physical science and engineering. A growing body of research indicates that
academic and social integration may be even more influential than academic
abilities for retention of students. Thus, interventions aimed at stemming the
losses of these individuals must ultimately be aimed at changing the system---
including unwelcoming institutional climates, racial/ethnic/gender stereotyping,
a lack of mentors with whom to identify, and evaluation methods that emphasize
conformity over individual capabilities---rather than changing the individual.
The SCI-STEPS pilot focuses effort on institutional readiness for implementation
of best practice interventions at four key junctures: (i) college freshman to
sophomore; (ii) undergraduate to graduate; (iii) PhD to postdoc; and (iv)
postdoc to workforce.The pilot will proceed in three steps: (1) a planning
phase, (2) development of an initial end-to-end pathways model with four
Juncture Transition teams, and (3) scale-up of the SCI-STEPS "network of
networks" with all initial partners. By addressing these objectives through a
collective impact framework and embedded research, this pilot will demonstrate
how best-practice interventions at each pathway juncture can be dovetailed and
scaled up across a broad range of institutional types and across a large but
distinct geographical area. Addressing these objectives will thus also serve to
advance Broadening Participation efforts at a national scale, by suggesting the
forms of institutional partnerships and best-practices that may inform other
alliances in other STEM disciplines and/or different regional areas.