* 1744213
* Phase-Field Model of Inhomogeneous Ferroelectric Crystals Under Ultrafast Stimuli
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Long-Qing Chen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2022
* USD 330,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research, computational modeling, and education that aim towards better
understanding ferroelectric materials. Ferroelectrics comprise a class of
crystalline materials that have found important technological applications in
many types of devices, such as medical and underwater transducers, sensors, non-
volatile memories, energy-efficient cooling. The goal of this research program
is to develop the necessary materials theories and computer codes to understand
how these ferroelectric crystals respond when subjected to external ultrafast
stimuli, such as a sudden temperature rise or an electric-field pulse on their
surface. The researchers will also explore possible new material states that may
emerge as a result of such external stimulation. The group will utilize a
network of experimental collaborators to validate the developed theory and
computer codes against experiments. The developed theory and computer codes
could find use in describing similar phenomena in other materials systems, for
example the ultrafast magnetization dynamics in ferromagnetic materials for
memory applications, and the potential formation of and transitions between
novel electronic phases in electronic switching
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is expected to have impact not only on
materials science by advancing materials theories, but also on applied
mathematics and the mechanics of materials. The PI will also integrate several
educational and outreach activities into the research; these include: 1) the
development of an open-source version of modeling software for materials and the
organization of an associated annual workshop, 2) the recruitment of
undergraduate students to perform research using the software package, and 3)
the engagement of women and underrepresented minorities in STEM via
participation in university-wide organized outreach activities and by recruiting
them to perform research in the PI's
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research,
computational modeling, and education that aim towards better understanding
ferroelectric materials. Ferroelectrics comprise a class of crystalline
materials that have found important technological applications in many types of
devices, such as medical and underwater transducers, sensors, non-volatile
memories, energy-efficient cooling. The goal of this research program is to
understand the dynamic responses of inhomogeneous ferroelectric crystals under
external ultrafast stimuli and in the presence of complex electrostatic and
elastic interactions among domains within the crystal. The PI and his group will
develop a dynamical phase-field method to model, predict, and understand the
dynamical spatiotemporal evolution of polarization and strain domain patterns
under ultrafast stimuli, taking into account long-range electrostatic and
elastic interactions and domain-wall energy. The group will also explore novel
transient or metastable domain states that may emerge when an inhomogeneous
crystal relaxes from its externally stimulated excited state back to the
original or a new equilibrium state; these could be hidden states that are
normally not observable under thermodynamic conditions. The researchers will
investigate ferroelectric and piezoelectric responses of inhomogeneous crystals
under ultrafast external stimuli, and will explore thermal, electric,
mechanical, and multifunctional responses at ultrafast frequencies. The group
will utilize a network of experimental collaborators to validate the developed
theory and computer codes against experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
dynamic phase-field method can be extended to the study of many other problems.
For example, it can be adapted to solve a micromagnetic phase-field equation
coupled with an elastodynamic equation for exploring ultrafast magnetization
dynamics in ferromagnetic materials with strong magnetoelastic coupling. The
proposed approach can also be extended to the study of electron-lattice coupling
phenomena and the potential formation of novel electronic phases by introducing
electronic degrees of freedom under ultrafast stimuli, allowing the manipulation
of electronic phase transitions such as metal-insulator transitions in
correlated systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is expected to have impact
not only on materials science by advancing materials theories, but also on
applied mathematics and the mechanics of materials. The PI will also integrate
several educational and outreach activities into the research; these include: 1)
the development of an open-source version of modeling software for ferroic
materials and the organization of an associated annual workshop, 2) the
recruitment of undergraduate students to perform research using the software
package, and 3) the engagement of women and underrepresented minorities in STEM
via participation in university-wide organized outreach activities and by
recruiting them to perform research in the PI's
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.