* 1744541
* NSF INCLUDES DDLP: Math FACESS (Families &amp; Communities Empowering Student Success in Mathematics)
* MPS,OMA
* 12/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Armelle Casau, Explora
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2020
* USD 299,250.00

This NSF INCLUDES Design and Development Launch Pilot will improve math
achievement among elementary school students of color in public schools in
Albuquerque, New Mexico. Recognizing the need to coordinate efforts related to
students' math and science achievement, key stakeholders formed the NM STEM
Ecosystem, a dynamic network of cross-sector partners committed to making real
impact on STEM education and degree attainment in Albuquerque. The NM STEM
Ecosystem identified the math achievement gap between low-income students of
color and their more economically-advantaged peers as the Broadening
Participation (BP) Challenge it would address first. While math achievement gaps
between students of color and Caucasian students appear nationally, the
situation is particularly dire in New Mexico. In order to keep doors open to
future STEM careers, it is crucial that learning pathways for math are
articulated early and that these pathways honor families' cultural ways of
knowing. The innovative strategy of Math Families &amp; Communities Empowering
Student Success (Math FACESS) is to use a collective impact approach to close
the math achievement gap by connecting formal and informal STEM educators around
a coherent, multi-faceted program of early mathematics teaching and learning
that empowers parents and teachers to support children's mathematical
development. Implementation of Math FACESS includes four major components: 1)
Teachers at two pilot schools will participate in professional development
related to Math Talk and Listening; 2) Parents at the pilot schools will
participate in parent workshops and community-based activities focused on
supporting their children's math achievement; 3) Project partners will implement
community-based family activities organized around a theme of Twelve Months of
Math; and 4) Ecosystem partners will study what worked and what didn't, in order
to identify best practices that can be shared with system leaders to scale
effective practices and increase impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The near-term
objectives for Math FACESS are: 1) improve students' attitudes, practices, and
achievement in math; 2) improve parents' attitudes, practices, and confidence in
math and increase their utilization of family math resources; 3) improve data-
sharing among partners related to math participation and achievement; and 4)
create pathways within the Ecosystem for family math learning. The effectiveness
of the collective impact model and impacts on partner organizations also will be
assessed. Through the math FACESS Launch Pilot, the NM STEM Ecosystem plans to:
1) demonstrate the power of a collective impact social innovation framework to
address a systemic community condition -- in this case, the math achievement
gap; 2) contribute to theory-of-change research that demonstrates student
achievement can be affected by working with parents and teachers; and 3) provide
a model that values different ways of knowing and uses cultural context in the
design of STEM learning opportunities for students, families, and schools.