* 1744226
* I-Corps: Combining High-throughput Automation and Organism Design Software
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2018
* David Bernick, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 12/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the expansion
and development of the field of synthetic biology, with a number of possible
applications in untapped markets. By applying research outcomes from synthetic
biology, robotic automation, and machine learning, the designing and engineering
of microorganisms opens the door to a realm of possibilities in chemical
synthesis that never existed in the past. This work will allow us to build nano-
scale factories, applying the experimental field of synthetic biology to the
real-world demands of pharmaceutical companies, allowing them to bridge the gap
between disease and cure, faster and cheaper than ever before. By
industrializing the process of designing biological systems, it is possible to
build a system that can automate innovation at the nano-scale level. This will
focus research on developing new approaches, with a majority of the
experimentation performed by robotic laboratories.

This I-Corps project automates the design and engineering of microorganisms for
pharmaceutical production, by bringing together recent advances in the fields of
synthetic biology, robotic automation, and machine learning. The approach
translates innovations in these fields to form hypotheses that are tested using
high-throughput automation to develop methods to predict novel function of
enzymes and other biological parts. This will allow clients to produce compounds
faster and more efficiently, freeing resources for development of new products.
Preliminary studies have been in the engineering of microorganisms for
production of an alternative sugar. By coupling machine learning with high-
throughput screening, testing, and experimentation, the approach will enable
automated discovery, testing, and validation.