* 1744723
* I-Corps: Tissue Kinematics Quantification
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Suhas Pol, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 03/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is clinicians
being able to evaluate therapy impact implemented on individual patients by
quantifying real-time tissue kinematics response to a procedure. While tools
that objectify therapeutic intervention outcomes are desirable, they are not
often available, where the procedure's results are usually unknown until it is
too late to redirect the outcomes. Such a delay could exacerbate a patient's
symptoms, requiring additional interventions or diagnostic tests, increasing
costs and professional liabilities. This innovation greatly improves the
possibility of objectifying therapy outcomes or planned interventions to ensure
success on performed treatments. As an example, this innovation can quantify
uterine C-section scar tissue integrity, allowing Obstetricians and
Gynecologists to reduce risk during births that involve women with previous
C-section history. Additional promising applications include, more precise
speech language pathology diagnosis and physical therapy treatment
validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on an innovative
method that measures displacement and strain in tissue and body fluid for
determining the accuracy and objectivity of clinical tests and the effectiveness
of treatment procedures. The novel method developed, processes an image time
series obtained using typical diagnostic tools, such as ultrasound, MRI, or CT
scan imaging, to quantify target tissue displacement and strain. Contemporary
methods, such as Tissue Doppler Imaging, require cross-sectional plane imaging,
restricting strain measurements to a single component. The method developed here
identifies functions without the necessity for natural markers and yields all
components of the strain tensor field at a much finer resolution. Further,
repeatability of this novel method's function has been assessed by conducting
multiple in vitro and in vivo experiments. The method's versatility has been
demonstrated by quantifying kinematics for variety of biological tissues, such
as median and sciatic nerves, surrounding muscle, and subcutaneous tissue.