* 1744802
* The cognitive and neural mechanisms of computer programming in young children: storytelling or solving puzzles?
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Marina Bers, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 07/31/2020
* USD 150,000.00

Research and policy changes over the recent years have brought a newfound focus
on STEM for young children. Policy decisions regarding how and when to introduce
computer science education would benefit from additional data. This project will
investigate the cognitive and neural basis of learning computer science in early
childhood. The project will use functional MRI to evaluate the novel hypothesis
that engaging in programming activities can be similar to engaging in language
comprehension and production. This project comes at a time when there is a re-
envisioning of STEM in early childhood education as well as a push for
integrating coding at all levels of the educational system. This empirical
project will provide critical insights into the cognitive and neural basis of
programming, which is key for furthering the goal to bring computer science for
all and the design of learning technologies for young
children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project will focus on
understanding the cognitive and neural basis of computer programming in young
children. Since computer programming is traditionally associated with problem
solving it is taught as a STEM discipline. However, the underlying assumption
that programming abilities are related to math and general problem solving
skills has not gone unchallenged. Some researchers proposed that learning a
programming language may also be related to the cognitive processes associated
with literacy, akin to acquiring a foreign language. In this interdisciplinary
project the research team will use functional MRI to evaluate whether engaging
in coding and computational thinking primarily activates the domain-general
problem-solving brain regions (the fronto-parietal multiple demand network), and
whether it additionally engages the fronto-temporal language network. The team
will ask this question by conducting a pilot study with children 8 years of age
programming with ScratchJr, an introductory programming language developed by
the PI. Understanding whether engaging in computer programming primarily relies
on domain-general problem-solving resources or whether it additionally engages
language processing mechanisms, will provide critical insights into the
cognitive and neural basis of programming, which is needed for understanding
learning trajectories in computational thinking, developing effective learning
technologies, and making policy recommendations for incorporating the teaching
of computer science.