* 1744999
* Interacting Stressors: Metabolic Capacity to Acclimate under Ocean Warming and CO2-Acidification in Early Developmental Stages of Antarctic Fishes
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Anne Todgham, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 06/30/2023
* USD 959,694.00

The Southern Ocean contains an extraordinary diversity of marine life. Many
Antarctic marine organisms have evolved in stable, cold ocean conditions and
possess limited ability to respond to environmental fluctuations. To date,
research on the physiological limits of Antarctic fishes has focused largely on
adult life stages. However, early life stages may be more sensitive to
environmental change because they may need to prioritize energy to growth and
development instead of maintenance of physiological balance and integrity- even
under stress conditions. This project will examine the specific mechanisms that
young (embryos, larvae and juveniles) Antarctic fishes use to respond to changes
in ocean conditions at the molecular, cellular and physiological levels, so that
they are able to survive. The aim is to provide a unifying framework for linking
environmental change, gene expression, metabolism and organismal performance in
different species that have various rates of growth and development. There is a
diverse and robust education and outreach program linked with the research
effort that will reach students, teachers, young scientists, community members
and government officials at local and regions scales.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polar species have already been identified as highly
vulnerable to global change. However as yet, there is no unifying framework for
linking environmental change to organismal performance, in part because a
mechanistic understanding of how stressors interact at the molecular,
biochemical and physiological level is underdeveloped is lacking for most
species. In the marine environment, this paucity of information limits our
capacity to accurately predict the impacts of warming and CO2-acidification on
polar species, and therefore prevents linking climate model projections to
population health predictions. This research will evaluate whether metabolic
capacity (i.e. the ability to match energy supply with energy demand) limits the
capacity of Antarctic fishes to acclimate to the simultaneous stressors of ocean
warming and CO2-acidification. If species are unable to reestablish metabolic
homeostasis following exposure to stressors, increased energetic costs may lead
to a decline in physiological performance, organismal fitness, and survival.
This energy-mismatch hypothesis will be tested in a multi-species approach that
focuses on the early life stages, as growing juveniles are likely more
vulnerable to energetic constraints than adults, while different species are
targeted in order to understand how differences in phenology and life history
traits influence metabolic plasticity. The research will provide a mechanistic
integration of gene expression and metabolite patterns, and metabolic responses
at the cellular and whole organism levels to broadly understand metabolic
plasticity of fishes. The research is aligned with the theme "Decoding the
genomic and transcriptomic bases of biological adaptation and response across
Antarctic organisms and ecosystems" which is one of three major themes
identified by the National Academy of Sciences in their document "A Strategic
Vision for NSF Investments in Antarctic and Southern Ocean Research".
Additionally, this project builds environmental stewardship and awareness by
increasing science literacy in the broader community in three main ways: First
it will increase the diversity of students involved in environmental science
research by supporting one PhD student, one postdoctoral scholar and two
undergraduate students and promoting the training of young students from groups
traditionally underrepresented in environmental biology. Second, the project
will participate in UC Davis's OneClimate initiative, which leverages the
community's expertise to develop broad perspectives regarding climate change,
science and society, and engage K-12 students, government officials, and local
and statewide communities on topics of Antarctic research, organismal adaptation
as well as ongoing and potential future changes at the poles. Lastly, summer
workshops will be conducted in collaborations with the NSF-funded education
program APPLES (Arctic Plant Phenology: Learning through Engaged Science), to
engage teachers and K-12 students in polar science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.