* 1744506
* NSF INCLUDES DDLP: Wabanaki Youth in Science (WaYS) Program to Bridge inclusion in Post-Secondary Education Through the Sciences
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* John Daigle, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2020
* USD 299,985.00

The University of Maine will address the grand challenge of increasing Native
American participation in the science,technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) enterprise in an NSF INCLUDES Design and Development Launch Pilot project
addressing culturally relevant pedagogy, incorporating Community Elders,
Cultural Knowledge Keepers, and mainstream secondary and higher education
institutions in the development of STEM pedagogy that can be replicated to other
underrepresented and underserved populations. Partners in the effort include the
Wabanaki Youth in Science program (WaYS)(a non-profit organization), Salish
Kootenai College (a Tribal College), Massachusetts Institute of Technology (a
research university), the National Indian Education Association (a non-profit
membership organization) and the current NSF INCLUDES Design and Development
Launch Pilot project at the University of Maine (the Stormwater Research
Management Team (SMART)). This NSF INCLUDES partnership provides students with
evidence-based STEM activities involving culturally relevant internships,
mentoring, STEM professional development activities and other support. Non-
native students will reciprocally participate in Native American learning
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The foundation for the project's activities
is based on the WaYS program in science education that incorporates Traditional
Ecological Knowledge (TEK). The goals of the project are to: 1) create and
integrate curriculum that embraces TEK and western science as equal partners;
2)develop and implement protocols to incorporate a continued mentorship program
for WaYS and STREAM engineering students; 3)develop a framework to bridge the
gap between high school and college; and 4) foster collaboration among Community
Elders, Cultural Knowledge Keepers and University of Maine faculty in a model
that could be transferred to other communities. Internal and external evaluation
activities will add to the scholarly literature on educating Native Americans
and non-native students in STEM disciplines. Dissemination of project results
will include published peer-reviewed journal articles on newly developed
pedagogy and conference presentations at the American Indian Science and
Engineering (AISES) national conference, the National Diversity in STEM
Conference, National Science Teachers Association, AAAS, ASEE and the National
NSF INCLUDES Network.