* 1744463
* NSF INCLUDES DDLP: Building on Strengths - A Design and Development Launch Pilot to Broaden Participation in Mathematics
* MPS,OMA
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Albert Cuoco, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2021
* USD 359,499.00

In this NSF INCLUDES Design and Development Launch Pilot the institutions of
"Building on Strengths" propose to build and pilot the infrastructure, induction
process, and early implementation of the Mathematician Affiliates of Color
network. This network will consist of mathematicians of color from across
academia and industry who want to invest time in, share their expertise with,
and learn from students of color and their teachers. Building on Strengths will
draw on basic needs cognitive theory to support these interactions and will
focus narrowly on short and moderate term collaborations (from one month to a
semester) between visiting mathematicians, students, and collaborating teachers
that will involve three specific types of interactions: doing mathematics
together as a habits-of-mind practice, talking about the discipline of
mathematics and the experiences of mathematicians of color in that discipline,
and relationship-building activities. The foundational infrastructure developed
in the project will include systems for recruitment, selection and induction, a
process for pairing affiliate mathematicians with classrooms, and support
structures for the collaborations. To support the goals of the network a
prototype virtual space will be developed in which real-time artifacts can be
collected and shared from the classroom interactions. While Building on
Strengths will pilot this program in the secondary context, once a viable model
is established, scaling to K-16, as well as to other STEM fields, will be
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research study in the project uses an
exploratory sequential mixed-methods design and will be conducted in two phases.
In the first, quantitative, phase of the study the following questions will be
addressed: (1) Is the teacher-mathematician collaboration associated with a
change for students in perception of basic human needs being met, mathematical
or racial identities, or beliefs about mathematics or who can do mathematics?
(2) Is the teacher-mathematician collaboration associated with a change for
adults in perceptions of the role of basic needs or in adults' identities or
beliefs about mathematics or who can do mathematics? In the second, qualitative,
phase of the study, two types of interactions will be selected for in-depth
qualitative study, identifying cases where groups of students experienced
changes in their needs, identity, and beliefs. In this qualitative case-centered
phase, the following questions will be explored: (1) What is the nature of the
mentor-student interaction? (2) What aspects of the intervention do students
feel are most relevant to them? (3) How did the implementation of the
intervention differ from the anticipated intervention? The results of the study
will help improve the infrastructure for, and better support the interactions
between, mathematicians of color, students of color and their mathematics
teachers; the outcomes will also shed light on how students experience their
interactions.