* 1744998
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Contemporary Variability in Antarctic Sea Ice: Ensemble Reconstruction of Sea Ice Extent and Concentration for the 20th Century
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Ryan Fogt, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 198,300.00

In contrast to the Arctic, sea ice cover in most Antarctic regions has increased
since 1979. The area-integrated total sea ice extent grew to record maximum
values in four of the last six years, yet the 2015-16 summer was marked by
record low ice cover. While impressive, it is difficult to assess the
significance of these very recent records in the context of longer term
variability, since the continuous satellite record only dates back to 1978. The
limited length of the continuous sea ice record, is a significant confounding
factor in ascertaining whether the observed current changes are due to natural
variability alone, or represent a forced anthropogenic response. As a result,
the scientific understanding of the Antarctic sea ice trends remains poor, as
does confidence in projections of future Antarctic sea ice trends.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address this challenge, this project seeks to
reconstruct sea ice extent and sea ice concentration, using the relationships
between satellite-observed sea ice, sea level pressure, tropical sea surface
temperature, ENSO indices, some proxy data (ice cores, etc.), and in situ
Southern Ocean temperature data. The aim of the study is to collect and combine
these ancillary records as accurately as possible while retaining the
variability associated with the intrinsic uncertainty in the available field
data. &lt;br/&gt;A range of statistical methods for modelling the relationship
between satellite era sea-ice data using flexible regression, Bayesian and
multivariate dynamic spatial temporal (MDST) methods will be
used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will entrain cross-disciplinary training of
undergraduate and a graduate student at UCLA and Ohio
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.