* 1744391
* Faculty of Color Uncovering Success Strategies in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Joy Gayles, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 12/31/2018
* USD 49,854.00

Across the nation, there is a critical need to increase the diversity of faculty
in STEM fields, such as engineering. The 2014 NACME report indicated, in
2011,that racial/ethnic minorities comprised 4.8% of full professors, 7.6% of
associate professors, and 8.2% of assistant professors in engineering. Moreover,
the percentages for racial/ethnic groups, at each rank, are even lower. Of
further concern is the fact, at the highest faculty ranks, that there are fewer
numbers of racial/ethnic minority faculty represented, indicating that
racial/ethnic minority faculty members are leaving their faculty positions
before promotion and tenure to associate professor and/or staying at associate
professor and not going up for promotion to full professor. It is well-
documented in the theoretical and scientific literature that underrepresented,
engineering faculty members experience many challenges in the professoriate,
which oftentimes compromise their success. This proposed 12-week project
addresses some of the many challenges that tenure-track, engineering faculty of
color experience in the professoriate. During the 12-week program,
underrepresented engineering faculty participants will learn specific skills and
techniques, designed to help them identify, prioritize and plan their research
and writing goals. Participants will also develop a strategic plan and have
weekly planning meetings. Each week, the participants will learn a specific tool
or strategy for faculty success, including building their mentor network,
aligning their time with research and writing priorities, writing through
resistance, and self care strategies. They will also work with a faculty success
coach and meet once a week with this person throughout the 12-week program. It
is also believed that the program has great probability to help advance the
careers of participants of the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the
12-week program also have the potential to change and shape how engineering
faculty approach teaching, research, and service in ways that lead to long-term
success and increased productivity and satisfaction among underrepresented
engineering faculty. further, participating faculty members will obtain a set of
tools to not only use for themselves but also to mentor and support other
tenure-track, engineering faculty members. The methods to achieve faculty
success entail the following: &lt;br/&gt;1) During the summer 2017, five
underrepresented faculty of color in the College of Engineering will be selected
to participate in the faculty success program.&lt;br/&gt;2) Participating
faculty members will engage in a 12-week faculty success program during the fall
semester, which teaches them how to plan and develop healthy relationships and
achieve work-life integration.&lt;br/&gt;3) There will be ongoing data
collection on faculty productivity and faculty development outcomes to determine
the program's impact on faculty productivity and work-life integration.