* 1744540
* West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) Workshops 2017-2018 - A Forum for WAIS Research and the Thwaites Program
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Ted Scambos, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 51,083.00

West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) meetings provide an annual forum for scientists
seeking to understand past and present ice-sheet behavior. The meetings are
focused on West Antarctica, an area of critical importance to understanding how
Earth's ice sheets evolve, and to past, present, and future sea level. This
award provides partial support for the WAIS meetings in 2017 and 2018.

Goals for the 24th and 25th WAIS meetings are to: (1) engage students and early-
career scientists, and promote input from under-represented groups or scientists
with related but under-represented scientific backgrounds; (2) consider new
technologies for geophysical measurements and process observations, new modeling
approaches, and new sites for coordinated study; (3) encourage data submission
and good metadata practices for field-acquired data, and (4) discuss science
objectives and research plans for the Thwaites Program, a multidisciplinary
study of the Thwaites-Amundsen region of West Antarctica that will be supported
by the National Science Foundation and the UK Natural Environment Research
Council. In addition to discussing the ongoing evolution of West Antarctica,
participants will engage in themes such as WAIS paleoclimate, geophysical
boundary conditions that describe the ice sheet, climate-ice-ocean processes
that govern ice-sheet mass balance, and regional climate and coupled-system
models.