* 1744491
* NSF INCLUDES DDLP: Advanced Manufacturing Partnerships (AMP): Broadening Participation in New Hampshire's Workforce
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Palligarnai Vasudevan, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,952.00

The University of New Hampshire (UNH) NSF INCLUDES Design and Development Launch
Pilot project is a collaborative effort with the Community College System of New
Hampshire, Advanced Manufacturing (AM) businesses, NH Economic Development, and
the University of New Hampshire to address workforce development in the Advanced
Manufacturing sector in the state. The Advanced Manufacturing Program (AMP) uses
a framework built on the Collective Impact collaboration model that enables AMP
partners to innovate, plan, and implement strategies that significantly increase
NH's community colleges (CC) as a source for future workers and leaders in AM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this proposal addresses the pressing need
for increasing numbers of AM workers through strategies designed to increase the
retention of low socioeconomic status (LSES) students in CC STEM degree
programs. AMP coordinates four key implementation strategies: 1) Co-requisite
remediation within mathematics and quantitative reasoning; 2) Guided Pathways
mentorship with "high touch" advising and student guidance resources that
combines clearly defined academic pathways leading to 4-year college transfer
and job placement; 3) paid work-based learning (WBL) experiences in industry and
academic research; and 4) mentor inclusiveness training to prepare the workplace
and academic settings to receive LSES students into a supportive climate.
Successfully coordinating these four components through the process of
Collective Impact collaboration will lead to a flexible and integrated AM
workforce pipeline that serves CC AM students, AM industry partners, and the
state as a whole. Findings will be disseminated to academic, business, and
government stakeholders in NH, the region, and nationally to inform and improve
broadening participation initiatives.