* 1744618
* Student Support for the 2017 Gaseous Electronics Conference
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Earl Scime, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2018
* USD 10,000.00

The Gaseous Electronics Conference (GEC) is an annual topical meeting of the
American Physical Society sponsored under the auspices of the Division of
Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics. It is the leading international
conference in the science and technology of Low Temperature Plasmas (LTP)
combined with collision physics (CP). The GEC combines aspects of atomic,
molecular, and optical physics with low-temperature plasma physics, electric
discharges, and plasma chemistry, as well as their technological and medical
applications. The conference has been the venue of the first presentations on
world leading developments in investigations of LTP and CP topics including
advanced combustion systems, lighting and lasers, plasma materials processing of
relevance to the semiconductor and photovoltaics industry, and plasma
application in biomedicine. The invited speakers represent the world's leading
scientists in these fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will pay partial
travel support for 20 US PhD students to attend and present the results of their
work at the 70th Annual GEC meeting to be hosted on November 6-10, 2017 in
Pittsburgh, PA by West Virginia University. This meeting is expected to attract
more than 500 plasma scientists, collision physicists, and engineers. This award
will provide the opportunity for PhD students to establish peer to peer
collaboration with researchers from around the world. The students will have the
opportunity to observe first-hand the scientific and cultural diversity of the
field, and establish what will hopefully be career long collaborations with
their international counterparts. The GEC makes a special effort to support
graduate students who are women and underrepresented minorities.