* 1744537
* RAPID: Testing the Solar Occultation Flux Instrument on the Wyoming King Air
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Rainer Volkamer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2018
* USD 199,973.00

This project includes the modification and testing of the University of Colorado
Airborne Solar Occultation Flux (SOF) instrument on the Wyoming King Air
aircraft during the late summer of 2017. Prior deployment of this instrument on
the NSF/NCAR C130 demonstrated its capability to quantify emission fluxes of
ammonia, nitrogen oxides and other trace gases. The instrument will be
especially useful in the study of wildfire emissions planned as part of a larger
field campaign in the summer of 2018 in the Western US. Wildfires contribute to
reduced visibility and the degradation of air quality in many regions.

The SOF can quantify trace gas emission fluxes from an area source, such as a
wildfire source, by measuring the entire plume column profile. In combination
with measurements of wind direction/speed, the emission flux is calculated by
applying the mass balance method. The urgency of this RAPID proposal consists in
the need for instrument modifications and for testing and demonstrating the
feasibility of deploying the instrument in a wildfire environment prior to
supporting its use in a major field campaign scheduled for next summer in 2018.
SOF measurements of trace gas columns are highly complementary to the detailed
sampling that is planned from the NSF/NCAR C130 aircraft in 2018.