* 1744859
* Collaborative Research: Linking Predator Behavior and Resource Distributions: Penguin-directed Exploration of an Ecological Hotspot
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Megan Cimino, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 08/31/2024
* USD 234,938.00

This research project will use specially designed autonomous underwater vehicles
(AUVs) to investigate interactions between Adelie and Gentoo penguins (the
predators) and their primary food source, Antarctic krill (prey). While it has
long been known that penguins feed on krill, details about how they search for
food and target individual prey items is less well understood. Krill aggregate
in large swarms, and the size or the depth of these swarms may influence the
feeding behavior of penguins. Similarly, penguin feeding behaviors may differ
based on characteristics of the environment, krill swarms, and the presence of
other prey and predator species. This project will use specialized smart AUVs to
simultaneously collect high-resolution observations of penguins, their prey, and
environmental conditions. Data will shed light on strategies used by penguins
prove foraging success during the critical summer chick-rearing period. This
will improve predictions of how penguin populations may respond to changing
environmental conditions in the rapidly warming Western Antarctic Peninsula
region. Greater understanding of how individual behaviors shape food web
structure can also inform conservation and management efforts in other marine
ecosystems. This project has a robust public education and outreach plan linked
with the Birch and Monterey Bay Aquariums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous studies
have shown that sub-mesoscale variability (1-10 km) in Antarctic krill densities
and structure impact the foraging behavior of air-breathing predators. However,
there is little understanding of how krill aggregation characteristics are
linked to abundance on fine spatial scales, how these patterns are influenced by
the habitat, or how prey characteristics influences the foraging behavior of
predators. These data gaps remain because it is extremely challenging to collect
detailed data on predators and prey simultaneously at the scale of an individual
krill patch and single foraging event. Building on previously successful
efforts, this project will integrate echosounders into autonomous underwater
vehicles (AUVs), so that oceanographic variables and multi-frequency acoustic
scattering from both prey and penguins can be collected simultaneously. This
will allow for quantification of the environment at the scale of individual
foraging events made by penguins during the critical 50+ day chick-rearing
period. Work will be centered near Palmer Station, where long-term studies have
provided significant insight into predator and prey population trends. The new
data to be collected by this project will test hypotheses about how penguin prey
selection and foraging behaviors are influenced by physical and biological
features of their ocean habitat at extremely fine scale. By addressing the
dynamic relationship between individual penguins, their prey, and habitat at the
scale of individual foraging events, this study will begin to reveal the
important processes regulating resource availability and identify what makes
this region a profitable foraging habitat and breeding
location.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.