* 1744721
* Collaborative Research: Groundwater transit time distributions: bridging the gap between advanced tracer techniques and numerical modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* D. Kip Solomon, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 05/31/2023
* USD 239,473.00

The transit time of groundwater from recharge to discharge into streams is an
important control on how quickly contaminants are flushed out of aquifers and
into streams. Field studies and groundwater models both indicate that
groundwater with a range of transit times contributes to streamflow at any given
time. However, field studies suggest the relative contribution of young
groundwater (i.e., groundwater with short transit times) to streams is
substantially less than calculated in modeling studies. This discrepancy in the
groundwater transit time distribution (TTD) leads to a very different
understanding of streamflow sources, fundamentally different predictions of the
future impact of groundwater discharge on stream water quality, and potentially
different perspectives on the design and assessment of efforts to manage non-
point-source contamination in aquifers. This project will conduct field
measurements and groundwater modeling to investigate differences in groundwater
TTDs, and to determine and understand the processes that drive TTD at a range of
spatial scales. Results of the project will assist water resources managers,
regulators, and consultants to better understand and manage both water quantity
and quality. Information will be disseminated through Cooperative Extension
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goals of this project are to (1)
evaluate why there is a discrepancy between TTDs derived from groundwater
measurements (field sampling of age-dating tracers) and groundwater models, (2)
investigate how these processes may be better understood by using both field
measurements and models in nested watersheds at a range of scales (14-3900 km2
in this project) and (3) determine the processes that control the shape of the
groundwater TTDs,. This project will be conducted in a watershed overlying the
High Plains aquifer in the Nebraska Sandhills, where groundwater accounts for
approximately 90% of the annual stream discharge. The TTDs will be determined
using age-dating tracers for both young and old groundwater (3H/3He, SF6, 14C,
4He). Groundwater age information will be coupled with discharge measurements in
streams and groundwater discharge measurement from tube seepage meters in
streambeds. The tracer-based TTDs will be compared to groundwater TTDs derived
from particle tracking simulations in a numerical groundwater model (MODFLOW),
at both the reach and watershed scale. The model will be used as a tool to
investigate differences that arise between tracer- and model-based TTDs. For
example, the project will investigate the variation in groundwater recharge
relative to the stream channel, and if a higher resolution and more accurate
representation of recharge in the model leads to better agreement between field-
and model-based TTDs. The model will also be re-calibrated using groundwater age
data to evaluate how TTDs compare to field-based estimates after refinement and
recalibration. Information will be disseminated through Cooperative Extension
programs, including interactive online training materials at
www.nebraskawatershedscience.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.