* 1744503
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Variation and the Grammar of Child African American English
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Brandi Newkirk-Turner, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 02/28/2023
* USD 148,740.00

The variation of language dialects has been primarily studied for adult speech.
A growing literature is looking at the development of these dialects by focusing
on children's usage. One reason this is important is because accurate
understanding of a dialect and its acquisition and development are needed to
identify typical linguistic patterns and when patterns are indicative of a
language disorder. Collaborations between experts in linguistics and
communication disorders have the potential to answer questions about developing
patterns in children in dialects where adults use variable forms, and where the
stages of development of acquisition are not yet clearly described and analyzed.
This project will collect developmental data on the acquisition of a particular
dialect to fill in gaps in the literature about stages of development of the
acquisition of variable forms, information that is not available for the child
variety of the dialect. Broader impacts include the usefulness of findings for
the development of more culturally and linguistically appropriate assessment
tools, leading to more accurate assessment outcomes for children who speak this
dialect, the involvement in undergraduate research by underrepresented groups,
and the strengthening of a research collaboration between two institutions, one
a historically black college (HBCU). The activities will provide undergraduate
students with background and analytical skills that are applicable to STEM-
related fields, such as linguistics and computation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is a collaboration between researchers from Jackson State University (an
HBCU) and the University of Massachusetts Amherst to investigate developing
patterns in morphological marking on verbs in African American English (AAE).
Systematic variation in African American English (AAE) has been addressed in
research on the variety; however, there remains a blurred line of demarcation
between typical developmental language variation and language disorder in
younger AAE speakers. This study builds on previous descriptions of child AAE,
and it applies quantitative analysis and mechanisms in current syntactic theory
to empirical data in investigating the connection between morphological marking
and the instantiation of [Tense] and [Agreement] in child AAE. Specifically, the
project will analyze verbs in past tense contexts and in 3rd person singular
non-past contexts child AAE. The data and results will bear directly on the
acquisition path of morphological marking (e.g., 3rd singular -s and forms of
past such as -ed) on verbs in that it will fill gaps in the literature about
stages of development of the acquisition of variable forms, information that is
not available for child AAE. Findings of the project will be used to describe
how normal variation associated with child AAE is systematically different from
disordered language. Findings will be useful in the development of more
culturally and linguistically appropriate assessment tools, leading to more
accurate assessment outcomes for AAE-speaking children. A better understanding
of the AAE linguistic system will be useful in addressing longstanding questions
that remain unanswered about the interaction of AAE and the acquisition of
literacy and other language-based academic subjects, such as math and science,
and should ultimately lead to more positive educational opportunities for
children who speak AAE.