* 1744273
* EAGER:  Combining FerroElectret NanoGenerators (FENG) with smart materials for enabling unique performance in microdevices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2019
* Nelson Sepulveda, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2019
* USD 59,987.00

Abstract Nontechnical: The proposed exploratory work is aimed at merging
FerroElectret Nanogenerator (FENG) and smart materials in micrometer-sized-based
devices. This is expected to establish new performance theoretical limits in the
operation of micro-electro-mechanical and optical systems; and to enable
unprecedented functionality. The research plan is focusing on the transition of
nanogenerator technologies from device development to system implementation,
enabling integration in wearable electronics. The project will complete three
Major Research Tasks that cover device optimization, system integration, and
validation. The overall scientific broader impact of this work is to generate
knowledge that will be of significance to researchers and developers in the
fields of large-scale integration of wearable and portable systems. The societal
broader impact is found in the development of an energy harvesting technology
that could pave the road towards self-powering portable/wearable electronics
from human motion reducing the need of non renewable energy sources. Technical:
The PI's research group introduced the FENG as a promising device for harvesting
energy from human motion, and demonstrated major progress in performance from
the integration of single wall CNT films with vanadium dioxide (VO2)-based
devices. In this early exploratory research, the PI proposes to study the
feasibility of merging these two breakthroughs into micrometer-sized devices to
allow for self-powering capabilities and enable touch-activated programming of
electrical, mechanical, and optical states. The intellectual merit of the
proposed work is found in the combination of FENG and VO2-based microdevices to
enable self-powered programmable microdevices that can be integrated in wearable
electronics. The potential main contributions of this exploratory research are
the maturing of nanogenerator technologies capable of harvesting energy from
human motion; and the development of a design platform for the integration of
FENG with micrometer devices. Despite the significant progress on
nanogenerators, there are still hurdles in the path towards their individual
optimization and full integration with microdevices, and even more for the
development of self-powered wearable electronics. The most significant obstacles
that prevent the further advancement of the technology include: (i) device
dynamics and frequency performance, (ii) matching impedance with power storage
units, and (iii) power modulation. All these three obstacles will be addressed
in the proposed exploratory research.