* 1744049
* 2017 Gordon Research Conference on Biomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Joel Collier, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Mohan Srinivasarao
* 05/31/2018
* USD 5,010.00

Nontechnical: &lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division
of Materials Research to Gordon Research Conference is in support of the
participants' travel and/or registration to attend and present recent scientific
findings by researchers for the 2017 Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) and Gordon
Research Conference (GRC) on "Biomaterials" to be held at Holderness School,
Plymouth, NH from July 23 to July 28, 2017. This award is cofounded by the
Engineering of Biomedical System program in the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental &amp; Transport Systems (Directorate for
Engineering). The conference is committed in bringing together young and senior
scientists in the field of biomaterials, and to discuss their current research.
These interactions are expected to build informal networks with their peers in
fostering collaborations and interactions between scientists from different
countries and fields that may lead to a lifetime of collaborations and
scientific achievements. To fulfill these scientific goals and broader impacts,
the organizers have invited a significant number of early career faculty and
postdoctoral scientists as well as senior scientists to speak at the meeting.
Exposing a diverse mix of scientists to this kind of intensive and interactive
meeting will be an excellent way to stimulate broader participation in cutting
edge Biomaterials
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: &lt;br/&gt;Biomaterials are
exquisitely designed and synthesized in nature with high degree fidelity and
functionality, and most of these synthetic reactions in nature are carried out
at ambient conditions of temperature, pressure, pH, etc. In many cases, the
bioderived materials display structure-function relationships that exceed our
current ability to reproduce them by synthetic means. Nevertheless, our
understanding of these designs, and how they are produced is now sufficient to
encourage efforts to harness or mimic these designs and the methods used in
nature. Specific science questions to be addressed in this conference include:
1) how can computational design and assessment would provide more efficient and
powerful approaches to biomaterials research; 2) what are molecular strategies
that can be deployed to regulate interactions; and 3) how molecularly designed
structures can be designed for a range of future applications. This conference
will bring together young and senior scientists in the field of biomaterials to
share recent advances and new methodologies. The focus of this GRS/GRC
conference will be to promote exchange of ideas between researchers in the field
of biomaterials and tissue engineering by promoting the attendance of a diverse
group of participants at different career stages, genders, ethnic backgrounds,
and who possess a diversity of intellectual thoughts and approaches.