* 1744460
* NSF INCLUDES: Sustainability Teams Empower and Amplify Membership in STEM (S-TEAMS)
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2019
* Amy Tuininga, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 10/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

The Sustainability Teams Empower and Amplify Membership in STEM (S-TEAMS), an
NSF INCLUDES Design and Development Launch Pilot project, will tackle the
problem of persistent underrepresentation by low-income, minority, and women
students in STEM disciplines and careers through transdisciplinary teamwork. As
science is increasingly done in teams, collaborations bring diversity to
research. Diverse interactions can support critical thinking, problem-solving,
and is a priority among STEM disciplines. By exploring a set of individual
contributors that can be effect change through collective impact, this project
will explore alternative approaches to broadly enhance diversity in STEM, such
as sense of community and perceived program benefit. The S-TEAMS project relies
on the use of sustainability as the organizing frame for the deployment of
learning communities (teams) that engage deeply with active learning. Studies on
the issue of underrepresentation often cite a feeling of isolation and lack of
academically supportive networks with other students like themselves as major
reasons for a disinclination to pursue education and careers in STEM, even as
the numbers of underrepresented groups are increasing in colleges and
universities across the country. The growth of sustainability science provides
an excellent opportunity to include students from underrepresented groups in
supportive teams working together on problems that require expertise in multiple
disciplines. Participating students will develop professional skills and
strengthen STEM- and sustainability-specific skills through real-world
experience in problem solving and team science. Ultimately this project is
expected to help increase the number of qualified professionals in the field of
sustainability and the number of minorities in the STEM professions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While there is certainly a clear need to improve
engagement and retention of underrepresented groups across the entire spectrum
of STEM education - from K-12 through graduate education, and on through career
choices - the explicit focus here is on the undergraduate piece of this critical
issue. This approach to teamwork makes STEM socialization integral to the active
learning process. Five-member transdisciplinary teams, from disciplines such as
biology, chemistry, computer and information sciences, geography, geology,
mathematics, physics, and sustainability science, will work together for ten
weeks in summer 2018 on real-world projects with corporations, government
organizations, and nongovernment organizations. Sustainability teams with low
participation by underrepresented groups will be compared to those with high
representation to gather insights regarding individual and collective
engagement, productivity, and ongoing interest in STEM. Such insights will be
used to scale up the effort through partnership with New Jersey Higher Education
Partnership for Sustainability (NJHEPS).