* 1744250
* NSF RAPID - Economic Risks, Immigration Threats and Public Attitudes After Britain's Brexit Referendum
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2018
* Marianne Stewart, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2018
* USD 38,250.00

This project is motivated by the observation that resurgent populism has become
a highly consequential force in major mature democracies including the United
States and the United Kingdom. One important effect of the new populism occurred
on June 23rd, 2016 when the UK decided in a national referendum to leave the
European Union. The project focuses on the nature, sources, and consequences of
public attitudes towards the economic, security and cultural costs and benefits
of EU membership, paying particular attention to attitudes towards immigration.
The project also will gather data on the perceived risks of leaving the EU, the
impact of attitudes towards "Brexit" on voting in the June 8, 2017 general
election, and reactions to subsequent "divorce" negotiations between the UK and
the EU. The United Kingdom's historic Brexit decision has attracted global
attention and the proposed project will produce broad impacts through analysis
of the dynamics of public attitudes and political behavior in the UK. These are
particularly pertinent as the Brexit negotiations between the UK and EU unfold
over the coming year. The project also examines possible responses to terrorism
by including survey questions first used following the 2005 terrorist attacks on
London. The project's all data and research findings will be made freely
available in highly accessible form to scholars, students, policy makers, media
commentators and laypersons.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project consists of
three large (N = 5000) national panel surveys administered in the UK. Two
surveys will be fielded before and after the June 8, 2017 UK general election,
with the third conducted in spring 2018. The three surveys will include a large
panel of respondents participating in three previous national surveys
administered prior to and following the June 2016 Brexit referendum. The
resulting six-wave national panel, with three waves already done, facilitates
sophisticated multivariate analyses (e.g., mixed Markov latent class and dynamic
panel models) of the individual-level dynamics of the attitudes and behaviors of
interest and their drivers. By replicating key questions asked in monthly
surveys conducted since 2004, the new surveys also will provide unique leverage
for mapping the aggregate-level evolution of relevant public attitudes over the
14-year period preceding and following the historic June 23, 2016 Brexit vote.
It bears emphasis that the questions asked and data gathered in the proposed
study are not and will not be available in the British Election Study or any
other surveys.