* 1744245
* Political Parties in the Modern Democracies
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2018
* Hans Noel, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2018
* USD 48,592.00

This conference brings together scholars studying party politics from a variety
of intellectual perspectives who study many different countries. Many
democracies have recently experienced similar developments, including populist
challenges to political elites and concerns about immigration and globalization.
At the same time, political science research on political parties tends to view
United States in isolation. This conference would help to bridge that division,
bringing knowledge from other democracies to bear on our understanding of the
United States, and knowledge about the United States into the thinking of those
who study other democracies. The United States has a two-party party system and
a presidential governmental system. Many other democracies have multiple
parties, a parliamentary system, or both. These differences may obscure the
similarities of populist, anti-elite political movements. If we want to learn
from the common experience of many democracies, we need to understand better how
these different institutions and their related different political cultures
affect party politics in each country.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The conference
brings together political parties scholars from the United States with those
from other countries. Theories of political parties in the United States have
been concerned with the role of policy-motivated actors versus the role of
office-seeking actors. Scholars studying parties in most parliamentary
democracies have had less trouble considering the importance of policy, as
parties in those countries tend to be viewed as more programmatic. Many now see
U.S. parties as increasingly programmatic, and many also see this as a problem
from democracy. A more unified theory of what a political party is will help us
see similarities and differences in how parties respond to movements, such as
recent populist or anti-globalist movements. Given that we think there are
common shocks to the political systems of many western democracies, it makes
sense to try to learn from those examples. To do that, we need a more effective
common framework. This conference will help steer research toward such a
framework.