* 1744539
* NSF INCLUDES DDLP: Fostering Engineering Identity and Support Structures to Promote Entry and Persistence in Engineering for First-Generation Students
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Roberta Anslow-Hammond, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Arizona State University's Ira A. Fulton Schools of Engineering with the
Maricopa County Community Colleges District and K-12 school districts along with
industry partners, Honeywell, Intel, and Texas Instruments, and the Helios
Education Foundation will implement an NSF Design and Development Launch Pilot
to address the broadening participation objectives of enhancing entry and
persistence of underrepresented groups in engineering. This alliance will
identify and develop effective mechanisms to impact entry and persistence in
engineering at scale and to expand the effort for the region, serving as a model
for Arizona and other universities nationally. Diversity is often seen as a
valuable commodity for fostering innovation and creativity in engineering, and
extant theoretical and empirical literature provides evidence of the importance
a diversified engineering workforce can have to spark scientific and
technological innovation to solve complex problems. Nationally, there is a
consistent shortage of available diverse engineers and scientists, which is
believed to compromise the country's ability to sustain its leadership position
as a global force. This project will create engineering pathways for
underrepresented groups and identify and develop effective mechanisms that
impact these students' entry and persistence in engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A total of 500 high school students, 100 2-year college
students, and 200 four-year college students will participate in the project.
The research measures will focus on students' academic/career awareness and
interest in engineering and the degree to which students develop a strong
identity and affinity for engineering. It is expected that the alliance
affiliates will develop into adaptive systems that respond to needs of first-
generation students at various pathway junctures. This project has the potential
to transform educational experiences and support systems for first-generation
students.