* 1744946
* Collaborative Research: Ice Supersaturation over the Southern Ocean and Antarctica, and its Role in Climate
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2022
* Andrew Gettelman, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* David Sutherland
* 03/31/2022
* USD 67,098.00

Ice supersaturation plays a key role in cloud formation and evolution, and it
determines the partitioning among ice, liquid and vapor phases. Over the
Southern Ocean and Antarctica, the transition between mixed-phase and ice clouds
significantly impacts the radiative effects of clouds. Remote regions such as
the Antarctica and Southern Ocean historically have been under-sampled by in-
situ observations, especially by airborne observations. Even though more
attention has been given to the cloud microphysical properties over these
regions, the distribution and characteristics of ice supersaturation and its
role in the current and future climate have not been fully investigated at the
higher latitudes in the Southern Hemisphere. One of the main objectives of this
study is to analyze observations from three recent major field campaigns
sponsored by NSF and DOE, which provide intensive in-situ, airborne measurements
over the Southern Ocean and ground-based observations at McMurdo station in
Antarctica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will analyze aircraft-based and
ground-based observations over the Southern Ocean and Antarctica, and compare
the observations with the Community Earth System Model Version 2 (CESM2)
simulations. The focus will be on the observations of ice supersaturation and
the relative humidity distribution in mixed-phase and ice clouds, as well as
their relationship with cloud micro- and macrophysical properties. Observations
will be compared to CESM2 simulations to elucidate model biases. Surface
radiation and the precipitation budget at the McMurdo station will be quantified
and compared against the CESM2 simulations to improve the fidelity of the
representation of Antarctic climate (and climate prediction over Antarctica).
Results from our research will be released to the community for improving the
understanding of cloud radiative effects and the mass transport of water in the
high southern latitudes. Comparisons between the simulations and observations
will provide valuable information for improving the next generation CESM model.
Two education/outreach projects will be carried out by PI Diao at San Jose State
University (SJSU), including a unique undergraduate student research project
with hands-on laboratory work on an airborne instrument, and an outreach program
that uses social media to broadcast news on polar research to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.