* 1744837
* 2017 Meeting of the Pan-American Society for Evolutionary Developmental Biology, August 19-22, 2017, Calgary, Canada
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Daniel Medeiros, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 06/30/2019
* USD 20,350.00

The field of Evolutionary Developmental Biology (EvoDevo) sits at the
intersection of Evolutionary Biology, Developmental Biology, Genetics, Genomics,
and Physiology. The main goal of EvoDevo is the same as these fields; to
understand how genotype gives rise to phenotype. However, unlike traditional
developmental genetics, which relies largely on human-induced variation in a
small number of model organisms, EvoDevo utilizes naturally occurring variation
between different groups of organisms to link genotype and phenotype. To
accomplish this, EvoDevo workers apply modern developmental, genetic, genomic,
and bioinformatic tools to a broad range of model and non-model organisms. The
mission of the newly formed Pan-American Society for Evolutionary Developmental
Biology (PASEDB) is to; 1) promote and support EvoDevo in the Americas, 2)
provide a forum for communication and collaboration between workers in the field
and related disciplines and, 3) promote training and education in EvoDevo and
related disciplines. The members of PASEDB view the continued vitality and
growth of the EvoDevo community as essential to progress and innovation in
several fields directly relevant to human health. PASEDB is also strongly
committed to achieving appropriate representation of women, racial/ethnic
minorities, persons with disabilities, and other individuals who have been
traditionally underrepresented in science. The main way PASEDB is addressing
these concerns is by organizing a biennial conference where established
researchers and trainees representing a diverse cross-section of the field can
meet to exchange ideas, network, and establish collaborations. The proposed
activity will support the attendance of new faculty and trainees to the 2017
Biennial Meeting of PASEDB. In doing so, the project with facilitate the
exchange of ideas, collaborations, and sense of community needed to advance
knowledge and train the next generation of scientists. Due to the highly
interdisciplinary nature of the field, these benefits will extend to related
fields including Evolutionary Biology, Developmental Biology, Genetics,
Genomics, and Physiology. Attendees will also participate in several activities
designed to help promote appropriate representation of women, racial/ethnic
minorities, persons with disabilities, and other individuals who have been
traditionally underrepresented in science.

Technical Explanation of the Project. The proposed activity will support
attendance of 10 junior faculty members, 10 postdoctoral scholars, and 25
graduate students to the Pan-American Society for Evolutionary Developmental
Biology 2017 biennial meeting. Attendees will participate in several activities
designed to help achieve appropriate representation of groups traditionally
underrepresented in science. These will include round table breakfasts for
persons of color and members of the LGBTQ community, a workshop for women in
science, and a talk by an internationally recognized leader in increasing the
number of women faculty in the sciences. Select participants will take part in
an outreach activity to the Spanish speaking community involving Spanish
language interviews with invited speakers. Participants will also be chosen to
achieve gender parity, and at least 30% of funded attendees will be from groups
traditionally underrepresented in science.