* 1744340
* The 14th U.S.-Korea Forum on Nanotechnology: Internet of Things Including Nanosensors and Neuromorphic Computing, To Be Held September, 11-12, 2017, in Washington, DC
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Myung Jhon, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 07/31/2018
* USD 38,960.00

The proposed project for a Forum seeks financial support for scientists and
engineers in the nanotechnology area with an objective to recommend new
paradigms in this area and promote collaborative initiatives between the US and
Korea, two countries. The "14th U.S.-Korea Forum on Nanotechnology: Internet of
Things (IoT) including Nanosensors and Neuromorphic Computing" will host 8
senior presenters and 8 additional early-career presenters (underrepresented
minorities will be strongly encouraged) and an approximately equal number of
Korean presenters. It will actively encourage partnerships in nanotechnology for
breakthroughs in various topics in IoT including nanosensors as well as novel
computing architecture in information technology, in addition to strengthening
achievements and assessing the progress on recommendations made during the
previous meetings of this type.&lt;br/&gt;The Forum will play a key role in
identifying new directions for research on IoT technologies and neuromorphic
computing addressing long-term challenges in nanotechnological fundamentals and
its application for the mutual benefit of both the US and Korea. The meeting
proceedings and findings will be published in a booklet form by the National
Nanotechnology Policy Center, Korea and on Carnegie Mellon?s website, which will
be available to a broader public.