* 1744401
* Convergence HTF: Workshop on Converging Human and Technological Perspectives in Crowdsourcing Research
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2017,12/31/2018
* Heng Xu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Meghan Houghton
* 12/31/2018
* USD 49,124.00

Intelligent, interactive, and highly networked machines -- with which people
increasingly interact -- are a growing part of the landscape, particularly in
regard to work. As automation today moves from the factory floor to knowledge
and service occupations, research is needed to reap the benefits in increased
productivity and increased job opportunities, and to mitigate social costs. The
workshop supported by this award will promote the convergence of computer
science, data management, machine learning, education, and the social and
behavioral sciences to define key challenges and research imperatives of the
nexus of humans, technology, and work. Convergence is the deep integration of
knowledge, theories, methods, and data from multiple fields to form new and
expanded frameworks for addressing scientific and societal challenges and
opportunities. This convergence workshop addresses the future of work at the
human-technology frontier.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific focus of this
workshop is on crowdsourcing -- the production of networked knowledge from
public participation. This is a new area of research, gaining attention from
researchers who study human-computer interactions, data management, machine
learning, human behavior, and business. This workshop will bring together
researchers from these and other relevant communities to (1) synthesize the
diverse perspectives found in these different fields, (2) integrate different
knowledge, theories and data to create a transdisciplinary and convergent
research roadmap, and (3) catalyze new research directions and advance
scientific discovery and innovation in crowdsourcing research. The workshop will
also contribute toward broadening participation in this area of research by
proactively seeking inclusion of traditionally underrepresented persons.