* 1744445
* NSF INCLUDES DDLP: BEST BET: Broadening Experiences in Scientific Training - Beginning Enhancement Track
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Linda Hyman, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Marenda
* 04/30/2022
* USD 299,826.00

The Broadening Experience for Scientific Training: Beginning Enhancement Track
("BEST-BET"), an NSF INCLUDES Design and Development Launch Pilot project, draws
upon the expertise of five research-intensive institutions that have developed
innovative programing in career and professional development for doctoral and
postdoctoral trainees in biomedical research. The goal of the project is to
expand the scope and leverage the work so as to engage students earlier in their
career exploration. Specifically, the project will target undergraduates who may
not be aware of the multitude of career options available to them. These include
opportunities in academia, the biotechnology and pharmaceutical industries,
science communication, science policy, and technology transfer/patent law. The
effort will focus on undergraduates who come from populations generally
underrepresented in STEM fields, including but not limited to ethnically,
racially and socioeconomically underserved communities. The grant will support
educational opportunities for students at minority-serving institutions and will
assess the impact of providing new opportunities to this community. The critical
contributions of a diverse and inclusive community are essential to progress in
all STEM fields. By promoting diversity in education, this project aims to
engage undergraduate students at a point in their professional development that
could enable participation in a wide range of workforce opportunities so as to
advance the progress of science and national health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
focus of BEST BET will be to use a collective impact framework to connect the
"BEST network" of institutions to partners engaged in undergraduate education of
students from underrepresented communities who are interested in the life
sciences. The underlying premise is that career exploration focused on
opportunities that go beyond physician training will enable engagement of this
community of learners in the life science workforce beyond the pre-med track and
keep them engaged in degree completion. Multiple strategies will be used to
attain the goals of BEST BET. They are organized in the context of two major
objectives roughly divided into the scope of planned activities. The first
objective focuses on "career exploration" and offers strategies to assist
partner institutions to build career and skill development capacities. The
second is grounded in an enhanced experience of BEST site visits whereby
undergraduates will have the opportunity to envision life as a graduate student
and beyond. These strategies will likely enhance persistence to complete the
baccalaureate degree and move onto doctoral programs.