* 1744501
* Ecology Plus (Ecology+):  Broadening Pathways to Ecological Careers through a Collective Impact Approach
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Teresa Mourad, Ecological Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Marenda
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,992.00

Ecology Plus (Ecology+) is an NSF INCLUDES Launch Pilot project with a goal of
increasing the participation of underrepresented minorities in a broad range of
career pathways where ecology plays a role. This project recognizes that both
innovative scientific research and wider societal participation are needed for
effective and equitable solutions to environmental issues that directly impact
societal well-being and national security. Both research and policy are enhanced
by full participation of all sectors of society. Despite the existence of
multiple programs over many years, barriers to the participation of
underrepresented minorities in ecology persist. One overarching systemic issue
remains critical: that insufficient connections among programs result in breaks
along critical transition points in career pathways. Project activities will lay
the groundwork by developing a regional approach to alliance-building that can
be extended across the nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ecology+ will
use a collective impact framework -- characterized by a common agenda, shared
measurement, mutually reinforcing activities, continuous communication, and
backbone support -- to optimize career guidance and support for undergraduate
students, graduate students and early career technical and professional
scientists. Starting in the Washington-Baltimore region, key objectives of the
project are to develop infrastructure for effective communications among
partners with the capacity to expand nationally; map potential career pathways
with associated sets of necessary competencies, opportunities and mentors, and;
empower alliance participants to overcome institutional barriers and patterns of
unconscious bias. Ecology+ will: a) establish an online mentoring platform; b)
offer a career fair with motivational talks and guidance on individual career
development plans; c) offer a series of relevant skills workshops; d) arrange
research or internship experiences, and; e) facilitate awareness and networking
opportunities with employers from agencies, business and nonprofit sectors. The
value of Ecology+ lies in its comprehensive, integrated approach that will bring
new partners and their resources into a transformative and systemic response to
the key barriers affecting underrepresented minorities in science.