* 1744771
* Synoptic Evaluation of Long-Term Antarctic Ice Sheet Model Simulations using a Continent-Wide Database of Cosmogentic-Nuclide Measurements
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Gregory Balco, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 262,203.00

The purpose of this project is to use geological data that record past changes
in the Antarctic ice sheets to test computer models for ice sheet change. The
geologic data mainly consist of dated glacial deposits that are preserved above
the level of the present ice sheet, and range in age from thousands to millions
of years old. These provide information about the size, thickness, and rate of
change of the ice sheets during past times when the ice sheets were larger than
present. In addition, some of these data are from below the present ice surface
and therefore also provide some information about past warm periods when ice
sheets were most likely smaller than present. The primary purpose of the
computer model is to predict future ice sheet changes, but because significant
changes in the size of ice sheets are slow and likely occur over hundreds of
years or longer, the only way to determine whether these models are accurate is
to test their ability to reproduce past ice sheet changes. The primary purpose
of this project is to carry out such a test. The research team will compile
relevant geologic data, in some cases generate new data by dating additional
deposits, and develop methods and software to compare data to model simulations.
In addition, this project will (i) contribute to building and sustaining U.S.
science capacity through postdoctoral training in geochronology, ice sheet
modeling, and data science, and (ii) improve public access to geologic data and
model simulations relevant to ice sheet change through online database and
website development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical aspects of this project are
primarily focused on the field of cosmogenic-nuclide exposure-dating, which is a
method that relies on the production of rare stable and radio-nuclides by
cosmic-ray interactions with rocks and minerals exposed at the Earth's surface.
Because the advance and retreat of ice sheets results in alternating cosmic-ray
exposure and shielding of underlying bedrock and surficial deposits, this
technique is commonly used to date and reconstruct past ice sheet changes.
First, this project will contribute to compiling and systematizing a large
amount of cosmogenic-nuclide exposure age data collected in Antarctica during
the past three decades. Second, it will generate additional geochemical data
needed to improve the extent and usefulness of measurements of stable cosmogenic
nuclides, cosmogenic neon-21 in particular, that are useful for constraining
ice-sheet behavior on million-year timescales. Third, it will develop a
computational framework for comparison of the geologic data set with existing
numerical model simulations of Antarctic ice sheet change during the past
several million years, with particular emphasis on model simulations of past
warm periods, for example the middle Pliocene ca. 3-3.3 million years ago,
during which the Antarctic ice sheets are hypothesized to have been
substantially smaller than present. Fourth, guided by the results of this
comparison, it will generate new model simulations aimed at improving agreement
between model simulations and geologic data, as well as diagnosing which
processes or parameterizations in the models are or are not well constrained by
the data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.