* 1744760
* Collaborative Research: Antarctic Diatom Proteorhodopsins: Characterization and a Potential Role in the Iron-limitation Response
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Brian Hopkinson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Karla Heidelberg
* 05/31/2022
* USD 226,807.00

Proteorhodopsins are proteins that are embedded in membranes that can act as
light-driven proton pumps to generate energy for metabolism and growth. The
discovery of proteorhodopsins in many diverse marine prokaryotic microbes has
initiated extensive investigation into their distributions and functional roles.
Recently, a proton-pumping, rhodopsin-like gene was identified in diatoms, a
group of marine phytoplankton that dominates the base of the food web in much of
the Southern Ocean. Since this time, proteorhodopsins have been identified in
many, but not all, diatom species. The proteorhodopsin gene is more frequently
found in diatoms residing in cold, iron-limited regions of the ocean, including
the Southern Ocean, than in diatoms from other regions. It is thought that
proteorhodopsin is especially suited for use energy production in the Southern
Ocean since it uses no iron and its reaction rate is insensitive to temperature
(unlike conventional photosynthesis). The overall objective of the project is to
characterize Antarctic diatom-proteorhodopsin and determine its role in the
adaptation of these diatoms to low iron concentrations and extremely low
temperatures found in Antarctic waters. This research will provide new
information on the genetic underpinnings that contribute to the success of
diatoms in the Southern Ocean and how this unique molecule may play a pivotal
role in providing energy to the base of the Antarctic food web. Broader impact
activities are aimed to promote the teaching and learning of polar marine-
sciences related topics by translating research objectives into readily
accessible educational materials for middle-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine molecular, biochemical
and physiological measurements to determine the role and importance of
proteorhodopsin in diatom isolates from the Western Antarctic Peninsula region.
Proton-pumping characteristics and pumping rates of proteorhodopsin as a
function of light intensity and temperature, the resultant proteorhodopsin-
linked intracellular ATP production rates, and the cellular localization of the
protein will be determined. The project will examine the environmental
conditions where Antarctic diatom-proteorhodopsin is most highly expressed and
construct a cellular energy budget that includes diatom-proteorhodopsin when
grown under these different environmental conditions. Estimates of the energy
flux generated by proteorhodopsin will be compared to total energy generation by
the photosynthetic light reactions and metabolically coupled respiration rates.
Finally, the characteristics and gene expression of diatom-proteorhodopsin in
Antarctic diatoms and a proteorhodopsin-containing diatom isolates from
temperate regions will be compared in order to determine if there is a
preferential dependence on energy production through proteorhodopsin in diatoms
residing in cold, iron-limited regions of the ocean. Educational activities will
be performed in collaboration with the Morehead Planetarium and Science Center
who co-ordinates the SciVentures program, a popular summer camp for middle-
school students from Chapel Hill and surrounding areas. In collaboration with
the Planetarium, the researchers will develop activities that focus on
phytoplankton and the important role they play within polar marine food webs for
the SciVentures participants. Additionally, a teaching module on Antarctic
phytoplankton will be developed for classrooms and made available to educational
networking websites and presented at workshops for science educators
nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.