* 1744479
* NSF INCLUDES DDLP: Capacity Building in Disaster Research for Scholars from Under-Represented Groups
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2017,05/31/2019
* Lori Peek, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 05/31/2019
* USD 299,936.00

This NSF INCUDES Design and Development Launch Pilot will increase the
recruitment, retention, and matriculation of racial and ethnic minorities in
STEM Ph.D. programs contributing to hazards and disaster research. Increasing
STEM focused minorities on hazards mitigation, and disaster research areas will
benefit society and contribute to the achievements of specific, desired societal
outcomes following disasters. The Minority SURGE Capacity in Disasters (SURGE)
launch pilot will provide the empirical research to identify substantial ways to
increase the underrepresentation of minorities in STEM disciplines interested in
hazards mitigation and disaster research. Increasing the involvement of
qualified minorities will help solve the broader vulnerability concerns in these
communities and help advance the body of knowledge through the diversity of
thought and creative problem solving in scholarship and practice. Utilizing
workshops and a multifaceted mentorship program SURGE creates a new model that
addresses the diversity concerns in both STEM and disaster fields, and make
American communities more resilient following natural disasters. This project
will be of interest to policymakers, educators and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Minority SURGE Capacity in Disasters (SURGE)
NSF INCLUDES Design and Development Launch Pilot will enhance the social capital
of racial and ethnic minority communities by increasing their networks,
connections, and access to disaster management decision-making among members of
their community from STEM fields. The four-fold goals of SURGE are to: (1)
increase the number of minority graduate researchers in STEM fields with a
disaster focus; (2) develop and guide well-trained, qualified disaster scholars
from STEM fields; (3) provide academic and professional mentorship for next
generation minority STEM scholars in hazards mitigation and disaster research;
and (4) develop professional and research opportunities that involve outreach
and problem solving for vulnerable communities in the U.S. The SURGE project is
organized as a lead-organization network through the University of Nebraska at
Omaha and includes community partners. As a pilot project, SURGE participation
is limited to graduate students from research-intensive universities across the
country. Each student will attend workshops and training programs developed by
the project leads. SURGE investigators will conduct project evaluation and
assessment of their workshops, training, and mentorship projects. Results from
evaluations and assessments will be presented at STEM and disaster-related
conferences and published in peer-reviewed academic journals.