* 1744433
* Collaborative Research: Arctic Hydrological Regime Shift in a Warming Climate
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Michael Retelle, Bates College
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 258,349.00

The Arctic is currently warming faster than any other region of the globe, and
recent changes in climate and hydrology have had direct impacts in Svalbard,
where flash flooding and enhanced mass movement over frozen ground on steep
slopes has occasionally led to catastrophic slope failure. This study will
examine how warming is leading to a new hydrological regime in regions adjacent
to the areas where major sea-ice losses have occurred. The new hydrological
regime is result of an increase in annual precipitation, a higher proportion of
which is in the form of rain rather than snow, especially in the transition
seasons of fall and spring. Under this collaborative project, the team will
study annually laminated sediments in lakes of western Svalbard (Norwegian
Arctic) to identify the sedimentary signal of recent changes in hydrology and
use this to reconstruct the long-term history of rainfall-related sedimentary
events to determine when similar conditions may have prevailed in the past. This
project will involve a postdoctoral scientist, a graduate student, and
undergraduate students at University of Massachusetts and Bates College, as well
as teacher in the research. There is training of STEM teachers through a summer
program enabling them to incorporate Arctic earth science activities into their
classroom curricula. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine how warming
is leading to a new hydrological regime in regions adjacent to the areas where
major sea-ice losses have occurred. The investigators will study annually
laminated sediments in lakes of western Svalbard to identify the sedimentary
signal of recent changes in hydrology and reconstruct the long-term history of
rainfall-related sedimentary events to determine when similar conditions may
have prevailed in the past. The type and amount of sediment transported to lakes
carries with it information about meteorological and hydrological conditions in
the lake watershed. The investigators will recover sediment cores to study the
structure and grain size profiles of recent years of sediment accumulation, to
compare with meteorological measurements, sediment recovered in traps, and
measurements of processes responsible for sediment transport and deposition.
They will employ microanalytcal techniques for high-resolution grain size
analysis, varve detection and measurement. Using scanning electron microscope
image analysis methods, they will reconstruct rainfall-driven sedimentary
events. Sediments acquired from sediment traps will be analyzed using a laser
particle size analyzer to obtain sub-annual scale grain size profiles to compare
with observed hydroclimatic events and the varved records. This will provide a
unique perspective on the nature of recent sedimentary changes and provide
insight into the effects of contemporary changes in climate on the hydrological
regime of this region. The results will have implications for other parts of the
Arctic where sea-ice is rapidly receding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.