* 1744246
* INSPIRE - Intentional defaults for more sustainable infrastructure: Studying interventions to alleviate biases in upstream, multi-stakeholder decisions
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Leidy Klotz, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2021
* USD 948,731.00

1531041 (Klotz). This INSPIRE project is jointly funded by the Environmental
Sustainability program in the CBET Division in the ENG Directorate, the
Decision, Risk, and Management Sciences program in the SES Division of the SBE
Directorate, and the Office of Integrative Activities. The project will extend -
to upstream, multi-stakeholder decision making for sustainability - the study of
interventions designed to alleviate decision biases such as framing effects and
social norms. This topic will be studied in the context of defaults, or starting
points, in development decisions for physical infrastructure, which has long
term impacts on various sustainability concerns. Such decisions in
infrastructure, as in other domains, are guided by decision aids including
rating systems that do not take full advantage of advances in behavioral
sciences, in part because this is an area where interdisciplinary exchange of
methods, problems, and solutions has been rare. Through a collaboration that was
established by the NSF RCN SUSSTAIN, this project will examine whether and how
default options presented to infrastructure designers can help them overcome
barriers to the selection of more sustainable options.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intentionally designed defaults will be studied in
Envision, a leading rating system for sustainable infrastructure. The research
plan follows an iterative process that begins with experimental work to test a
series of default interventions, with students and professionals, using replicas
of actual infrastructure development decisions. Experiments will test the extent
to which behavioral science theories translate to upstream, multi-stakeholder
decisions, in particular whether choice defaults influence such decisions, and
through which of three channels: the cognitive energy required to make a
decision; perceptions that the default is the recommended or social norm option;
and by framing the outcome as a loss or gain. Experiments will also explore
whether disclosing interventions diminishes their effect. Semi-structured
interviews with decision makers will complement the experiments to explore the
relative influence of the choice defaults compared to technical and economic
considerations and compared to stakeholders' differing goals, importance
weightings, and tradeoff values. This project is set up to yield educational
case studies to infuse research insights into engineering and behavioral science
curricula.