* 1744587
* Collaborative Research: Arctic sea ice variability: Remote drivers and local processes
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Axel Schweiger, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 05/31/2023
* USD 346,084.00

Arctic sea ice loss is an important concern for global society affecting both
Arctic and global environments. At present, global climate models do a poor job
of predicting recent observed declines in Arctic sea ice, and the causes of this
discrepancy remain unclear. One interpretation is that models may not be
sensitive enough to capture the response of sea ice to greenhouse warming.
However, another possibility is that natural cycles have accelerated the recent
Arctic sea ice loss. Solving this problem has important implications not only
for the interpretation of recent Arctic climate change but also the future
projection for the Arctic, including the question as to when we will see the
first ice free summer in the Arctic. The study will conduct targeted simulations
and place these simulations in the context of observations over the last 117
years. As a result, we expect to better understand how well models capture
naturally occurring variations of the Arctic climate and sea ice, and how we can
improve models to yield more confident predictions. In addition, the study will
train a graduate student and a postdoctoral scientist in polar aspects of
climate science and general climate modeling and will provide outreach
activities targeting K-12 students and teachers in Santa Barbara.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will help us understand and quantify how
atmospheric circulation in the Arctic influences winds, cloudiness, water vapor,
radiation and thereby sea ice variability. It will lead to better understanding
of the relative contribution of forced and internal variaiblities in recent
Arctic warming and sea ice loss. First, the investigators will use data
assimilation techniques in a global earth system model and explore how tropical
sea surface temperature contributes to the recent sea ice decline via
teleconnections to the high latitudes. The investigators will then examine
dynamical mechanisms that link Arctic circulation to remote drivers in the
tropics and put circulation changes over the last 40 years into the context of
longer centennial term changes. Finally, results will help evaluate model skill
for Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5) and determine whether
the tropical drivers represent a main source of modeled internal
variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.