* 1744410
* Convergence NNA: Navigating the New Arctic- Understanding Future Systems of Transportation in Arctic Regions, a Workshop Proposal
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2019
* George Kantor, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 98,823.00

The workshop will consider future innovations in transportation technology and
policies in the Arctic that could address challenges associated with rapid
climate change. One transportation challenge, for example, is the limited
network of roads which are now being undermined by permafrost thaw and flooding;
while another challenge is the subsistence based rural economies which may face
food shortages. The workshop will bring together a number of natural and social
scientists and engineers with relevant expertise to consider how autonomous and
robotic transportation might address transportation challenges of the new Arctic
in the context of social, cultural, economic and environmental
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will consider future innovations in
transportation technology and policies in the Arctic that could address
challenges associated with rapid climate change. This workshop proposes not only
to look at the technological and engineering advancements of robotic
transportation but to expand collaborations between engineers, social and
natural scientists in order to develop new convergent ways of thinking about
this technology and its social and environmental impacts. These issues are
particularly relevant in the north because of the long distances, rural
economies, fragile environments, and majority Indigenous communities that pose
both opportunities and challenges to robotic transportation, particularly within
the context of globalizing social and economic systems and environmental change.
The workshop will be structured to enhance convergent outcomes through a
combination of lightning talks, co-design exercises and recombining the initial
organizing committees into convergence teams. The workshop will promote
convergence by focusing on the critical societal concern of limitations to
inland transportation in the Arctic and by bringing together experts from many
relevant disciplines of social science, natural science and engineering to
devise new creative approaches to address these limitations.