* 1744309
* RESEARCH-PGR: Algorithms and Tools for Improving Genome Assemblies
* BIO,IOS
* 12/15/2018,11/30/2022
* Steven Salzberg, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 11/30/2022
* USD 774,675.00

Over the past fifteen years, the field of genomics has generated thousands of
plant and animal genomes, each of which is an important resource for a broad
range of scientific studies. During the same time period, DNA sequencing has
become thousands of times faster and cheaper, which has been the main driver of
this flood of new genomes. Despite its efficiency, the new technology has
significant limitations, one of which is that only a short stretch of DNA, a few
hundred bases in length, can be sequenced at a time. These "reads" then need to
be assembled together to reconstruct a genome, which might contain billions of
bases spread across dozens of chromosomes. One consequence is that most genomes
today, except for a very tiny number of intensively-studied model organisms,
exist in highly fragmented form, often comprising tens of thousands of
fragments. The vast majority of plant and animal species have remained in this
"draft" format ever since their initial publication. This project will create
new genome assembly software that will make it possible for scientists to use
new sequencing technology to fix these draft genomes, not only correcting errors
but also stitching together many of the small fragments to create much better
assemblies for a very broad range of species. These improved genomes will, in
turn, provide the foundation for more accurate gene catalogs, better analyses of
genome structure and evolution, and a deeper understanding of the biology of
genomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genome assembly has long been an extremely
challenging computational task, due to the complex repetitive nature of many
genomes and to the large scale of the data generated in a sequencing effort.
Next-generation sequencing (NGS) has dramatically expanded the scale of the
assembly problem, with raw data sets increasing from millions of reads in the
mid-2000s to billions of reads in recent years. The recent introduction of very-
long-read technologies with high error rates has made assembly even more
challenging, but the great length of these sequences offers the possibility of
much more contiguous assemblies. This project aims to develop new technology for
genome assembly and to improve the genomes of a broad range of plant species
that are used by scientists across many fields of research. The investigators
will pursue these improvements through two related aims. First, they will
develop new and improved assembly algorithms that combine Illumina sequences
with third-generation sequencing technologies from Oxford Nanopore, Pacific
Biosciences, and others. The new algorithms will allow investigators to combine
low-cost short reads with higher-cost, high-error long reads to produce
dramatically better genome assemblies. Second, they will develop a new algorithm
to construct an assembly using the existing genome of a closely related species,
without the need to generate new data. The investigators will demonstrate their
methods by re-assembling multiple plant genomes from publicly available data.
All assemblies will be released rapidly to the community, and all software will
be free and open source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.