* 1744129
* Eager: Cyberattacks on Commercial IoT Networks Estimating Large Dimension Parameters for Big Data
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Rick Blum, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Zhengdao Wang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

Abstract ECCS -1744129&lt;br/&gt;Title: Eager: Cyberattacks on Commercial IoT
Networks Estimating Object Position &lt;br/&gt;Non-technical description:
&lt;br/&gt;While the internet has been available for many years, the integration
of sensing and control technology into the internet to yield what is being
called the Internet of Things (IoT) is still very immature and brings dangerous
new unaddressed security problems. For example, cyberattacks on automotive
processors have already been observed. Car manufacturers are developing critical
systems aimed at fusing data from several complex sensors to ensure self-driving
automobiles avoid collisions with people and animals. The proposed project will
seek to develop a complete theory of commercial IoT/sensor object location
estimation network attack mitigation and impact based on: (1) rigorous proofs
that the attacked sensors can be identified under some reasonable assumptions
and (2) rigorous estimation theory-based analysis of the possible range of
performance that the attacked system can achieve. The new theory should lead to
technology to protect against cyber attacks on smart homes, smart buildings,
smart factories and other commercial IoT/sensor systems relied upon in daily
lives. The major portion of the requested funds will go towards supporting
graduate students. Educating graduate and undergraduate students, from under
represented groups, in these important cross-disciplinary areas will be pursued.
Coordination between this research project, classes and Lehigh's Integrated
Networks for Electricity (INE) interdisciplinary research initiative is broader
impact associated with this project. Research results will be incorporated into
current and future Lehigh classes. Class notes might evolve into a short course,
and possibly a book on security of sensing systems, to provide a large
educational impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: &lt;br/&gt;For
the object localization problems under consideration, the research will
characterize precisely on how observations at each sensor constrain the possible
object position when no attacks are present. The research will also characterize
the impact of increasing the number of observations per sensor and the number of
sensors when no attacks are present. Further, the research will analyze the
impact of intersecting constraints at multiple sensors to show exactly how the
intersected constraints provide a strictly smaller set containing the object
location under the case of no attacks. Large deviation analysis will be used to
demonstrate that this approach can properly localize the target with high
probability when a sufficient number of observations are available at each
sensor. Cases with fewer observations will be analyzed using appropriate bounds
that are accurate with a finite number of observations. These analytical
approaches will be employed under attacks to show that significant attacks will
drive the intersected constraints to the empty set. Large deviation analysis
will be used to establish that this approach can properly identify attacked
sensors, under some reasonable assumptions, when a sufficient number of
observations are available at each sensor with high probability. Cases with
fewer observations will be analyzed using appropriate bounds that are accurate
with a finite number of observations.