* 1744118
* EAGER: Integration of Heat Pipes in Gas Turbines using Artificial Intelligence and Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2021
* Amir Faghri, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 04/30/2021
* USD 149,013.00

Gas turbines power almost all modern aircraft and generate about 21% of the
electricity used in the United States from natural gas. However, major losses of
efficiency and reliability in turbines are caused by the tremendous amount of
excess heat that turbines create. Current air-cooling technology has limited
success in getting rid of this excess heat. This project uses an advanced
cooling technology called heat pipes, which can dissipate significantly greater
amounts of heat than air cooling. Using this technology will significantly
improve fuel consumption, efficiency and reliability of gas turbines resulting
in significant cost savings.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project involves
constructing the vane or blade interior as a heat pipe and extending it into an
adjacent heat sink, thus transferring incident heat through the heat pipe to the
heat sink. This design provides an extremely high heat transfer rate and a
uniform temperature along the vane due to the internal changes of the phase of
the heat pipe working fluid. Furthermore, this technology eliminates hot spots
at the vane leading and trailing edges and increases the vane life by preventing
thermal fatigue cracking. There is also the possibility of requiring no bleed
air from the compressor, eliminating engine performance losses resulting from
the diversion of compressor discharge air. Combined air cooling with radially
rotating heat pipes is also considered for a better cooling method. The proposed
heat pipe is an innovative cooling system that includes non-conventional
geometries, evaporation, condensation, vapor flow, and interaction of the
liquid/vapor. These complex transport processes of heat transfer and two-phase
flow of a liquid metal working fluid under high centrifugal forces and
accelerations are all coupled. A detailed design analysis of integrated gas
turbine heat pipe vanes and blades is made using artificial intelligence and
additive manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.