* 1744645
* Spring Blooms of Sea Ice Algae Along the Western Antarctic Peninsula: Effects of Warming and Freshening on Cell Physiology and Biogeochemical Cycles.
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Jodi Young, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 07/31/2023
* USD 454,884.00

Rapid changes in the extent and thickness of sea ice during the austral spring
subject microorganisms within or attached to the ice to large fluctuations in
temperature, salinity, light and nutrients. This project aims to identify
cellular responses in sea-ice algae to increasing temperature and decreasing
salinity during the spring melt along the western Antarctic Peninsula and to
determine how associated changes at the cellular level can potentially affect
dynamic, biologically driven processes. Understanding how sea-ice algae cope
with, and are adapted to, their environment will not only help predict how polar
ecosystems may change as the extent and thickness of sea ice change, but will
also provide a better understanding of the widespread success of photosynthetic
life on Earth. The scientific context and resulting advances from the research
will be communicated to the general public through outreach activities that
includes work with Science Communication Fellows and the popular Polar Science
Weekend at the Pacific Science Center in Seattle, Washington. The project will
provide student training to college students as well as provide for educational
experiences for K-12 school children. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is
currently a poor understanding of feedback relationships that exist between the
rapidly changing environment in the western Antarctic Peninsula region and sea-
ice algal production. The large shifts in temperature and salinity that algae
experience during the spring melt affect critical cellular processes, including
rates of enzyme-catalyzed reactions involved in photosynthesis and respiration,
and the production of stress-protective compounds. These changes in cellular
processes are poorly constrained but can be large and may have impacts on local
ecosystem productivity and biogeochemical cycles. In particular, this study will
focus on the thermal sensitivity of enzymes and the cycling of compatible
solutes and exopolymers used for halo- and cryo-protection, and how they
influence primary production and the biogeochemical cycling of carbon and
nitrogen. Approaches will include field sampling during spring melt, incubation
experiments of natural sea-ice communities under variable temperature and
salinity conditions, and controlled manipulation of sea-ice algal species in
laboratory culture. Employment of a range of techniques, from fast repetition
rate fluorometry and gross and net photosynthetic measurements to metabolomics
and enzyme kinetics, will tease apart the mechanistic effects of temperature and
salinity on cell metabolism and primary production with the goal of quantifying
how these changes will impact biogeochemical processes along the western
Antarctic Peninsula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.