* 1744961
* Atmospheric Mineral Nanoparticles in Antarctic Ice during the last Climatic Cycle
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* John Olesik, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 693,077.00

The main goal of this project is to identify and geochemically characterize
atmospheric mineral nanoparticles in pre-industrial Antarctic ice during the
last climatic cycle. Recent technological and industrial development is
introducing a large number of natural and engineered nanoparticles into Earth's
atmosphere. These constitute a concern for human health, mainly due to their
high chemical reactivity. While many atmospheric nanoparticle studies have been
performed in modern urban environments, there is essentially no information
about their occurrence in a pristine pre-industrial atmosphere. This information
is critical, as it constitutes an important benchmark for comparison to the
modern atmosphere. Information on nanoparticles from the pre-industrial
atmosphere can be obtained from atmospheric mineral nanoparticles that are
entrapped in remote pre-industrial Antarctic ice covering the last climatic
cycles. Mineral nanoparticles can also affect several climatic processes. First,
they directly influence the global energy balance by reflecting solar radiation
and indirectly influence through changes in cloud formation (and clouds also
reflect solar radiation). Second, atmospheric mineral nanoparticles such as iron
oxides could have fertilized the oceans, causing blooms of marine phytoplankton
that may have drawn part of the atmospheric carbon dioxide into the oceans
during glacial ages (the "biological pump"). Third, a significant amount of
extraterrestrial material entering the Earth atmosphere is thought to be
transported to the poles as nanoparticles called "meteoric smoke" that form
polar stratospheric clouds implicated in changes of the ozone
hole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to establish the natural background
of unknown classes of glacial particles whose size is below the detection limit
of the conventional dust analyzers. The team will take advantage of ice samples
from the "horizontal ice core", already extracted from the remote Taylor Glacier
(coastal East Antarctica) covering the last ~44,000 years. These ancient samples
are particularly suited to project scope because i) a large ice volume is
available ii) the team expects to find a markedly different geochemistry between
nanoparticles deposited during the last glacial age and during the current
interglacial. A set of advanced techniques including Transmission Electron
Microscopy, Single Particle Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (spICP-
MS), spICP-Time of Flight MS, and Field Flow Fractionation will be employed to
determine mineral nanoparticle sizes, number/volume, and chemical composition.
So far, the elemental composition of dust entrapped in polar ice has been mainly
determined by Inductively Coupled Plasma Sector Field Mass Spectrometry and it
is generally assumed to be descriptive of the coarse aeolian dust fraction.
However, project will test whether or not the determined elemental composition
is instead mainly linked to the previously unobserved smaller mineral
nanoparticle content. Results on nanoparticles will be compared with a set of
new experiments of total dust composition measured by Inductively Coupled Plasma
Sector Field Mass Spectrometry, using the same ice samples from Taylor
Glacier.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.