* 1744879
* Subglacial Chemical Weathering under East Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Kathy Licht, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 403,283.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;Chemical weathering is the process by which
rocks and minerals are turned to clay, oxides, and chemical nutrients. Most of
these weathering reactions consume atmospheric gases, such as oxygen and carbon
dioxide, and therefore chemical weathering can drive natural, long-term changes
in atmosphere chemistry. The nutrients released from rocks by chemical
weathering are transported to the oceans and are necessary for the maintenance
of life on Earth. The principal aim of this project is to assess how much
chemical weathering occurs beneath Antarctica's largest ice sheet. Elsewhere in
the world, chemical weathering is assessed by analyzing the outflow of rivers,
but such direct measurements of chemical outflow are not possible because nearly
all of Antarctica is covered by ice. In Antarctica investigators use samples
from the Transantarctic Mountains where the interaction of flowing ice with
mountain peaks causes rock and mineral material to emerge from the glacier base.
This project will assess the degree to which this emerging mineral material has
been chemically weathered compared to the underlying rock and the time scale at
which such weathering occurs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary data from a Transantarctic Mountain site
strongly suggests that the mineral products of chemical weathering (clays and
oxides) are more abundant in the emerging material than in the underlying rocks.
However, the chemical alteration of this material could have occurred recently
or prior to glaciers forming in Antarctica. To constrain the timeline of
weathering and thereby assess modern rates of weathering in Antarctica, this
p[project will analyze two rare, radioactive isotopes within the weathered
minerals. Because these isotopes are lost through radioactive decay, they act as
clocks that can time the formation of the clays and oxides that form during
chemical weathering. Minerals that pre-date the ice will have these isotopes
clinging to their surface but not in their crystal structure. By first
chemically removing the elements on the surface on the clays and oxides and then
analyzing the minerals themselves, the project investigators will determine
whether the minerals formed recently under the ice or beforehand in an ice-free
environment. By calculating how recently these minerals formed and by analyzing
the rate at which ice transports them off the continent, they will be able to
calculate chemical weathering rates at locations up and down the Transantarctic
Mountains. The result will be an estimate the impact of weathering under the
East Antarctic ice sheet on the chemistry of the Earth's ocean nutrients. This
research will provide valuable training for the next generation of polar
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.