* 1744428
* Convergence HDR: Social Science Insights for 21st Century Data Science Education (SSI)
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Saul Perlmutter, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2022
* USD 99,967.00

A pair of workshops will be conducted to develop innovative ways of
incorporating social science findings about the practice of data science and
insights from educational research into data science curricula. The workshop
series will develop elements of 21st-century data science education anchored in
the doing of data science in disciplinary research settings. Workshop
participants will form a community of practice with practicing data scientists,
educators, and social scientists working together. This project promotes
Convergence by integrating insights from social science research and education
research in the context of addressing the problem of how to teach data science
and develop the appropriate curricular materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
first workshop is planned for 1.5 days with about 50 participants, and will
strive to identify key insights from social science research and education
research into the practice of data science, in the service of their translation
into data science curriculum. It will draw on findings from a range of social
science disciplines (such as science and technology studies, ethnographic
observation of transdisciplinary collaboration, computer supported cooperative
work, work on inclusion and diversity in teams, organizational / management
theory, systems thinking in design, and the human/technology interface) and
educational research and design together with disciplinary data science
practitioners and educators. In panels and working sessions, the workshop will
draw in participants to frame key themes associated with the doing of data
science and develop ways of targeting these to curriculum design. The product
from this workshop will be a publicly available white paper identifying core
insights for the next stage of work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the intervening
period between the first and second workshops, the observations and insights
from the first workshop will be recorded and refined for use by the second
workshop. In the interest of cross-fertilization, the workshop organizers will
also make contact with select industry practitioners to assess the importance of
the identified concepts for data science translated to real world application.
&lt;br/&gt;The second workshop will be for 1 day with about 30 participants. It
will outline and construct implementable approaches for translating the key
insights into data science curricula. Thematic sessions through the day will
build on the taxonomy of key insights developed in the first workshop, and
address substantive issues around practical implementation, and prototyping of
new curricular forms. The products from this workshop will be a fleshed-out set
of curricular elements (such as exercises, course modules, etc.) and best
practices guidelines to be publicly disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
workshops will spotlight the doing of data science as a key arena for
collaboratively engaging data science educators and social scientists in
curriculum design. This project reorients the transdisciplinary data science
education agenda by focusing on practitioners and practice. The workshops will
develop implementable, publicly available curricular elements and best practices
for data science education oriented to the collaborative doing of data science,
with attention to important issues such as diversity, inclusion, and societal
and ethical context.