* 1744386
* Convergence HTF: A Workshop Shaping Research on Human-Technology Partnerships to Enhance STEM Workforce Engagement
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Zachary Warren, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 98,346.00

The landscape of jobs and work is changing rapidly, driven by the development of
new technologies. Intelligent, automated machines and services are a growing
part of jobs and the workplace. New technologies are enabling new forms of
learning, skills assessments, and job training. The potential benefits of these
technologies include increased productivity and satisfaction, and more job
opportunities. The workshop supported by this award aims to harness these
innovations to enhance the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) job opportunities and workforce engagement of individuals with autism
spectrum disorder (ASD), and related developmental disabilities. The workshop
will promote the convergence of psychology, data science, computer science,
engineering, learning science, special education, organizational behavior, and
business to define key challenges and research imperatives at the nexus of
humans, technology, and work. This convergence workshop will employ deep
integration of knowledge, theories, methods, and data from multiple fields to
form new and expanded frameworks for addressing scientific and societal
challenges and opportunities. The results of the workshop will include the
identification and sharing of new research directions and tools to enhance STEM
workforce engagement of individuals with ASD and related developmental
disabilities. This convergence workshop addresses the future of work at the
human-technology frontier.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will explore tools
and approaches to enhance retention, engagement, and productivity in STEM jobs,
and specifically to harness unique capabilities and accommodate for individual
needs of individuals with ASD. The workshop will develop a convergence research
agenda around four topics, including 1) human-technology partnerships to support
success in K-12 STEM education, 2) tools for characterizing individual
capabilities and affinities and mapping these to STEM workforce needs, 3)
artificial-intelligence and visual-cognition tools for human interaction with
data, and 4) technologies to accommodate for unique needs and capabilites in the
workplace. These topics will integrate previously disparate disciplines and
research approaches, with speakers encompassing a wide range of subject matter
expertise; from engineers and technologists who are developing human-technology
interfaces and devices, to psychologists who are harnessing human-technology
partnerships to better understand unique human capabilities for STEM, to
computer scientists who are studying and developing novel data-visualization
approaches patterned on autistic visual thinking, to organizational scientists
developing innovative employment models for the creation of STEM sector
employment spaces and technologies that leverage and support autistic
individuals in the workforce. The conclusions and recommendations from the
workshop will be disseminated via a white paper, and will be used to design a
research agenda to help leverage human-technology advances to maximize workforce
opportunities and productivity.