* 1744365
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Award: Coordination Strategies for Joint State Rule
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2019
* Jordan Dalton, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2019
* USD 25,181.00

Jordan Dalton, of the University of Michigan, will conduct new archaeological
research in Peru, documenting how the expansion of the Inca Empire affected the
economy of the Chincha Valley. Archaeology is unusually well positioned to
answer questions pertaining to the long-term effects of state expansion, due to
the long time-span with which it works. Archaeologists are able to address the
dynamic effects of state expansion by documenting the effects of the initial
impact of contact and local political re-organization to the cascading effects
of later changes to political administration and the economy. The Chincha Valley
case (in which a local group was allowed to co-administer a valley with the more
powerful Inca intruders) is highly unusual, because in most cases the
expansionist empire dominates smaller ethnic minorities. Dalton's research will
shed new light on how the Chincha (a local ethnic group) adapted to the
intrusion of the Inca Empire and will add an important case study to the
understanding of how local populations cooperated and created new economic
strategies. In both ancient empires and contemporary cases of expansionist
states, some local strategies are retained while national and global practices
are imposed. The project will provide opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students, both from Peru and the United States, to collaborate and
develop their skills and knowledge in archaeology. Furthermore, research will be
shared with communities and students within the United States and Peru through
outreach activities and articles published in both Spanish and
English.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To document the changes in the political and
economic administration of the Chincha Valley during Inca occupation, Dalton
will excavate multiple rooms at the archaeological site of Las Huacas in the
Chincha Valley, a major agricultural community occupied immediately before and
during Inca occupation (A.D. 1470-1534). Dalton will expose residences,
manufacturing and production areas, and discard piles of household goods in
order to reconstruct which goods and crafts were manufactured, stored, and used
at Las Huacas and throughout the Inca Empire. During the era of the Inca, the
occupants of Las Huacas renovated their structures by laying down new floors,
allowing for a fine-grained analysis of change through time. Relying on these
sequences of superimposed floors, the research will document changes through
time in local Chincha practices and foreign Inca practices at Las Huacas,
answering questions about the impact of a foreign power on a local economy. By
analyzing an array of items - including ceramic dishes, food remains, weaving
instruments and farming tools, Dalton will evaluate how residents of Las Huacas
affected the Inca economy as well as how the Inca affected the local economy.