* 1744500
* NSF INCLUDES DDLP: Increasing Minority Presence within Academia through Continuous Training (IMPACT)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Rosario Gerhardt, Georgia Tech Applied Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Regina Pope-Ford
* 08/31/2022
* USD 299,856.00

Underrepresented minorities (URMs) are less than 10% of engineering faculty,
despite comprising nearly a third of the nation's population. A common
explanation for their disproportionate representation, at the engineering
faculty level, is related to a lack of access to effective mentorship from other
faculty. This NSF INCLUDES Design and Development Launch Pilot project will
expand a new mentoring and advocacy-networking paradigm to bring together two
stakeholder groups: (1) underrepresented minorities (URMs) who are engineering
faculty and (2) well-regarded (primarily non-URM) emeriti/retired engineering
faculty. A previously-funded NSF project found that this mentor-mentee pairing
was viewed favorable by both parties and beneficial, particularly by the URM
engineering faculty. Because of these results, the investigators proposed to
scale, test, and evaluate the approach on a broader scale by creating national
infrastructural network partners to help increase capacity to serve a greater
number of URM engineering faculty and to introduce tele-mentoring and training
models to serve URM faculty who work in remote geographical locations with very
little access to mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use a multi-
phased phenomenological, mixed method research design to gain greater
understanding of the ways in which the URM faculty and emeriti faculty
experience the opportunities afforded by the project. Further, the investigators
plan to collect data to examine how project participants perceive and experience
conventional, direct communications (e.g., telephone calls, e-mail, and in-
person meetings)through the mentoring process versus the use of Embodied
Conversational Agents (ECAs), anthropomorphic interface agents that engage a
user in real-time dialogue by using verbal-nonverbal channels to emulate the in-
person experience. This project has the potential to broaden participation in
the engineering professoriate and opens up new possibilities for supporting URM
engineering faculty.