* 1744320
* Convergence QL: Ideas Lab Workshop: Practical Fully-Connected Quantum Computer Challenge (PFCQC), Santa Fe Institute, August 28 - September 1, 2017
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2018
* Cristopher Moore, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 06/30/2018
* USD 98,750.00

The NSF "Ideas Lab: Practical Fully-Connected Quantum Computer Challenge
(PFCQC)" described in the NSF solicitation 17-548 will be held at the Santa Fe
Institute in Santa Fe, NM, from August 28 to September 1, 2017. Researchers from
a broad range of disciplines, including physics, engineering, and computer
science, will work together to develop promising new techniques that can address
the challenge of developing and operating a practical fully-connected quantum
computer. The funds will cover travel and expenses for 28 Ideas Lab
participants: 24 invited participants and 4 mentors. These expenditures will be
administered by the Santa Fe Institute, NM. Practical quantum computing has the
potential to transform cryptography, secure communication, material and drug
design, the efficient simulation of physical systems, and our ability to solve a
host of optimization problems in science and industry. Current work strongly
suggests that quantum computers have moved past the stage analogous to the first
transistor; several technologies are now reminiscent of the first integrated
circuit, and are showing signs that they can scale up to the point where quantum
computers will exceed classical ones in practice. Focusing on and incubating
these technologies at this juncture could usher in a new digital revolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in the laboratory are bringing large-scale
quantum computing closer to fruition, with several technologies that show
promise of scalability. In particular, fully-connected architectures-where one
can control interactions between any pair of qubits at will-offer truly
programmable quantum computers, as opposed to specialized hardware devices
hardwired to solve a fixed type of problem. Programmable quantum devices like
these could finally make quantum algorithms a reality, such as Shor's factoring
algorithm, Grover's search algorithm, and algorithms for efficiently simulating
quantum Hamiltonians relevant to condensed matter physics, high energy physics,
materials science, molecular biology, and drug design. Even devices with ~30
qubits could exceed the capabilities of classical computers, as well as
providing tests of "quantum supremacy" confirming the theoretical computational
power of quantum mechanics.