* 1744731
* Promoting STEM Education at Two-Year Colleges (PSE2YC)
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2017,05/31/2019
* Kathleen Alfano, Ashland University
* Standard Grant
* Heather Watson
* 05/31/2019
* USD 225,032.00

America's two-year colleges (2YCs) educate a substantial and rapidly growing
number of undergraduate students, including a significant number of students in
science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) fields. Furthermore, the
racial, ethnic, and geographic diversity of students served by 2YCs make these
institutions key entry points to STEM fields for students who have been
historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines. But, while National Science
Foundation (NSF) programs that increase representation in STEM are open to 2YCs,
2YC faculty often lack the experience, resources, and institutional support to
effectively compete for these program grants. The Promoting STEM Education at
Two Year Colleges (PSE2YC) project will facilitate meritorious proposal writing
among 2YC faculty teams for NSF STEM related program funding.

The PSE2YC project consists of a proposal writing workshop and mentoring program
for 50 2YC STEM faculty members. The project design addresses barriers faced by
2YCs to participation in Advanced Technological Education (ATE) and Scholarships
in STEM (S-STEM) program competitions, and the low number of 2YC applicants and
awards. This project builds on previous projects that facilitated 2YCs in
preparing meritorious proposals for NSF grant competitions by targeting two
programs that specifically reduce barriers encountered by 2YC students: the ATE
program, which supports development of two-year degrees leading to jobs in high-
technology fields, and the S-STEM program, which awards scholarship support and
provides supportive cohorting activities for STEM majors. The workshop and two-
year mentoring by experienced principal investigators and mentors will
strengthen individual and institutional capacity to pursue proposal-based
projects in America's two-year colleges. The key outcomes will include an
increase in the number of competitive ATE and S-STEM proposals submitted by 2YC
institutions and a stronger STEM grant writing culture for 2YCs. Overall, this
project will contribute to the national agenda of strengthening the STEM
workforce by empowering more STEM faculty and two-year institutions to compete
for meritorious NSF awards.