* 1744609
* Dayside Auroral Pulsations and their Association with Outer Magnetospheric Dynamics
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Tetsuo Motoba, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 07/31/2023
* USD 293,910.00

The Earth's magnetosphere interacts continuously with the incoming solar wind
plasma flow, transfers its energy and momentum from outer layers down to the
ionosphere and upper atmosphere. These physical processes take place mainly on
the Earth's dayside, generating electromagnetic waves in the outer magnetosphere
that likely act as key agents in causing and/or modulating precipitation of
energetic electrons responsible for the dayside auroral pulsations. For better
understanding of these physical processes laying underneath the dayside auroral
pulsations, it is essential to examine associations of the auroral structure
variations with the dayside outer magnetospheric dynamics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will significantly advance our understanding of
the ultra-low frequency electromagnetic wave dynamics in the outer magnetosphere
and their connection to the Earth's ionosphere and respective processes taking
place there. This research was motivated by recent case studies that suggested
connections between the dynamical behavior of daytime auroral pulsations being
modulated by the kilo-electron-volts electron precipitation caused by the
earthward-propagating compressional Pc3 waves of the upstream origin. This study
will conduct the first critical observational test of the above hypothetical
scenario via characterization of spatiotemporal properties of the dayside
auroral pulsations in the two-dimensional perspective that will help addressing
their association with the dynamic of outer magnetosphere layers. More
specifically, the following science questions will be addressed: (a) what are
the spatiotemporal properties of the dayside auroral pulsations, and (b) what
are their occurrence rate, period, propagation direction, and correlation with
the geomagnetic pulsations observed from the ground in the polar
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.