* 1744627
* Strengthening Impact, Supporting Collaboration, and Sustaining Access in the ATE Community
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Rachael Bower, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 6,165,806.00

Born out of a need recognized by the Advanced Technological Education (ATE)
program community for a centralized resource portal, ATE Central initially grew
out of a collaboration between a group of ATE centers and the University of
Wisconsin-Madison's Internet Scout Research Group. ATE Central provides a
browseable and searchable portal and a suite of tools and services that support
grantee work, along with a digital archive that preserves and sustains NSF's
valuable investment in ATE. ATE Central will continue to support the successful
efforts already under way, including the archiving service, resource collection,
and PI meeting app, but will also respond with new and innovative solutions to
meet evolving ATE community needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ATE Central will
support community-responsive tools, services, and solutions. Community-building
technology will help bring grantees together with a chat service and monthly
online "office hours" to help support collaboration and communication amongst
grantees. Annual Spotlight Focus workshops and webinars will provide expertise
from within and beyond ATE on topics indicated by grantees as critical to their
work. The new Curriculum Dissemination Service will develop and deploy
documentation and mechanisms to help ATE projects and centers ensure the content
they develop is Learning Management System (LMS)-friendly, and to provide access
to those ATE-authored materials and curriculum to faculty within their local
LMS. These and a host of other tools and services will create neoteric
approaches to supporting grantee work and take advantage of diverse pathways for
disseminating the deliverables and results of the community. ATE Central will
continue to broaden the impact of the work of ATE grantees by showcasing data
and deliverables, and disseminating metadata about the projects and centers and
the resources they develop and collect. The collective work of the ATE program
and ATE Central impacts a diverse set of stakeholders including students,
faculty, industry partners and evaluators. By utilizing a variety of pathways,
from conferences to social media to webinars, and with a deep commitment to
Universal Design, the project will ensure access to all stakeholders, including
those with disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.