* 1744371
* EAGER:   Understanding Nonlinear Mechanical Behavior in Porous Infrastructure Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* John Popovics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2019
* USD 99,996.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will provide
enhanced understanding of the mechanical response behavior of porous
infrastructure materials. Porous infrastructure materials are critical to the
foundations of civilized life, from underlying structural bedrock to the tallest
concrete structures in the world. Societal pressures for increased material
efficiency are expanding the use and specifications of these materials. In
addition, improved monitoring of such materials is necessary to extend material
life, safely and economically, and ensure public safety for the nation
infrastructure. However, progress toward expanding design and inspection of
porous infrastructure materials is hampered because some aspects of their
mechanical response behavior are poorly understood. This study addresses the
gaps in existing knowledge through direct observations using new experimental
techniques that can shed light on the micro-seismic initiation behavior of rock,
establish a new non-linear basis to interpret vibration and wave propagation
responses in concrete structures for structural health monitoring, and
potentially provide new insight about time dependent material behaviors
including shrinkage and creep in concrete.

Dynamic Mesoscale Nonlinear Elastic (DME) behaviors in porous infrastructure
materials will be studied using innovative experimental measurements at two
different length scales. The study is composed of the following efforts: (i)
Design and carry out macroscale observations of material nonlinear DME behaviors
through vibrational studies across environmental conditions; (ii) Design and
carry out microscale observations of nonlinear DME behaviors through
Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope (ESEM) measurements across
environmental conditions; (iii) Evaluate the observations between the length
scales to formulate a feasible basis for new physically-based phenomenological
theory underlying DME behaviors. The findings of the work will provide unique
insight and a new foundation to understand and interpret dynamic mechanical
responses of a broad range of porous engineered materials, and as such offer
benefits to broad swaths of the academic community.