* 1744925
* Comprehensive Study of 3D Magnetosphere-Ionospheric Current System Through the  Modeling, Observations, and Applications: Auroral Electrojet Indices for the Southern Hemisphere
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Sonya Lyatsky, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 06/30/2023
* USD 374,475.00

The Earth's three-dimensional magnetosphere-ionosphere current system is an
important component of the Geospace environment. These currents are driven by
the interaction of solar wind (an everlasting plasma flow from the Sun) with the
Earth's magnetosphere, transferring significant amounts of energy and momentum
into the high-latitude ionosphere and upper atmosphere via the geomagnetic
field-aligned currents. The 3D current system dynamics affect both the Northern
and South Polar Regions, causing their dynamic changes and heating through the
closure of these currents in the Earth's ionosphere. These currents can be
modeled, but they are difficult to observe from the ground or even from space -
only their effects on geomagnetic field variations (and respective indices of
geomagnetic activity) can be recorded by properly placed ground-based
instruments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a study of a
relatively unexplored phenomenon of interhemispheric field-aligned currents
through the model development and comparison of modeled results with the ground-
based and satellites observations. This new model will significantly advance our
understanding of the physics of space weather-driving processes in both
hemispheres and development of an index describing geomagnetic activities in the
Southern polar region. The latter is important because calculating this index
using existing Aural Electrojet (AE) technique (that uses data from 12
geomagnetic observatories across the Northern auroral region) is not applicable
to the Southern auroral region that goes over Southern Ocean for ~50% of the
global coverage. There are only 5-6 Antarctic costal research stations that can
contribute to this index calculations, which is much less than optimal for the
traditional AE calculation technique. This research effort has the potential to
significantly increase our understanding of the role played by interhemispheric
currents on the dynamics of the polar and auroral
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.