* 1744272
* NeTS:  EAGER:  Exploring 60G HZ based Wireless Body Area Networks for mHealth Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Honggang Wang, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 116,002.00

This project aims to explore 60 gigahertz (GHz) communication for mobile health
(mHealth) applications and build a strong theoretical foundation for designing
and evaluating 60GHz Wireless Body Area Network (WBAN) performance. Deep
understanding will be gained on the fundamental limits of current 2.4GHz-band
WBAN in mHealth applications and the promising benefits of 60GHz body area
communication, in terms of its smaller device size, higher data rates,
reliability, energy efficiency, safety and security. The outcomes of this
research significantly advance the discovery and development of theories and
algorithms for designing and evaluating 60GHz WBANs, accelerating wider and
faster mHealth applications and consequently addressing escalating healthcare
costs worldwide. The proposed research is tightly coupled to a strong
educational component. The planned outreach activities help motivate and attract
minority students, and meet increasing demands from a diverse group of
government and industry partners. The proposed project has a favorable impact on
both graduate and undergraduate training and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research project establishes the theoretical foundation to support the channel
modeling, energy efficiency, and security protection for 60GHz WBANs. This
research is challenging due to the unique radio propagation pattern of 60G Hz
body area communication, energy and security issues for resource-constrained
devices in WBANs. Unlike the traditional 2.4G band communication, using the
60GHz band for WBAN has significant advantages in its compact network coverage,
device miniaturization, efficient frequency reuse, reduced interference with
adjacent wireless body-centric networks, and high data rates. The project
includes (1) developing a new channel modeling for 60GHz WBAN communication; (2)
improving energy efficiency in 60GHz WBAN through resource allocations; (3)
establishing its security mechanism based on channel reciprocity; (4) conducting
performance evaluation for 60GHz WBAN communication. The proposed studies employ
new statistical modeling approaches to characterize the 60GHz communication
channel over body area, improve its power efficiency and security protection.
This research project is especially valuable to mHealth applications, advances
the WBAN literature, and may provide new guidelines for the 60GHz WBAN design
and deployment.