* 1744000
* Core Support for the Board on Environmental Change and Society (BECS) of the National Academies
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Toby Warden, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 02/28/2022
* USD 677,930.00

This award will continue support for core operations of the Board on
Environmental Change and Society (BECS) of the National Research Council of the
National Academy of Sciences. This board has functioned under its current and
previous names since 1989 to advance science and environmental decision making
by promoting integrated analysis of the human interactions with the natural
environment. BECS will work with government agencies and other sponsors build
understanding of human interactions with the biophysical environment; contribute
to the development of a coherent field of scientific endeavor in this area;
integrate social and behavioral science research into environmental science and
policy; advance the behavioral, social, and decision sciences; and provide
benefits to society through the application of these sciences to manage human-
environment interactions. BECS will evaluate research simultaneously from the
perspectives of the natural and social sciences with a focus on advancing
generalizable knowledge to assist decision makers and improve the quality of
practices at the federal, state, and local levels. BECS also will facilitate the
development of an interdisciplinary research community in response to an
increased realization that global environmental issues require enhanced
knowledge based on social science research. Because it is responsive to and
anticipatory in the advancement of cutting-edge science and application to
policy to identifying innovative solutions to improve societal wellbeing, BECS
serves as a national resource for the advancement of use-inspired science to
inform decision makers, stakeholders, and communities addressing a myriad of
environmental change challenges and opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Board on Environmental Change and Society functions as the National Academies'
primary unit for advancing research on the interactions between human activities
and the environment by providing a forum for linking the social and natural
sciences in research, planning, and decision making. BECS will strive to
integrate social, behavioral, and natural science knowledge to address emerging
scientific and governmental concerns through workshops, consensus studies, semi-
annual meetings, symposia, and a variety of outreach mechanisms. Over the period
to be supported with this award, BECS will develop and oversee activities,
engage a greater breadth of stakeholders and serve as a focal point toward which
federal agencies and other governmental and non-governmental decision makers
look to for integrated, trans-disciplinary approaches to cross cutting
environmental challenges and opportunities. BECS aims to advance new lines of
interdisciplinary research on topics at the intersection of human and natural
systems such as innovation in energy transitions and the social implications of
such transitions; the nexus between food, energy, and water; building resilient
and low-carbon cities; and shifts in migration under conditions of environmental
change.