* 1744702
* Collaborative Research: NSFGEO-NERC: A Thermodynamic Chemical Speciation Model for the Oceans, Seas and Estuaries
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Heather Benway, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2023
* USD 18,000.00

Ocean acidification due to increasing dissolution of carbon dioxide in seawater,
and the effects of cumulative stressors (including acidification, pollution,
warming, and anoxia) are among the top priorities for ocean research. Scientific
progress requires accurate and consistent measurements across the globe to
monitor and understand present effects, and modelling to evaluate future
scenarios and methods of remediation. The work of observational scientists and
modelers is linked by the need for an accurate knowledge of the chemical
speciation of the inorganic carbonate system, pH, and nutrient and contaminate
trace metals, in both natural waters and the reference materials and solutions
used for instrument calibration. In this collaborative project between
investigators in the U.S. and the United Kingdom, a team of scientists will work
to create a thoroughly updated modeling tool for determining the detailed
chemical composition, or "speciation," of seawater. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators propose to create a step change in the capability of marine
scientists to measure, interpret, and predict chemical speciation and pH in
natural waters of varying composition by creating a speciation model based upon
the Pitzer equations for the calculation of solute and water activities. The
approach has a long track record of success in geochemistry. The equations are
based upon the concept that interactions between pairs and triplets of dissolved
solute species control activities. The values of the parameters for these
interactions are determined from a wide range of measurements of solution
properties. Work in this project will include measuring activities and heat
capacities, and using recent literature data, to improve and test the model; the
computer coding and validation of the model and the development of methods to
quantify the relationship between uncertainties in model-predicted speciation
and those in the underlying measurements; and engagement with oceanographers
internationally to help design practical speciation modelling tools and
associated guidance for specific applications. The result of this project will
be a critically-evaluated thermodynamic model of natural waters containing (in
any proportion) the major and minor ions of seawater, seawater-related pH
buffers, and the trace metals iron, zinc, copper, and cadmium, to be made
available to the wider community through a project web site. The academic
beneficiaries will be chemical oceanographers, aquatic scientists, and others
working in the following areas: ocean acidification including polar brines (in
seasonal ice); pore water chemistry diagenetic reactions; paleoceanography;
metrology of pH in saline solutions such as seawater. A postdoctoral researcher
will be supported and trained through this project.