* 1744335
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Interaction between Violence and Perception of Social Difference
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Jane Buikstra, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2019
* USD 31,198.00

Identity-based violence - violence directed at individuals or groups perceived
as divergent - often accompanies periods of socio-political upheaval. While a
growing body of anthropological and behavioral research demonstrates that the
perception of social difference can motivate instances of mass violence today,
little work has been done to examine such identity-based violence
archaeologically. This may be because the subtleties of distinct social
identities can be difficult to interpret in the past. A bioarchaeological
approach, however, is well suited to empirically reconstruct past individuals'
social identities, as many facets of identity such as age, sex, or biological
relatedness, are grounded in the physical body, while others leave traces on the
body through behavior, such as dietary preferences or cultural modification.
This research will support both graduate and undergraduate student training and
enhance international research partnerships and collaborations between the
United States and Mexico. Furthermore, it will contribute to broader
anthropological understandings of how instances of mass violence may arise from
the interaction between specific social identities and complex social processes
of migration, demographic change, and biological
relatedness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a combination of
biogeochemical and biodistance analyses, this project reconstructs the
residential histories and biological kinship affiliations of victims of human
sacrifice interred at a small shrine site in pre-Hispanic central Mexico. The
shrine site dates to the Epiclassic period (600-900 CE). In central Mexico, this
period was characterized by the decline of the major regional center of
Teotihuac√°n and was a time of dramatic political, social, and demographic
reorganization. In such a volatile socio-political landscape, individuals'
residential histories or kinship affiliations may have singled them out as
targets of ritual violence. This research will answer the question: how did
specific aspects of individuals' social identities predispose them to suffer
ritual violence? The biogeochemical analysis of dental and skeletal elements
from a sample of 72 individuals will allow this project to reconstruct the
geographic origins of the sacrificial victims, while biodistance analyses will
allow for the reconstruction of patterns of genetic relatedness among the
sacrificial victims themselves, as well as between the sacrificial victims and
contemporary populations in central Mexico