* 1744459
* EAGER:   Coacervate Protocell Microdrops for Downstream Processing Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Nicole Zacharia, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

The manufacture of pharmaceuticals requires isolation of a bioactive compound of
interest from a complex multi-component solution. The components within the
solution often have similar chemical and physical properties, making isolation
and purification of a specific desired component difficult, resource intensive,
and expensive. Undesirable biological side effects of impurities necessitate a
robust and reliable separation process. This project will explore a
fundamentally new approach to separate pharmaceuticals, using engineered
polymers to create microscopic drops that concentrate the compound of interest
into a second phase, in a process known as coacervation. Concentration within a
coacervate drop mimics the process by which bacteria selectively transfer
compounds of interest across the cell wall. The coacervate drops thus acts as a
membrane-less "protocell" to concentrate and partition compounds of interest
into the interior. This project focuses on designing the polymers with a
controlled trigger for coacervation to isolate biological compounds of interest
with molecular-level specificity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
concentrate and partition representative biological compounds from dilute
aqueous solutions via complex coacervation using polymer macromolecules. The
polymer macromolecules will be molecularly designed with oppositely charged, or
hydrogen bonding, functional groups that trigger coacervation via strong
intermolecular interactions. Coacervation will lead to a liquid-liquid
separation that concentrates the species of interest into a dense, polymer rich
liquid. Partitioning into this phase then facilities recovery and/or disposal.
This early-concept grant for exploratory research (EAGER) project will test the
primary hypothesis that the coacervate drop will stabilize select model
biological molecules from dilute, yet complex, aqueous media. The interaction
between model proteins and various coacervate environments will be examined. It
is anticipated that this concept will lead to the use of coacervate drops as
protocells to isolate and recover compounds of interest. It is anticipated that
successful demonstration of this early-concept will lead to use of coacervate
drops for increasingly complex tasks, such as use as cell-like microreactors for
waste degradation.