* 1744131
* EAGER/Collaborative Research: Explore the Theoretical Framework of Engineering Knowledge Transfer in Cybermanufacturing Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Hui Wang, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2018
* USD 29,999.00

3D Printing, also known as additive manufacturing, offers the potential for
individuals and companies to design and produce customized parts in quantities
as small as a single unit. However, unlike conventional mass production, for
which production machines are adjusted to maintain quality by periodically
measuring the parts that are produced, the small lots produced in 3D Printing do
not provide the opportunity to tune the production machines in the same way.
This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) will investigate a
statistical method for adjusting the production quality of a 3D Printing machine
based on experience in producing parts of different part types. Such a tool has
the capability to be offered to manufacturers as a cloud-based utility, with
possible extension to aggregating data from similar machines at different
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental barrier to knowledge transfer
between engineering processes lies in lurking variables, which are process
variables that are unobserved due to infeasibility of measurement or
insufficient knowledge. The project will model and mitigate the effects of
lurking variables in terms of observable control variables to enable a novel
gray-box model transfer strategy for additive manufacturing systems. The
proposed research tasks include: (1) establishing a theoretical formulation of
effect equivalence to quantify effects of lurking variables, (2) exploring a
statistical foundation for learning effect equivalence, (3) verifying effect
equivalence models and their robustness, and (4) obtaining engineering insight
from effect equivalence and developing a multi-resolution measurement strategy.
The project is expected to produce a mathematical formulation of engineering
effect equivalence, demonstrate the formulation in predicting geometric shape
deformation of 3D products built by additive manufacturing machines, and a
multi-resolution measurement strategy for equivalence-based additive
manufacturing process control.