* 1744202
* Exploring the Potential of Tablets as Early Math Resources for Urban Kindergarteners in Schools and Homes
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Laura Tortorelli, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* M. Alejandra Sorto
* 07/31/2019
* USD 132,991.00

This project will examine the impact on mathematics learning of an initiative to
provide kindergartners in an urban school district with personal tablet devices
that include free, widely available digital mathematics resources. An important
question for schools as tablet devices become more accessible is how to
effectively use them in primary grades, especially kindergarten. In addition,
since the devices are portable, how children use the resources such as games for
mathematics learning at home is also important to understand. This project is
set in a high-needs school district with a large number of low-income children.
The project provides an opportunity to learn about the potential role of tables
and digital resources in early grades through the analysis of assessment data,
user analytic data documenting how the resources were used, and survey data from
teachers and families. The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools (RMTs).
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education
and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and
empirical justification for proposed projects.

Most studies of digital learning resources have been small-scale or focused on
engagement. This study offers the opportunity to investigate the relationship
between the use of these resources and learning outcomes using a quasi-
experimental design. The research questions examine how teachers use table-based
mathematics resources during instruction, how caregivers and children engage
with table-based mathematics resources and how the resources then relate to
kindergartners mathematics learning. Assessments of students' learning will
focus on number, geometry and measurement concepts. The learner analytic data
from the tablets will document the use of the resources on the tablets. Surveys
and demographic data will also be collected to document how the tablets were
used. Results of the study should inform implementation of tablet use by schools
with particular attention to how they are used across in-class and at-home
settings.