* 1744562
* Measuring Dissolved Gases to Reveal the Processes that Drive the Solubility Pump and Determine Gas Concentration in Antarctic Bottom Water
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Brice Loose, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* David Sutherland
* 04/30/2022
* USD 269,485.00

Near the Antarctic coast, polynyas are open-water regions where extreme heat
loss in winter causes seawater to become cold, salty, and dense enough to sink
into the deep sea. The formation of this dense water has regional and global
importance because it influences the ocean current system. Polynya processes are
also tied to the amount of sea ice formed, ocean heat lost to atmosphere, and
atmospheric CO2 absorbed by the Southern Ocean. Unfortunately, the ocean-
atmosphere interactions that influence the deep ocean water properties are
difficult to observe directly during the Antarctic winter. This project will
combine field measurements and laboratory experiments to investigate whether
differences in the concentration of noble gasses (helium, neon, argon, xenon,
and krypton) dissolved in ocean waters can be linked to environmental conditions
at the time of their formation. If so, noble gas concentrations could provide
insight into the mechanisms controlling shelf and bottom-water properties, and
be used to reconstruct past climate conditions. Project results will contribute
to the Southern Ocean Observing System (SOOS) theme of The Future and
Consequences of Carbon Uptake in the Southern Ocean. The project will also train
undergraduate and graduate students in environmental monitoring, and earth and
ocean sciences methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the causal links
between Antarctic coastal processes and changes in the deep ocean system
requires study of winter polynya processes. The winter period of intense ocean
heat loss and sea ice production impacts two important Antarctic water masses:
High-Salinity Shelf Water (HSSW), and Antarctic Bottom Water (AABW), which then
influence the strength of the ocean solubility pump and meridional overturning
circulation. To better characterize how sea ice cover, ocean-atmosphere
exchange, brine rejection, and glacial melt influence the physical properties of
AABW and HSSW, this project will analyze samples and data collected from two
Ross Sea polynyas during the 2017 PIPERS winter cruise. Gas concentrations will
be measured in seawater samples collected by a CTD rosette, from an underwater
mass-spectrometer, and from a benchtop Membrane Inlet Mass Spectrometer. Noble
gas concentrations will reveal the ocean-atmosphere (dis)equilibrium that exists
at the time that surface water is transformed into HSSW and AABW, and provide a
fingerprint of past conditions. In addition, nitrogen (N2), oxygen (O2), argon,
and CO2 concentration will be used to determine the net metabolic balance, and
to evaluate the efficacy of N2 as an alternative to O2 as glacial meltwater
tracer. Laboratory experiments will determine the gas partitioning ratios during
sea ice formation. Findings will be synthesized with PIPERS and related
projects, and so provide an integrated view of the role of the wintertime
Antarctic coastal system on deep water composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.