* 1744615
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: A Network Approach In Analyzing Early State Organization
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Anne Underhill, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2018
* USD 25,011.00

Qingzhu Wang of Yale University, along with colleagues, will investigate the
agency of past local elites in "peripheral" regions that might have contributed
to the dynamics of state organization from the perspective of the production,
circulation, and consumption of highly valuable goods.. The discipline of
archaeology is well suited to investigation of social dynamics over long periods
of time and identification of significant socio-political and economic change,
especially for understanding the operation of political processes. Research in
multiple areas of the world emphasizes how central state administrators
legitimate their power and incorporate local elites into state order by
controlling the production, circulation, and consumption of valuable goods. Wang
and his research team will focus on power available to local elites, and
investigate how local elites might actively negotiate with the state to
accomplish their own goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wang's research project
focuses on investigating social dynamics in Shandong province during the Shang
period, to the east of the core Shang areas of power in Henan province, from the
perspectives of bronze production, distribution, and consumption. Instead of
accepting the traditional view that sees Shandong as an incorporated part of the
centralized Shang state, the research team will test an alternative Negotiation
Model that emphasizing the agency of local elites and the broader social
networks and institutions that structure social interactions and internal state
organization. Applying a multi-proxy approach for data collection and analysis,
the team will investigate how bronze production and consumption in Shandong
acted to reinforce or renegotiate group identities and social ties, and how
these changed on a localized and inter-area basis over time. This research also
considers how the local elites in Shandong might have actively negotiated with
the Shang royal court in Henan during the Middle and Late Shang periods, and how
the negotiation potentially contributed to the dynamics of the Shang state. By
investigating the socio-political and economic organization of the Shang Dynasty
from the perspective of interaction between local elites in Shandong and high
elites in the royal capitals from the perspective of production, distribution
and consumption of bronze objects, this research will provide a new
understanding of the operation and development of early states in China.
Furthermore, it will contribute to a comparative perspective on early states in
anthropology and archaeology as a whole, since few theories of early state
processes have drawn upon Chinese materials.