* 1744472
* NSF INCLUDES DDLP: IM STEM
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Mimi Lufkin, National Alliance for Partnerships in Equity Education Foundatio
* Standard Grant
* Bernice Anderson
* 09/30/2020
* USD 299,994.00

The National Alliance for Partnerships in Equity Education Foundation (NAPE)
will partner with a diverse group of organizations from six states (CO, ID, NM,
NV, UT, and WY) to form the Intermountain STEM (IM STEM) project, an NSF
INCLUDES Design and Development Launch Pilot project focused on the goal of
increasing the participation and closing achievement gaps in STEM education,
including career and technical education. These organizations whose programs
impact the formal STEM education system include: Departments of Education;
Higher Education agencies; governor supported STEM Action Centers; universities;
secondary school districts; community colleges; Department of Energy National
Labs; businesses, non-profits and others. The partners in this effort will
identify effective practices focused on the common set of objectives and create
a model to bring them to scale by employing a collective impact approach.
Through the project, the participating organizations will create a common
agenda, identify shared metrics, implement mutually reinforcing activities, and
maintain continuous communication. This effort addresses directly the lack of
diversity of the STEM workforce; a societal challenge of significant magnitude
because of its impact on innovation, national security, environmental safety,
and income inequality in the US. The IM STEM?s mission to increase the diversity
of students who are successful in STEM education will create a more STEM
literate society, ensure the contributions of a diverse STEM workforce, and
level the playing field for entrance into high wage STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The capacity of IM STEM to bring large well-
resourced organizations to bear on the broadening participation challenges in
STEM will advance the knowledge of how creative social innovations, like
collective impact, can create transformative institutional and cultural change.
The collection, evaluation and scaling of effective research-based solutions to
close equity gaps in STEM will advance inclusion in STEM. Initially, the IM STEM
project will pilot the scaling of NAPE's professional development (PD) programs
- Program Improvement Process for Equity and Micromessaging to Reach and Teach
Every Student - that have proven to impact equity gaps in STEM and career and
technical education (CTE). The six participating states are interested in
scaling their current small scale implementation of NAPE's PD programs and will
also incorporate selected emerging practices. This design and development launch
pilot will provide the vehicle for identifying support mechanisms for scaling of
the PD and the identification of additional scaling opportunities with other
effective practices of the participating partners. These efforts have the
potential to develop a model for expansion to other states wanting to scale
effective practices.