* 1744588
* Workshop:   Organizational Issues in Technology Transfer at Federal Laboratories; November 13-15, 2017, Phoenix, Arizona
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2018
* David Waldman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Chao
* 12/31/2018
* USD 34,958.00

The purpose of this project is to host a workshop that will advance the
technology transfer mission of federal laboratories, which constitute an
important component of the U.S. national innovation system. In 1980, Congress
enacted two landmark pieces of legislation, with strong bipartisan support, to
facilitate technology transfer from universities and federal laboratories to the
private sector. The first was the Bayh-Dole Act, which applied mainly to
universities. The second was the Stevenson-Wydler Act, which applied to federal
labs. This was followed by two additional pieces of legislation that were also
designed to facilitate the commercialization of research at federal labs, the
Federal Technology Transfer Act of 1986 and the Technology Transfer
Commercialization Act of 2000. Bayh-Dole unleashed a substantial rise in
university technology transfer, which has been studied intensively by academics.
Unfortunately, much less is known about technology transfer at federal labs. It
also appears that technology transfer outcomes at federal labs have lagged
behind those achieved by universities. Also, managers at federal labs have few
analytical tools and little existing research to help them manage technology
transfer effectively. This workshop will fill this gap by developing a research
agenda that will be useful to scholars, lab managers, and policy makers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will specifically address organizational
issues, which have been shown to affect university technology transfer
performance, including the propensity of academic scientists and engineers to
engage in technology transfer. These include macro or institutional factors,
such as strategy, structure, organizational culture, and inter-organizational
relations. Organizational issues also include micro or individual-level factors,
such as whether scientists perceive that they are being treated fairly in the
workplace, incentives for faculty engagement in technology transfer, and
struggles that scientists have with their new role as academic entrepreneurs.
These types of issues, as well as others, are also likely to be relevant to
federal labs. By considering both micro- and macro-level issues, the workshop
will be highly interdisciplinary in nature. The workshop will convene: (1)
leading academic experts on organizational issues in management, psychology,
strategy, sociology, public policy, and economics; (2) the relatively few
academics who have conducted research on technology transfer at federal labs;
(3) editors of top journals in innovation and management studies and other
thought leaders in management, sociology, and public policy; (4) doctoral
students from leading schools of public policy and management, and (5) managers
of major federal labs and the federal agencies that sponsor them. A key goal of
the workshop will be to develop a research agenda that will simultaneously
advance academic research on organizational issues in technology transfer, while
at the same time, identifying tools and tactics to enable managers of federal
labs to advance their technology transfer mission and fulfill the spirit of
Stevenson-Wydler and other legislation that is designed to stimulate the
commercialization of research at federal labs.