* 1744661
* EAGER:  A novel set of computational methods for mining nonlinear and high-order relationships
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Xiaohua Hu, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 07/31/2020
* USD 150,000.00

Studying nonlinear and high-order relationships in a network data set is very
important to understand the mystery of a complicated system and the structure of
many real world problems such as the microbial community of human body,
environmental eco-systems, etc. However, the huge data volume, the complexity
and the intricate data properties have created a lot of opportunities and
challenges for data analysis and mining. This project aims to develop a novel
computational framework to tackle these challenging issues, focusing on the
following two tasks: 1) Novel computational approaches to mine, extract and
infer interactions and relations; 2) Novel computational methods for identifying
higher-ordered interactions and relations from three types of microbiome
datasets: metagenomes, bacterial genomes and literature. This research is of
high risk and high payoff because the outcome will revolutionize the way to
construct and analyze microbial knowledge graphs, and to aid discovery for
biological mechanisms and medical applications.

This project will consider the characteristics of microbiomic data and develop a
novel computational framework for microbiomic data analysis. Scalable
probabilistic and tensor methods with manifold-regularization for mining
microbiomic data will overcome the assumption of linear, Euclidean and infinite
space. These computational methods will be used to construct and analyze
microbial knowledge graphs to aid discovery. The computational results will be
disseminated through open software tool (by developing a novel R package) and
presentations at conferences and workshops. Both the research and education
plans of the proposal are highly interdisciplinary, engaging students and
faculty from various research areas and drawing from work on multiple fields of
study. The proposed research area lends itself to raising the scientific
curiosity of students at many levels. Students will obtain significant exposure
to the latest research in big data, computational science, bioinformatics and
statistics.