* 1745230
* Workshop: The Role of Crowdfunding in the STEM Ecosystem; October 9-10, 2017, Alexandria, VA
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2018
* Morris Cohen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 06/30/2018
* USD 41,881.00

Crowdfunding is an activity in which a project creator appeals to the public and
solicit donations from a large pool of community members to support their
project. Crowdfunding is now regularly used to support many kinds of endeavors,
including art and film projects, journalism, charitable efforts, music and
others. Most recently, crowdfunding became a novel way for scientists and
engineers to support their research project. The proposed workshop will examine
crowdfunding for science and engineering from various points of view.
Scientists, the principals of the crowdfunding platforms, representatives of
non-profits, private foundations and U.S.government agencies will share their
perspective on crowdfunding for science. The workshop participants will
represent demographic and geographic diversity of the research community. The
workshop materials will be distributed through written report and the social
media.

Crowdfunding as a social phenomenon is being studied using a variety of
approaches, from social anthropology to network science. On a practical side, a
growing number of researchers emphasize interactions between the academia and
the general public, as well as translation of STEM developments into societal
benefits. Crowdfunding is growing in significance as one mechanism of
supplementing the funding portfolios of researchers in academia and elsewhere.
The main goal of this workshop will be describe the landscape of crowdfunding in
the context of the changing science policy in the US. We will discuss the
utility of crowdfunding as well as its potential pitfalls, which include, among
others, the difficulty of making a strong and effective public pitch, possible
lack of scientific validity of some of the pitches, as well as difficulties in
public accountability of the crowdfunding projects. A report of the workshop
will be generated and made publicly available. The report will have impact in
the MCB-supported community but also beyond, since the themes and issues being
discussed are broadly applicable across the entire STEM enterprise.