* 1745632
* EAGER:   A Beamforming Optimization Framework for Large Scale mmWave Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Chunsheng Xin, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 101,000.00

In recent years we have witnessed remarkable proliferation of intelligent
wireless devices. According to leading market research firms, there will be 50
to 100 billion wireless devices by 2025. At the same time, mobile-broadband
services will continue driving the demand for higher consumer data rates. As a
result, the wireless industry is anticipated to meet a 1000x growth challenge.
The vast majority of today's wireless communications systems operate in the
microwave spectrum below 3 GHz, which is experiencing severe spectrum shortage
and has become a crowded and precious resource. The millimeter wave (mmWave)
band, operating at frequencies between 20 and 300 GHz, is a promising candidate
for next-generation wireless communications systems. The massive underutilized
spectrum at the mmWave band provides great potential to support multiple
gigabit-per-second user data rates and thousand-fold increase in total mobile
broadband data rate. Beamforming is a fundamental enabling technology for
wireless communications at the mmWave band. This project explores a framework
for beamforming optimization in large scale mmWave networks. If successfully
completed, this exploratory research is expected to advance and affect the
design, deployment, and operation of future mmWave communication systems, and
result in significant scientific, economical, and societal impacts. The project
will broaden the participation of underrepresented groups, such as
underrepresented minority and female students, in the state-of-the-art research,
as well as promote STEM education through outreach activities such as summer
camps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To compensate the high path loss at the mmWave band,
the beamforming technology concentrates energy in a sharp beam toward the
receiver to achieve a high channel gain. However, the existing beamforming
approaches are prohibitively costly, both technically and economically, and
cannot be scaled to beamforming for large scale mmWave networks. This project
explores a framework for beamforming optimization in large scale mmWave
networks, with multiple base stations, a large number of mobile stations or
users, and a vast, multi-dimensional solution space for various beam formation,
user association, and beam scheduling configurations. The proposed research is
exploratory and consists of four tasks: 1) Clustering and Resource Allocation,
2) Power Control, 3) Multi-base station Oriented Clustering, and 4) Beamforming
and Interference. The four tasks are intertwined and multidisciplinary. The
innovative optimization formulations, various heuristic algorithms and schemes
based on multiple techniques such as set covering and bin packing will be
explored, to form a comprehensive framework for user clustering, beam resource
allocation, power control and beam scheduling in large scale mmWave networks.
The optimization models, algorithms and schemes developed for the framework make
it practical for beamforming optimization in large scale mmWave networks. This
will significantly help to pave the roads for large scale mmWave networks. The
techniques developed in this project will have significant impacts on a broad
spectrum of applications, including 5G, mmWave WLAN, and public safety
communication networks.