* 1745742
* Travel Support for International Symposium on Semiconductor Light Emitting Devices. To be Held in Banff, Canada, October 8-12, 2017
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2018
* Zetian Mi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 01/31/2018
* USD 12,500.00

This is an NSF support for increasing the diversity of speakers and enhancing
student participation at the 11th International Symposium on Semiconductor Light
Emitting Devices (ISSLED). The ISSLED is a specialized biannual international
meeting covering current challenges in semiconductor light emitting devices.
This year meeting will be in Banff (Canada). The ISSLED and the LED research
community as a whole stands to benefit from an increase in the invited speakers
and attendees at the symposium that are underrepresented minorities.
&lt;br/&gt;The ISSLED Symposium is a specialized biannual international meeting
covering current challenges in semiconductor light emitting devices. The
participants are researchers from academia, national institutes, and industry
and travel from all parts of the world. To continue this trend, speakers are
invited from various research fields and ethnic/cultural backgrounds in an
effort to improve the diversity of symposium attendees. A great deal of
attention is given to involve students and young researcher who are just
beginning their research careers.&lt;br/&gt;The funds will enable the organizers
to offer travel support for invited speakers who are underrepresented minorities
in the LED device research community. The technical program will provide student
participants the opportunity to gain exposure to new materials and devices,
their basic physics, and their engineering applications.