* 1745399
* Student Support for 2017 International Conference on Advances in Geographic Information Systems (ACM SIGSPATIAL 2017)
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Goce Trajcevski, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 06/30/2018
* USD 30,000.00

This award provides support for U.S-based students to attend the 25th ACM
SIGSPATIAL International Conference on Advances in Geographic Information
Systems, November 7-10, 2017 in Redondo Beach, CA
(http://sigspatial2017.sigspatial.org/). In addition to regular research/demo
papers and industry papers, ACM SIGSPATIAL 2017 features several sessions
dedicated to young researchers: PhD Symposium, SIGSPATIAL Cup, and Student
Research Competition. PhD Symposia in the past four years have also organized
panels and keynote talks by prominent researchers, to help young researchers in
improving the focus of their work. Spatial information is essential in many
branches of industry and academia, and businesses as well as governmental
agencies are utilizing it their daily operations to improve the structuring of
new strategies, and increase overall productivity. Applications of spatial
information handling can be found in location-based services in the mobile-
commerce industry, strategic assessments in the military agencies, climatology
studies (e.g., determining the potential effects of a tsunami) in meteorological
research, computer-aided design and computer aided manufacturing (CAD/CAM)
applications, medical imaging and atlases (e.g., 3D brain atlas), land-use
classification of satellite imagery in urban planning, detection of local
instability in transportation networks, epidemiological pattern forecasting
(predicting the spread of disease) in the health-care field, analyzing crime hot
spots for law enforcement, creation of high resolution three-dimensional maps
from satellite imagery for intelligence applications, etc. Combined with the
increased demand for spatial data processing, spatial information systems are
gaining a substantial share across the spectrum in the industrial, government,
and academic sectors. The ACM Special Interest Group on Spatial Information
(SIGSPATIAL) is an association for researchers, students, developers,
practitioners, and professionals interested in research, development, and
deployment of solutions to spatial data, spatial operations, spatial information
handling, and spatial knowledge extraction problems. The scope of members'
interests spans from more theoretical aspects (e.g., geometric algorithms) to
very focused application-oriented aspects, and has generated a significant body
of research in the past decade. The charter of ACM SIGSPATIAL is dedicated to
fostering research and development activities especially as it pertains to the
acquisition, management, and processing of spatially-related information with a
focus on algorithmic, geometric, and visual considerations, and is at the heart
of enabling technologies for geographic information systems (GIS), navigation
systems, etc. Given the relative importance of the field of spatial and
geographical data, ACM SIGSPATIAL conference aims to augmenting its role and
impact by motivating and supporting a new generation of scientists and engineers
to take on the challenge of pursuing their graduate careers and beyond in this
multidisciplinary area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ACM SIGSPATIAL conference has
established itself as the world's premier research conference in Spatial
Information and Geographic Information Systems (GIS). The conference provides a
forum for original research contributions covering all conceptual, design, and
implementation aspects of GIS ranging from applications, user interfaces, and
visualization to storage management and indexing issues. It brings together
researchers, developers, users, and practitioners carrying out research and
development in novel systems based on geospatial data and knowledge, and
fostering interdisciplinary discussions and research in all aspects of GIS.
Proceedings of the ACM SIGSPATIAL 2017 Conference will be published in the ACM
Digital Library (http://dl.acm.org/).