* 1745015
* Collaborative Research: Constraining West Antarctic Ice Sheet Elevation during the last Interglacial
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Nelia Dunbar, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 370,103.00

This study will collect a novel dataset to determine how the West Antarctic Ice
Sheet (WAIS) responded to a warmer climate during the last interglacial period
(~125,000 years ago) by reconstructing the glacial history at the Mt. Waesche
volcano. Reconstructing WAIS geometry when the ice sheet was smaller than
present is difficult and data are lacking because the evidence lies beneath the
present ice sheet. This study will drill through the ice sheet and recover
bedrock that can be analyzed for its surface exposure history to help determine
when the surface became overridden by the ice sheet. This study will provide
constraints on the past maximum and minimum spatial extent of WAIS during the
last glacial-interglacial cycle. Understanding the geometry of a reduced WAIS
during intervals when the planet was warmer than present may provide a possible
analogue for future environmental conditions given predicted temperature trends.
A reduction of WAIS results in rising sea levels which threatens coastal
communities across the globe. The data will help improve numerical ice sheet
models to better predict WAIS response to current and future climate trends. The
project supports a teacher educational workshop and the training of graduate and
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
obtain rock samples from beneath the WAIS through shallow (&lt;80 m) drilling at
Mt. Waesche, a volcano in Marie Byrd Land, near an ice dome of WAIS (2000 m
elevation). The lithologies of lava flows exposed on the flank of the volcano
are well-suited for cosmogenic 3He and 36Cl as well as 40Ar/39Ar measurements
which will establish eruption and exposure age. Existing 40Ar/39Ar data indicate
basaltic lava flows on the volcano flank as young as 350 ka. Thus, measured
cosmogenic nuclides measured in rock cores from beneath the ice surface will be
indicative of relatively recent exposure during periods of reduced ice
elevation, most likely, during the last interglacial. The first field season is
focused on identifying appropriate locations for drilling and a ground
penetrating radar (GPR) survey of the subglacial topography &lt;100m under the
blue ice area. Mapping and dating the adjacent exposed lava flows will allow
tracing of lava flows of known age and composition below the ice margin that
will be targeted for drilling the following year. The second field season
activities include drilling 8 boreholes (two transects) through blue ice with
the Winkie drill near the ice margin to 80 m depth to obtain rock cores from the
sub-ice lava flows. 3He exposure ages will constrain the duration and minimum
extent of past surface lowering of the WAIS in Marie Byrd Land. Deeper GPR
imaging (up to 700 m) will hope to reveal additional evidence of lava/ice
interactions that would independently place constraints on lower ice levels
during past eruptions. Results from this study will be compared with the modeled
ice elevation histories at Mt. Waesche to validate ice sheet modeling
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.