* 1745375
* EAGER:   SSDIM:   Generating Synthetic Data on Interdependent Food, Energy, and Transportation Networks via Stochastic, Bi-level Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Sauleh Siddiqui, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 02/28/2021
* USD 399,874.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will generate
data at the interdependencies of the energy, food, and transportation
infrastructures, providing essential information for contributing to improved
approaches to addressing design and operational issues for interdependent
critical infrastructures (ICIs). The project introduces a new mathematical
framework and applies it to data generation, allowing explicit representation of
infrastructure interdependencies. It allows integration of current data
generation techniques into a unified representation of societal, mechanistic,
and physical aspects of ICIs. All data generated from this research will be made
freely available through online repositories. Along with academic publications
and presentations, the project will create communication materials such as
digital maps for dissemination to practitioners, particularly within rural
communities. The findings and outcomes from this research may serve to raise
public awareness about infrastructure threats and resilience. This project will
also develop a food/energy module for elementary schoolchildren, as well as
support for graduate student researchers.

This project will develop a new mathematical framework (Stochastic Bilevel
Optimization) to generate synthetic data on ICIs. The project will also provide
uncertainty measures associated with these data, allowing a measure of quality
as well as quantifying relationships with input information. This method will
generate data for interdependent agriculture, food, energy, and transportation
ICIs, allowing for integration of existing data generation techniques. The
mathematical structure of the stochastic bilevel optimization problem allows for
representation of, and integration across, the physical, mechanistic, and
community functions of ICIs. The aim is to generate data to optimize strategies
for disaster preparedness, resilience, and response. This research will
contribute to the emerging area of food system resilience and will enable future
efforts to model potential threats to food systems such as energy supply
disruptions and fuel price spikes.