* 1745477
* Convergence HTF: RCN: Enhancing Small and Mid-level Farm Viability Through a Systems-based Research Network: Linking Technology and Sustainable Development and Practice
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Alexander Leonessa, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2022
* USD 514,924.00

This convergence Research Coordination Network addresses the future of work at
the human-technology frontier in the context of small- and medium-sized farms.
Intelligent, interactive, and highly networked machines -- with which people
increasingly interact -- are a growing part of the landscape, particularly in
regard to work. As automation today moves from the factory floor to knowledge
and service occupations, research is needed to reap the benefits in increased
productivity and increased job opportunities, and to mitigate social costs.
Convergence is the deep integration of knowledge, theories, methods, and data
from multiple fields to form new and expanded frameworks for addressing
scientific and societal challenges and opportunities. The Research Coordination
Network supported by this award will define key challenges and research
imperatives at the nexus of humans, technology, and work through the convergence
of robotics, human factors, systems and control theory, neuromotor and cognitive
sciences, machine learning, systems engineering, data analytics, precision
agriculture, ergonomics, health and safety, and sustainability. This project
promotes Convergence by exploring methods for incorporating a human-centric
focus, including social and economic considerations, throughout the entire
technology research and development process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
focus of this Research Coordination Network is to build research collaborations
among multiple stakeholders in order to fully realize the potential benefits of
emerging technological capabilities in the context of small- and medium-sized
farms. The stakeholders include academic researchers with complementary
expertise in human factors, robotics, systems engineering, education, and
sustainability, among other areas. Small- and medium-sized farms face a variety
of serious economic and demographic challenges. Farming is a strenuous and
dangerous occupation, which takes a physical toll on an aging workforce.
Innovations in automation and robotics may augment individual capabilities as
well as reduce the risk of injury, but with these potential benefits come the
threat of job displacement and the possible exacerbation of economic inequity.
Currently, creation and development of emerging technological solutions are
typically driven along parallel, isolated lines of inquiry, with no awareness of
the broad and interrelated nature of the issues involved. This research network
seeks to provide researchers across relevant disciplines with this integrated
perspective, as well as to involve stakeholders in the agricultural community at
a much earlier stage in the technology development process.