* 1745111
* RAPID: Historical contingency in ecology and restoration: environmental change, year effects, and priority effects in California grasslands
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Truman Young, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2019
* USD 25,217.00

This project explores how climate variation affects species in California
grasslands. It builds on a long-term experiment in which different plants were
planted in different plots, then monitored for many years. A four-year drought
provided an unexpectedly strong test of how those plants respond to extreme
stress. In the winter and spring of 2017, the drought suddenly ended; rainfall
returned to normal levels. This dramatic change in conditions is a rare event
and will likely have a strong influence on the types of plants that still live
in the plots. Funding provided by this award will allow scientists to continue
the experiment for at least another year to measure that influence.
Understanding how cycles of rainfall influence plants is important for
management of grasslands in light of possible long-term shifts in weather.

This is a short-term continuation of a long-term project that, unfortunately,
expired just as the drought was ending. The experiment extended by this award
tests two opposing models of how natural communities develop after disturbance.
One theory predicts that community composition will tend to return to the pre-
disturbance state, regardless of the vagaries of early establishment. The other
theory predicts that community composition is largely determined priority
effects (i.e., the order in which species colonize after disturbance). The study
will assess how an unexpectedly large disturbance in water availability affects
the outcome of community assembly processes. In addition to providing training
for students in research, the investigator will assist in local restoration
projects.