* 1745332
* Workshop on Long-Term Measurements of Biosphere-Atmosphere Chemical Interactions; Irvine, California; Two Days in October or November of 2017
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2018
* Alex Guenther, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2018
* USD 48,439.00

This project supports a workshop to identify the scientific need for long-term
atmospheric chemistry measurements, especially those relevant to gaining a
better understanding of biosphere/atmosphere exchange of trace gases and
aerosols. This workshop is in response to a recommendation from the National
Academy of Sciences/National Research Council in the 2016 report, "The Future of
Atmospheric Chemistry Research: Remembering Yesterday, Understanding Today,
Anticipating Tomorrow." The recommendation in the report states,&lt;br/&gt;"NSF
should take the lead in coordinating with other agencies to identify the
scientific need for long-term measurements and to establish synergies with
existing sites that could provide core support for long-term atmospheric
chemistry measurements, including biosphere-atmosphere exchange of trace gases
and aerosol particles."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will bring together
around 100 scientific leaders and scholars who have expertise in the physical,
chemical and biological drivers of land-atmosphere exchange and the developers
of both observational and modeling approaches that are used to investigate
biosphere-atmosphere interactions. The workshop will also enable an emerging
community of early career scientists to meet, network, and exchange ideas with
leaders in the field of atmospheric sciences. The scientific focus areas include
the following: (1) micrometeorology and flux measurements, (2) oxidants and
reactivity, (3) biogenic secondary organic aerosol, (4) the role of nitrogen,
(5) ecophysiological processes controlling bio-atmos exchange, (6) multiscale
modeling: cells, canopies, regional, Earth system, (7) feedbacks between
atmospheric chemistry and biogeochemistry, and (8) Earth system changes:
atmospheric composition, climate, and land use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop will take place in October or November of 2017 at the University of
California at Irvine.