* 1745562
* Convergence ROL: RCN: Cross-Scale Processes Impacting Biodiversity
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Bette Loiselle, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 469,692.00

Biodiversity on Earth -- comprising an estimated 10 million or more different
species -- provides crucial ecosystem services to the planet, including the
cycling of nutrients, gases, and water, provision of food, medicine, energy, and
shelter. Because biodiversity is essential to the health of the planet, it is
important to understand how it is generated, maintained and lost. This topic,
however, is extraordinarily complex. Biodiversity distribution patterns and
ecosystem services are regulated by processes that operate across multiple
hierarchical levels of organization, temporal dimensions, and spatial scales.
This Research Coordination Network brings together a diverse set of researchers
to integrate data and explore novel concepts that will rapidly advance the
field. Researchers will explicitly investigate processes that span hierarchical
levels to identify novel properties that could not have been predicted by
investigating the individual parts alone. Biologists working at different scales
of organization will lead the effort, in coordination with researchers with
expertise in machine learning, modeling, and mathematics to ensure the required
cyberinfrastructure will advance in sync with new biodiversity and ecological
forecasting theory. Annual meetings and workshops will offer diverse training
opportunities in biodiversity informatics and scientific communication to
students and faculty. The network will establish student research immersion
opportunities and extensive cross-disciplinary training through exchanges among
biodiversity, environmental biology, and computer sciences laboratories at the
collaborating institutions. Based on participant feedback, the Research
Coordination Network will adapt best student-centric practices of collaborative
research, and report them to the scientific community. Envisioned products
include perspective, synthetic, proof-of-concept, and data-driven publications,
and presentations at scientific meetings, webinars, and learning modules. The
project also will provide outstanding education and networking opportunities to
scientists at different career levels, institutions, and cultural backgrounds,
contributing to the establishment of a diverse and well-trained workforce in the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The non-linearity of the complex mechanisms regulating
biodiversity and ecological processes makes predictions difficult, and requires
diverse data and novel analytical methods to make forecasting more accurate.
This Research Coordination Network promotes convergence by bringing together a
diverse set of biologists, environmental biologists, computer scientists, and
mathematicians to explore the cross-scale processes regulating the Rules of
Life, and the theory, models, and cyberinfrastructure needed to analyze them.
This Research Coordination Network will focus on four major topics: 1) how to
incorporate cross-scale processes into models of biodiversity patterns and
predictions about the ecosystem functions they provide; 2) exploration and
expansion of novel biodiversity monitoring approaches to better understand
patterns and processes acting across scales (particularly through the use of
proximal and remote sensing methods); 3) challenges and possible solutions in
bioinformatics and cyberinfrastructure to foster new ways to handle storage,
integration, and visualization of complex biological and environmental data; and
4) novel approaches to enhance public awareness about the complexity, value, and
role of biodiversity. This convergence approach promises to provide novel
insights into fundamental questions about biodiversity and ecological
forecasting that will have a broad impact on the biological sciences, and
society more generally.