* 1745796
* SBIR Phase I:  Direct Measurements of Black and Brown Carbon Aerosols without Filter Collection
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,09/30/2018
* John Birks, 2B Technologies, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 09/30/2018
* USD 223,717.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project lies in the widespread
nature of the problem of airborne Black (BC) and Brown (BrC) carbon
particulates. These are formed from combustion processes such as motor vehicles
and ships, forest fires and biomass burning, as well as indoor cooking in
developing countries. BC and BrC are important components of atmospheric
aerosols (small airborne solid and liquid particles) that affect air quality,
visibility and climate. The World Health Organization estimates that nearly 7
million premature deaths globally in 2012 were linked to air pollution, and
black carbon-containing aerosols are often singled out as a major contributor
due to their strong linkages to adverse health effects. Accurate and robust
monitoring of BC (and BrC) at a lower cost is necessary in urban and industrial
areas throughout the United States and abroad to provide adequate temporal and
spatial measurements that can be used to assess regional air quality models and
estimate community exposure risks. This information will then make it possible
for local and regional government agencies to develop mitigation strategies that
protect the health of their communities.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the
problem of accurate and inexpensive Black Carbon (BC) measurements by developing
a long-path photometer to quantify airborne BC and BrC particulates. The most
common commercially-available technique for BC and BrC requires collection of
particulates on a filter. This filter introduces numerous artefacts requiring
complicated corrections. Other existing techniques are quite expensive and
require significant expertise to operate. The Black Carbon Photometer (BCP) to
be developed here will not require pre-concentration on a filter, thus providing
a direct, correction-free measurement. It will be operationally simple and
require little maintenance, similar to photometers routinely used in monitoring
networks for gas phase species such as ozone. The initial BCP will be low power,
portable and is projected to cost less than currently available BC analyzers.
Thus, it should provide researchers in air quality and public health, as well as
those in monitoring agencies, a practical and economical alternative to existing
technologies.