* 1745333
* Increasing Underrepresented Minorities in STEM:  The 44th NOBCChE Annual Conference:  Community, Leadership and Partnership
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Malinda Swoope, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 04/30/2018
* USD 49,931.00

This award supports the participation of 52 undergraduate students, graduate
students, and postdoctoral students at the 44nd Annual National Organization for
the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers (NOBCChE)
Conference, held Oct. 30 - Nov. 3, 2017 in Minneapolis, MN. Selected
participants are from underrepresented minority groups in the Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides opportunities for participants to
engage in four major areas of focus: 1) technical and professional development;
2) networking and mentorship opportunities with professionals working in STEM
fields; 3) exposure to high-profile minority role models in STEM; and 4)
academic and professional STEM career advancement opportunities. Student
participants interact with peers and professionals from industry, government,
and academia to develop collaborations and to explore opportunities to pursue
graduate degrees in the chemistry or chemical engineering disciplines. These
opportunities may not only impact these specific participating individuals, but
also benefit the larger community of STEM field practitioners as these
activities are useful in recruiting and retaining individuals from
underrepresented talent pools. NOBCChE seeks to increase the number of
minorities in the STEM workforce, particularly those in the chemistry or
chemical engineering fields.