* 1745798
* I-Corps: Miniaturized, End-to-End Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Platform
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Zoltan Nagy, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 12/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this I-Corps project is a miniaturized, on-
demand pharmaceutical manufacturing platform that is scalable and efficient to
deploy, highly automated, and fast on product release. The project's aim is to
reduce manufacturing and inventory cost and in turn overcome drug shortages.
Broadly speaking, the current global pharmaceutical industry is prone to supply
chain disruptions, drug shortages, and drug price hikes. One major contributing
factor are legacy factories and processes which are limited to intermittent and
slow production. Moreover, the outdated infrastructure has weaknesses in terms
of product yield and environmental impact. Given the pressure of meeting demand
for clinical trial supplies, uncertainties over approvals, and other resource
constraints, drug development activities have often only been a series of
process scale-ups with less emphasis on innovating on the next-gen manufacturing
processes, which can be fundamentally better in all aspects in the long term.
Consequently, this project is a significant push towards a more flexible,
economical, greener, and, ultimately, more sustainable drug manufacturing
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project explores the
commercial potential of a microfluidic-based, continuous-flow pharmaceutical
manufacturing device. It represents a paradigm shift from conventional, labor-
intensive, batch drug manufacturing processes. Microfluidics (MFDs) are
fabricated microchannels which are up to a thousand times smaller than a
conventional batch reactor for the same throughput. In turn, MFDs offer up to a
thousand times increase in the surface area to volume ratio, allowing for
extremely rapid heat and mass transfer and a suite of other advantages; Since
the process is continuous, the system can be spatially integrated with state-of-
the-art analytical sensors and computer-based controllers, by which the product
quality can be assured not only by process design, but also by advanced process
control. From a synthesis and purification perspective, MFDs allow for precise
handling of previously inaccessible, but highly efficient, pressurized, and
often exothermic pathways. This results in greener and safer processes with
higher throughput and less waste. On the formulation side, MFDs provide
homogeneous crystallization environments, leading to monodisperse crystal size
distributions, which leads to superior reproducibility in key product quality
such as shape and size.