* 1745055
* Collaborative Research: Topographic Controls on Antarctic Ice Sheet Grounding Line Behavior - Integrating Models and Observations
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Leigh Stearns, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 260,378.00

Current ice mass loss in Antarctica is largely driven by changes at glacier
grounding lines, where inland ice transitions from being grounded to floating in
the ocean. The rate and pattern of glacier retreat in these circumstances is
thought to be controlled by the terrain under the ice. This project incorporates
evidence of past ice-retreat events and other field data, such as grounding-line
positions and dates, subglacial topography, and meltwater features, into
numerical models of ice flow to investigate the influence that grounding-line
processes and subglacial topography have on glacier retreat rates over the past
15,000 years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent observations suggest that Antarctic
ice mass loss is largely driven by perturbations at or near the grounding line.
However, the lack of information on subglacial and grounding-line environments
causes large uncertainties in projections of mass loss and sea-level rise. This
project will integrate geologic data from the deglaciated continental shelf into
numerical models of varying complexity from one to three-dimensions. Rarely do
numerical ice-sheet models of Antarctica have multiple constraints on dynamics
over the past ~15,000 years (a period that spans the deglaciation of the
Antarctic continental shelf since the Last Glacial Maximum). The geologic
constraints include grounding-line positions, deglacial chronologies, and
information on grounding line-ice shelf processes. The models will be used to
investigate necessary perturbations and controls that meet the geological
constraints. The multidisciplinary approach of merging geologic reconstructions
of paleo-ice behavior with numerical models of ice response will allow the
research team to test understanding of subglacial controls on grounding-line
dynamics and assess the stability of modern grounding
lines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.