* 1745371
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Assessing anthropogenic impacts on endangered primates
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2022
* David Watts, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2022
* USD 25,001.00

Diverse species worldwide are endangered because of habitat loss and increased
exposure to human activities. Research is needed that moves beyond the current
focus on protected areas to other human-modified landscapes to determine how
wildlife and humans can coexist. This doctoral dissertation project combines
behavioral, ecological, demographic, and genetic data from an endangered lemur
species that lives in a landscape shared with humans, to assess how this species
is affected by human activities. In addition to furthering knowledge about
human-lemur dynamics, the project will provide a model for wildlife biologists
and managers of protected areas to investigate human-wildlife dynamics more
generally. As part of this project, investigators will train students in field
and laboratory techniques, including behavioral data collection, wildlife
surveys, and DNA extraction and amplification. Further, the project will
contribute to public science outreach, international research collaborations,
and primate conservation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will conduct a
fine-scale analysis of the impacts of human activities on the ecology of the
Verreaux's sifaka, including how this lemur species responds to disturbances and
which types of human activities are most threatening. Behavioral, demographic,
and geographic data will be collected for sifakas living in areas subject to
differing degrees of human disturbance. These investigations will be focused at
Bezà Mahafaly Special Reserve, a recently expanded protected area in southwest
Madagascar that includes core conservation areas as well as areas of regulated
human use. At a larger landscape scale, investigators will survey unprotected
forest fragments in the Bezà region and conduct landscape genetic analyses,
using fecal DNA. These analyses will determine how sifakas move across the
human-dominated landscape and how the structure of the sifaka population is
influenced by patterns of human land use. Finally, investigators will combine
long-term demographic data from the core sifaka population at Bezà with data on
sifaka movement into and out of the reserve to predict the population's future
growth and stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.