* 1745768
* Meeting: Support of Student Participation in the 2017 International Congress on Membranes and Membrane Processes, July 29-August4, 2017, San Franciso, CA
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2017
* G. Glenn Lipscomb, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 12/31/2017
* USD 10,000.00

Separation of a complex chemical mixture into its molecular components requires
energy, and it is estimated that 10 to 15% of the world?s energy goes into the
separation of chemical products and precursors, including gasoline, polymer
precursors, drinking water, and pharmaceuticals. A number of new separation
processes, based on molecular-level interactions and molecular sieving effects,
are being developed to reduce this parasitic energy consumption of purification.
Membranes are an emerging technology that generally use significantly less
energy than traditional separation processes, as they do not require a phase
change (such as boiling) to separate the constituents on a molecular basis.
Rather, the membranes serves as a selective boundary that allows a molecule of
one type to pass while retaining other molecules. Due in part to the reduced
energy consumption, nearly 8% growth is expected in the membrane markets for gas
and liquid separations through 2019, and student involvement and engagement is
essential to support growth of this community.

The International Congress on Membranes and Membrane Processes meeting is one of
the preeminent global membrane meetings, and is held every three years. It is a
cooperative meeting between three international societies, including the North
America Membrane Society of the US. The latest developments in the membrane
field from leading academic, governmental, and industrial laboratories are
presented for the first time for evaluation by the membrane community. Enabling
Membrane Technology is the theme of the 2017 meeting, as adoption of energy-
efficient membrane technology has been hindered by the risks associated with
replacing traditional separation technology on a large scale. This project
supports graduate student participation in the 11th meeting of this group, which
will be held July 29 - August 4, 2017 in San Francisco, CA at the Hilton San
Francisco Union Square. Up to 150 students will be selected from US Universities
to receive $100 per person to offset registration fees. Travel supplements
offered by the North America Membrane Society will be used synergistically to
support student travel. Travel to this conference will enable students to
network with their peers and understand their work in the context of the larger
field. The feedback the students receive from senior members of the community
can help direct their career.