* 1745999
* SBIR Phase I:  Development and Evaluation of a Robust, Compliant, Sensorized Prosthetic Hand
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Aadeel Akhtar, PSYONIC, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will primarily benefit the 11.4 million people
with hand amputations worldwide. By making and selling a prosthetic hand at a
price lower than competing devices, the proposed prosthetic hand is expected to
be more affordable for people with upper limb amputations. Increasing robustness
by incorporating compliant materials should allow patients to use their hands
longer without worry of damage. By incorporating pressure sensors, the team
expects to enable patients to precisely manipulate many different types of
objects. Two former war veterans with amputations have already been enabled with
early versions of the proposed technology. Through the low cost of the device
and the advanced features unique to the hand, the goal of this project is to
help the millions of hand amputees worldwide to regain independence and
confidence in their lives through innovative prosthetic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project involves development and
evaluation of an affordable, robust myoelectric prosthetic hand that provides
natural, compliant grasps with pressure feedback to users. Making the hand
compliant will require the use of soft, compliant materials not used in
currently available commercial prosthetic devices. The design and materials used
in the hand must be robust enough to last at least two years of daily usage.
Finally, sensorizing the hand will require placing pressure sensors and
electronics in the fingers that also need to withstand impacts. Feasibility will
be established through the performance of each design iteration in accelerated
life tests (150,000 flex/extend cycles) and human subject experiments
(performance after activities of daily living and motor control tasks). The
capabilities of the Phase I prototype will be extended in Phase II for delivery
of a complete myoelectric prosthetic hand system that is ready for clinicians to
use with patients.