* 1745605
* Collaborative Research:  DCL:  HBCU EAGER Network effects, competition and survival of small and minority owned firms in public procurement
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Georgia Kosmopoulou, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2020
* USD 76,141.00

Award Abstract Alexander/Kosmopoulous&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative
Research: HBCU DCL, EARGER: Network Effects, Competition and Survival of Small
Minority-Owned Firms in Public Procurement&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Small firms,
especially those owned by economically disadvantaged groups, provide a large
share of employment for this population. These companies are often at
competitive disadvantage when they compete against large firms and often lose in
the process. Can these firms form networks to learn from each other, increase
their efficiency, compete effectively against larger firms and expand their
activities? How do these networks affect the chance of winning a bid and
effectively carrying out the project? This research project will use data from
the state of Oklahoma road construction bidding program to study the impact of
networks on efficiency of small minority-owned businesses. The study will focus
on factors that increase the chances of forming networks and the effects of
these networks on firm success in bidding, cost efficiency, profits, and long-
term stability. The results of this research project will increase our
understanding what determines the success of small minority-owned firms and in
the process, provide policy guidance on how best to increase the competitiveness
of small firms generally. Because the results of this research project could
guide policies to increase the efficiency of small firms, the results could also
increase the competitiveness of the U.S. economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative research will study the industrial organization and
competitiveness of small minority-owned firms. Specifically, it will use
administrative and field data to study the effects of network formation on the
success and survival of small, minority-owned firms in bidding for and
completion of government infrastructural contracts. The research focuses on: (i)
strategic network formation among contractors who repeatedly compete or
cooperate in contracting jobs; (ii) the impacts of networks on the probability
of a small minority-owned firm winning a bid for contract; (iii) the effects of
networks on the survival of small firms. The state of Oklahoma construction
bidding data has enough detailed information to allow the PIs to identify
networks, control for heterogeneity of firms and ownership structure when
analyzing the effects of networks on efficiency. The PIs will develop an
auctions model that allows for information asymmetries across different types of
firms due to differences in experience, efficiency and network connections. The
model treats network formation as endogenously determined by firm net
profitability in a network relative to profitability outside a network. The PIs
will use Bayesian methods to estimate the models. The results of this research
project will inform our understanding of the relationship between network
formation and efficiency of small minority-owned firms and in the process,
contribute to the competitiveness of the U.S. economy.