* 1745330
* EAGER: Investigating Optical Characteristics, Doping Levels and Current Matching in Perovskite/Si, Perovskite/GaAs/Si and Perovskite/III-V Ternary Semiconductors
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Indranil Bhattacharya, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2018
* USD 30,047.00

Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical: &lt;br/&gt;Crystalline silicon solar cell
technology has dominated the photovoltaic technology market for years with a
current market share of 90%, owing to its wide technological applications in
semiconductor electronics. Light absorption for limited range of the spectrum
and thermalization losses hinder further increase in silicon solar cell
efficiency. This research endeavor is geared toward increasing efficiency beyond
the thermodynamic limits imposed by the physics of single-junction silicon solar
cells by incorporation of different bandgap semiconductors in tandem. This
research will perform optical and electronic optimization schemes to improve
absorption, photocurrent and efficiency in solar cells, light emitting diodes
and other electronic devices. The research will address fundamental limitations
of integration of perovskites with silicon and other semiconductors and will
impact a diverse technical and societal community. The broader impacts of this
research lies in 1) incorporating research findings into curriculum enhancement
of courses such as Photovoltaic Engineering, Physical Electronics and
Optoelectronic Engineering at Tennessee Tech University, 2) recruiting female,
underrepresented groups and veterans in research and 3) organizing outreach
activities to foster increased awareness of energy technologies at the high-
school, middle-school and community levels. This will help increase longer-term
enrollment in engineering and computing education, yielding many long-standing
benefits to society at large. &lt;br/&gt;Technical: &lt;br/&gt;The primary
scholarship of the research plan lies in addressing the challenges facing
perovskite/Si tandem technologies such as: 1) high sub-bandgap absorption in the
perovskite absorber; 2) low photoconversion efficiency of perovskite/Si tandem;
3) relatively higher reflection and parasitic losses; and 4) compromising open-
circuit voltage and fill factor. Transfer-matrix based optimization of optical
absorption, reflection and internal quantum efficiency vs. wavelength of each
layer will provide insights about maximum achievable absorption efficiency and
photocurrent in each layer. Modeling of wavelength-dependent absorption by
combining conventional pyramidal texture with wavelength-selective intermediate
reflector will further increase the tandem efficiency. Doping concentration and
thickness based current density vs. voltage simulations for each subcell layer
in the tandem and optimizing those parameters to match the current will achieve
the best possible photoconversion efficiency for tandem designs. This research
will have significant contributions to solid-state lighting, lasing and thin-
film electronic device applications.