* 1745824
* Workshop:  The subterranean macroscope: sensor networks for understanding, modeling, and managing soil processes (University of Chicago-Hyde Park, Illinois - October 2017)
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Supratik Guha, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* James Jones
* 08/31/2018
* USD 99,887.00

Science has a poor understanding of one of the most important components of life
on earth: the physical, biological and chemical nature of the soil in the
subsurface region of the earth that typically reaches to 0.6 to three meters
below the surface. Soils provide food, fiber and fresh water, make major
contributions to energy and climate sustainability, and help maintain
biodiversity and the overall protection of ecosystem. Scientists lack an
accurate understanding and predictive models for soil and for the plants that
grow in it, because it has been difficult to create high resolution experimental
maps of the biological and geochemical properties of the soil over large tracts
of land over time. However, the emergence of sensor networks, better sensing
using nanotechnology, and data analytics has the potential soon to bring such
high resolution experimental soil mapping capabilities within reach. The goal of
this workshop is to bring together the engineering, computer science, and soil
and plant science communities to develop a vision for underground wireless
sensor networks that will enable the creation of such subterranean soil maps,
followed by using these data to develop the next generation of soil and plant
models. Besides furthering the boundaries of fundamental science, these networks
would have a major impact on food security and the way we manage the environment
and ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists have a poor understanding of
the physical, chemical and biological transformations and cycling of soil in the
vadose zone and its influences on plant science and food security. Lacking
adequate soil data at high spatial and temporal length scales, current models
are inadequate. However, revolutionary advances in sensors and nanotechnology,
sensor networks, communications and microelectronics technologies, and data
analytics are poised to enable scalable and affordable subterranean sensing
networks that, in turn, can potentially revolutionize soil, plant, and ecosystem
sciences. Such advances would have a major impact on the environment, food
security and its management. Building on recent successes across various science
and engineering fields, this workshop brings together researchers in soil
science (including experts in the biological, chemical and physical nature of
soil), dynamic soil modeling expertise, plant sciences, sensor networks,
microelectronics and wireless researchers, and machine learning/data analytics.
The goal of the workshop is to create a vision and framework for how such a
subterranean sensor network could be built across different geographical scales,
with sensors that will generate dense, useful data that will inform soil
science, plant science and modeling efforts. These efforts, in turn would lead
to the next level of understanding of the physical, chemical and biological
nature of soil, and its impact on plant science and food security. The
discussion will be framed by three key topics that build upon NSF?s ?Big Ideas?:
(1) Convergence, bringing together the aforementioned multidisciplinary
communities; (2) Big Data, the efficient transmission, curation, and analysis of
dense, in situ soil data over time; and (3) Understanding the Rules of Life,
predicting phenotype from genotypes in diverse environments through advances in
measuring soil environmental conditions that interact with genotype (G x E
interactions). The workshop also considers how technology and data can best
interface with computational models to inform real-world decisions. Longer-term
impacts of the workshop may include facilitating the use of unprecedented levels
of spatial and temporal, multi-modal data that can revolutionize our
understanding of soils, developing more accurate soil and plant models than are
available today, and enabling a profound impact on environmental sustainability,
agricultural yields, climate models, water and agricultural management, and
global food security.