* 1745476
* I-Corps: Storm Water Redistribution Device
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Kathleen Trauth, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 12/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is in allowing
property owners to fully develop their land for economic benefit, while
satisfying regulatory requirements and, at the same time, protecting the water
resources that we rely on for water supply, environmental benefits and
recreation. Currently, land owners use developable land to manage storm water.
This project will consider how to best use the soil throughout the site to
manage the storm water and free up more of the site for development. By
spreading out runoff that naturally concentrates when we construct buildings,
roads and parking lots more water can soak into the ground. With this
infiltration, pollutants picked up on the land surface can be removed by the
soil rather than flowing directly to a stream. Infiltrated water moves
underground to streams and provides the continuous stream flow needed by
wildlife. Distributing runoff to the soil surrounding our buildings and pavement
can also help keep runoff out of the combined storm and sanitary sewers found in
many older communities, allowing the aging infrastructure to continue to
function and reducing the combined sewer overflows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project will result in a new solution, transforming the way storm water
runoff is managed; improving water quality and maintaining stream baseflow
required by wildlife, while decreasing costs and requiring less space to meet
permitting requirements. The solution consists of devices that are specially
constructed to slow down the flow of water and redirect it in a way that allows
it to seep into the surrounding soil. The core technology is based upon the
well-established principle that the size, mix and way materials are arranged
determines the way liquids flow. A patent for the solution has been issued
because of the new, innovative way of constructing and deploying these simple
materials (i.e., sand and gravel placed in tubes of the geotextile fabric often
used in landscaping), allowing water to be directed in three dimensions.
Concentrated runoff, for example the accelerated flow of water off a parking
lot, that is intercepted by the device, is first slowed and then directed down
into the soil or is moved left or right to the next device segment.