* 1745499
* Convergence NNA: Networking Indigenous Arctic and U.S. Southwest Communities on Knowledge Co-Production in Data Sciences
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Peter Pulsifer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 08/31/2023
* USD 499,006.00

This award supports a Research Coordinating Network (RCN) that brings together
scientists and Indigenous communities, Alaska Native communities and Tribal
communities in the U.S. Southwest, to advance understanding of the challenges
rapid socioecological change pose to food security and resilience in these
communities. Indigenous knowledge and perspectives will be combined with
scientific knowledge across the biological, geological, geographic,
anthropological, and information sciences to enable a comprehensive overview of
how different investigators and scholars, from different perspectives and
different environments, approach the issues of food security and resilience. One
of the key strengths of the RCN is the synergy it will generate between North
and South and between Western science and Indigenous scholarship. In addition,
the network incorporates insights from information science and data
professionals to explore ways to link systems, data and perspectives from
multiple domains, both Indigenous and scientific. The project team intends to
increase sharing and address issues of Indigenous communities concerns over data
ownership and access by developing more effective tools for sharing data in
cyberspace and on social media. Exploring how to merge ideas from diverse groups
will contribute to the advancement of both Convergence science and the co-
production of knowledge with Indigenous communities. This award is part of NSF's
effort to promote convergence. The project is convergent because it brings
together a diversity of disciplines to concentrate on a question of critical
social importance. Social, natural, and information scientists and Indigenous
communities will focus on increasing our understanding of the impacts of rapid
socioecological change in Indigenous communities from Alaska and the U.S.
Southwest on food security and resilience in these communities. The project is
convergent not just in how it combines scientific disciplines to address a
societal problem, but also in how NSF might fundamentally think about the social
construction of the scientific enterprise in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RCN has the potential to add a new and fresh
perspective to research on food security and resilience through exploration of
the rapid social and environmental changes ongoing in the Arctic, by more
effectively highlighting Indigenous sources of information. To broaden the
perspective and insight into these issues, the RCN will connect Arctic
Indigenous communities with tribes in the U.S. Southwest, mainly in Arizona and
New Mexico. The RCN has three foci: 1) preservation, visualization, and sharing
of Indigenous knowledge; 2) access to scientific data; and 3) Indigenous data
sovereignty. The project will be largely driven and led by Indigenous
organizations but will include interdisciplinary Western scientists focused on
food security and resilience from both the social and physical sciences to
discuss current research agendas, data availability, and encourage the direct
engagement of Indigenous partners. One Broader Impact of the RCN is the creation
of relationships between Indigenous communities living in different areas but
experiencing rapid social and environmental changes. The RCN will also create a
plan for preserving and visualizing Indigenous Knowledge and connecting it to
scientific data.