* 1745902
* I-Corps: Bacteriophage Platform
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,10/31/2018
* Rhonda Shrader, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 10/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is an
efficacious alternative for antibiotics and in treating antibiotic resistant
bacteria in a number of fields, including, healthcare, self-care, agriculture,
sanitation, animal health, and research. The CDC estimates that in 2013 more
than 2 million people had an antibiotic resistant infection, and 23,000 people
died due to antibiotic resistance. The costs to society of antibiotic resistance
are $20 billion in direct medical costs, and as much as $35 billion in lost
productivity-these are the savings in healthcare alone. The potential impact on
self-care is a competitive and safe alternative to OTC treatments for bacterial
related issues, such as acne, which affects more than 80% of the population at
some point in their lives, and has a market size of $644 million. The potential
impact on the animal health industry would be a replacement for growth-promoting
antibiotics.

This I-Corps project core technology is a software and hardware platform that
combines a method for creating precision disease models with a novel solution
for the discovery of a narrow band lytic bacteriophage. This discovery platform
enables the elimination of many of the bottlenecks and short falls of
traditional phage and antibiotic product discovery to improve isolation rates of
unique, diverse anti-infective candidates. When used in conjunction with regular
metagenomic monitoring of a target environment, the technology is able to model
a custom phage cocktail to ensure a specific functional profile using
combinatorics.