* 1745405
* Human Response To High Altitude Environmental Change
* SBE,BCS
* 05/12/2017,09/30/2022
* Jade d'Alpoim Guedes, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2022
* USD 213,017.00

Understanding how humans have managed to maintain food security while dealing
with climatic change is crucial in a rapidly changing world. However, human
adaptive responses to periodic fluctuations in local environment over the long
term are poorly understood. Even more crucial is understanding how humans
responded to climatic change, not in the few optimal areas of the world, but
rather in key marginal loci where the livelihoods of millions of smallholder
farmers and pastoralists are at stake. Archaeology is uniquely poised to answer
questions such as: Why are certain types of system resilient to climate change
while others fall apart? What types of strategy are adaptive not just over the
short term but for millennia? Along with colleagues, Dr. Alpoim Guedes will
carry out research to understand how humans modified their agricultural and
pastoral strategies in the context of a series of major climatic reversals over
the past two millennia. By examining the potential for different adaptive
strategies at the local level and providing a long term perspective on the
consequences of human decision making, this research has the potential to
further the production of more diverse, and more locally-adapted food sources
that are resilient in the face of climate change. In addition to serving as a
field school for students from a local university, it provides an international
fieldwork experience for US minority undergraduates as well as two early career
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Alpoim Guedes and colleagues will
investigate how humans responded to and adapted to climatic fluctuations in one
key marginal area: the high altitude environment of Eastern Himalayas of China.
In addition to reconstructing ancient subsistence patterns through the analysis
of plant and animal remains, the researchers will investigate how different
types of social organization facilitated or impaired human adaptation. Project
researchers will develop models to predict how crop and forage grass production
was impacted by climatic change. Each of these models will be used to predict
how production fluctuated not only in the past but also in future predicted
scenarios. By outlining the complex interactions between different factors that
determine how crops and graze resources react to changes in climatic and
ecological variables, the models created for this project can be applied to
other high altitude/high latitude areas worldwide, particularly those in the
United States.