* 1745674
* Linking Attitudes and Behaviors to Student Success in Career and Technical Education
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Sandra Hemmert, STEM Action Center
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 03/31/2023
* USD 766,364.00

Currently, many fields of Career and Technical Education (CTE) align with fast
growing high-tech and STEM-related industries, such as computing, cybersecurity,
advanced composites and materials, and engineering. CTE also supports greater
understanding of science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) content and
development of STEM competencies for a broad range of students. Access to
careers in high demand CTE areas is especially important for students in rural
areas and in poverty. Building a strong talent pool in rural areas could
increase the economic growth of these communities. Unfortunately, overall
enrollments are low in many CTE programs that educate students for high demand
technical career pathways (e.g., computer science and information technology).
Although they are limited in scope, studies suggest that the low enrollment may
result from student misperceptions that make pursuing CTE programs undesirable.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will: (1) use surveys and regional workshops
to identify misperceptions and biases within a comprehensive group of
stakeholders; (2) collect and analyze information to develop a new CTE
communication and outreach strategy; (3) implement the new communication and
outreach strategy; and (4) create an analytics platform to regularly evaluate
and assess the effectiveness of this implementation. The proposed activities
could increase knowledge about challenges that are common across all states, as
well as issues that may be unique to Utah. The resulting implementation plan has
the potential to replace misperceptions about CTE with more realistic
perceptions about the high value of CTE for specific target audiences. The
ability to assess whether the new communication strategy changes behavior,
including decision making by stakeholders, may be relevant for developing
effective communication and outreach strategies for communicating the overall
value of STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.