* 1745163
* Seven Worlds: Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2018
* Michael Becker, BBC Studios Americas, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 10/31/2018
* USD 1.00

Seven Worlds is a landmark television series and multi-media project from BBC
America and the BBC Natural History Unit, due to broadcast in 2019/2020. In
addition to the large U.S. and global reach of the television series, this
project promises to have the largest online footprint of any BBC wildlife series
to date. This award is for logistic support only for filming marine life with
NSF-supported research programs at McMurdo Station, Antarctica during the
2017/2018 polar season. Seven Worlds will engage, inform, and inspire audiences
with iconic landscapes, spectacular wildlife, and cutting-edge science. The
series will look at the natural history unique to each of the seven continents,
and explore how their geographic position and geologic history have influenced
the wildlife living there. A key episode is on Antarctica. It will provide an
unparalleled opportunity to see how earth system processes and ecosystem
dynamics have shaped the extraordinary physical and behavioral adaptions of life
forms that manage to survive the extreme cold. It will also showcase scientific
discoveries about the world's toughest environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
series will reflect the newest iteration of storytelling methods to promote
audience engagement and learning of science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) content. The BBC Natural History Unit's expertise in emotive
and factual storytelling will inform the content and narrative of the
deliverables. This allows for a scientifically accurate yet captivating viewer
experience that enhances retention of scientific information. In addition, the
television series will be complemented with a series of short-form out-reach
videos with collaborating scientists to showcase their important work online.
BBC landmark wildlife series attract a gender-balanced group of viewers, reach a
younger audience, and reach a more diverse audience when compared to other
factual programs. With BBC's sizable audience and ability to reach traditionally
underserved demographics, the project will promote STEM research to a broad and
diverse audience. The intent is to create a platform that not only helps the
public understand Antarctic science, but to feel immersed and connected to a
place that is distant and remote. Often what is "out of sight is out of mind",
but by transporting the public to a place few will ever visit, this film and
associated online components will make tangible concepts such as: Antarctic
biodiversity, behavioral ecology, biogeography, geomorphology, glaciology, and
humanity's role in shaping the future. The project is supported by NSF's Office
of Polar Programs.