* 1745686
* I-Corps: Conceptual Model-based Math Intelligent Tutors
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2018
* Yan Ping Xin, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 12/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to explore
the product-market fit for a conceptual model-based math intelligent tutors
(COMMIT) for teaching students with learning disabilities or difficulties in
mathematics. The technology will help overcome a current impediment for these
students' success in mathematics, the shortage of response to intervention
curriculum materials and service providers. The COMMIT products will potentially
address a practical issue in today's inclusive elementary classrooms: the need
to deliver individualized and effective intervention programs to those students
who are not responsive to or are struggling with mathematics content in their
regular classrooms. The COMMIT products will also promote the implementation of
evidence-based practice and translation of research into practice. Because the
COMMITs emphasize a conceptual model-based problem solving approach that orients
students' attention to deep problem structure, it is expected that this program
can also be used to improve mathematical learning of elementary students more
broadly.

This I-Corps project, conceptual model-based math intelligent tutors (COMMIT),
represents a shift from traditional mathematics problem-solving instruction,
which focuses on the choice of operation for solution, to a model-based problem-
solving approach that emphasizes an understanding and representation of
mathematical relations in algebraic equations and therefore facilitates
generalized problem solving skills. The COMMITs incorporate a constructivist
view of mathematics learning so that the reasoning behind mathematics is
explicit to the students. In other words, students will be able to make sense of
what they are doing with mathematical models and abstract symbols. The COMMIT
project will demonstrate how intelligent tutors will work with teachers in
synergy and provide personalized curriculum recommendations that are based on a
dynamic assessment of individual student's learning profile. COMMITs help build
fundamental mathematical ideas that are essential to enabling struggling
students to understand mathematics at a conceptual or abstract level.