* 1745214
* Development and Implementation of Workshops to Facilitate Capacity in Ocean Circulation, Ecosystem and Management Strategy Evaluation Modeling
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Eileen Hofmann, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 01/31/2023
* USD 49,900.00

U.S. scientists and students will participate in a series of three international
training workshops focused on numerical modeling of the southern ocean. The
three-year program is designed to train faculty and graduate students in the
development and implementation of numerical models for ocean circulation,
biogeochemistry and food webs and linking these models with socio-economic
models through Management Strategy Evaluation (MSE) models. The first workshop
will build upon the 2018 Austral Summer Institute (ASI) at Universidad de
Concepcion, which has the theme, Numerical Modeling Tools to Understand Physical
and Biological Processes in Mid and High Latitude Marine Ecosystems. Workshops
in years 2 and 3 will focus on approaches and tools for numerical modeling of
Antarctic systems and MSE models, respectively. International partners for the
workshops include the Center of Excellence on the Dynamics of High Latitude
Marine Ecosystems (IDEAL) at Universidad Austral de Chile in Valdivia, the
Universidad de Concepcion, the Universidad de Magallanes in Punta Arenas, and
Chinese faculty from Shanghai Jaio Tong University's Institute of Oceanography
who collaborate with the IDEAL Center. These institutions will provide housing,
conference facilities and computer resources necessary for the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The materials developed for the workshops
(lectures, model codes, model implementations) will be available for the
development of special lectures in university courses and archived on a
dedicated website. The long-term plan is that the workshops will provide a
framework for development of formal courses in numerical circulation and
ecosystem modeling that will be included as part of the main curriculum in
marine science programs in the U.S., Chile, South America, China and other
international programs. Each workshop will consist of overview lectures that are
followed with hands-on training. The expectation is that participants will
continue to use and develop the models for their research projects after the
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The structure of the proposed
workshops and the general plan for encouraging productive interactions between
scientists and students is well developed. The workshops will focus on important
scientific questions and development of related models will benefit greatly from
the collaborative international environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: Catalyzing connections between Antarctic scientists and development of
an international scientific community with strong numerical modeling skills and
a focus on the southern ocean will be an important outcome. US leadership in
this international community will allow US faculty and students to expand their
scientific connections and potential access to international collaborators.