* 1745771
* Collaborative Research: Shaping the Future of Science Through the Science of Learning
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Leanne Chukoskie, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 03/31/2019
* USD 41,403.00

The proposed workshop will bring together awardees of the NSF Science of
Learning Program. It seeks to capitalize on NSF investments in the Science of
Learning to build community among diverse interdisciplinary researchers studying
learning, and to build capacity so that investigators can readily reconfigure
and mobilize collaborations to capture new opportunities offered by NSF priority
areas. As examples, how technology impacts the way we learn and work, as well as
how we might harness Big Data to gain greater insight into real-world learning
are areas of relevance to the NSF's 10 Big Ideas
(https://www.nsf.gov/about/congress/reports/nsf_big_ideas.pdf).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This gathering will include researchers from several
disciplines under one large umbrella, including neuroscience, cognitive,
behavioral and social sciences, computer and information sciences, engineering
and education. The proposed effort is needed as there is currently no
professional society meeting to support this interdisciplinary Science of
Learning community of investigators and their trainees. The gathering seeks to
foster information exchange and resource sharing, and to build trust among
community members for successful interdisciplinary research. The workshop format
will include small group discussions on topics that include new insights and
methodologies that offer opportunities to make transformative advances in
fundamental knowledge about learning over the lifespan, and intersections in
interdisciplinary research that offer opportunities for convergence research in
support of NSF's Big Ideas. In this way, the workshop will leverage the group's
collective interdisciplinary intelligence for "Big Idea" problem-solving and the
unique opportunity to work on problems that are larger than any taken on by
individual laboratories. A survey of the research and other needs of the Science
of Learning community will be conducted. The diverse disciplinary representation
of the participants and the requirement to communicate and discuss science
across a broad audience will have broader impacts in building an active and
vibrant community capable of addressing complex societal problems through
collaborative efforts. In addition, and as part of the workshop, plans will be
developed to promote better communication of research findings to educational
practitioners, policy makers, and the public. This will help to bridge the gap
in understanding between basic research findings and their relevance to social
challenges.