* 1745897
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: An Experimental Approach to Formulate Transformative Research Questions
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Phillip Ortiz, SUNY System Administration
* Standard Grant
* Louise R. Howe
* 09/30/2020
* USD 175,773.00

Today's societal challenges are complex and compelling. To increase the
effectiveness of STEM research in addressing these challenges, it is essential
to formulate appropriately significant research questions. This collaborative
project from the SUNY System Administration and SUNY at Buffalo seeks to pilot a
new platform -- Germination Space -- for aiding investigators to construct and
define transformative research questions. The investigators will test a
repetitive process with defined steps: question formulation, reflection, and
redefinition. Participation will be open to all faculty members, post-doctoral
fellows and graduate students in the SUNY system. This open-door approach should
facilitate involvement of a diverse spectrum of participants, given SUNY's
strong history in recruiting individuals from underrepresented and underserved
groups into STEM fields. If successful, this study may develop a new approach
that will lead to transformative research to address key societal challenges. If
this project identifies underlying principles for formulating open and
transformative research questions, the results could be applied more broadly by
academic institutions to formulate strategies and innovative organizational and
program structures to effectively stimulate risk-taking and impact-driven
research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The platform to be developed --
Germination Space -- will consist of a multiple-iteration process including
formulating, reflecting upon, and redefining research questions. Researchers
will be guided to examine their research questions, challenge fundamental
assumptions, and leverage existing knowledge and solutions in other disciplines,
ultimately arriving at highly transformative research questions. Faculty and
students from across SUNY campuses will be invited to participate in this
project. Research will be conducted to understand the underlying principles of
formulating open and transformative research questions. It is expected that
these principles will inform both individual approaches to asking questions, and
the social and institutional arrangements that can serve to catalyze individual
explorations. Delineating underlying principles will be an essential
prerequisite for effective scaling of the Germination Space process.