* 1745068
* Collaborative Research: Reconstructing Late Holocene Ecosystem and Climate Shifts from Peat Records in the Western Antarctic Peninsula
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Zicheng Yu, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 384,404.00

Warming on the western Antarctic Peninsula in the later 20th century has caused
widespread changes in the cryosphere (ice and snow) and terrestrial ecosystems.
These recent changes along with longer-term climate and ecosystem histories will
be deciphered using peat deposits. Peat accumulation can be used to assess the
rate of glacial retreat and provide insight into ecological processes on newly
deglaciated landscapes in the Antarctic Peninsula. This project builds on data
suggesting recent ecosystem transformations that are linked to past climate of
the western Antarctic Peninsula and provide a timeline to assess the extent and
rate of recent glacial change. The study will produce a climate record for the
coastal low-elevation terrestrial region, which will refine the major climate
shifts of up to 6 degrees C in the recent past (last 12,000 years). A novel
terrestrial record of the recent glacial history will provide insight into
observed changes in climate and sea-ice dynamics in the western Antarctic
Peninsula and allow for comparison with off-shore climate records captured in
sediments. Observations and discoveries from this project will be disseminated
to local schools and science centers. The project provides training and career
development for a postdoctoral scientist as well as graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research presents a new systematic survey to
reconstruct ecosystem and climate change for the coastal low-elevation areas on
the western Antarctic Peninsula (AP) using proxy records preserved in late
Holocene peat deposits. Moss and peat samples will be collected and analyzed to
generate a comprehensive data set of late-Holocene climate change and ecosystem
dynamics. The goal is to document and understand the transformations of
landscape and terrestrial ecosystems on the western AP during the late Holocene.
The testable hypothesis is that coastal regions have experienced greater climate
variability than evidenced in ice-core records and that past warmth has
facilitated dramatic ecosystem and cryosphere response. A primary product of the
project is a robust reconstruction of late Holocene climate changes for coastal
low-elevation terrestrial areas using multiple lines of evidence from peat-based
biological and geochemical proxies, which will be used to compare with climate
records derived from marine sediments and ice cores from the AP region. These
data will be used to test several ideas related to novel peat-forming ecosystems
(such as Antarctic hairgrass bogs) in past warmer climates and climate controls
over ecosystem establishment and migration to help assess the nature of the
Little Ice Age cooling and cryosphere response. The chronology of peat cores
will be established by radiocarbon dating of macrofossils and Bayesian modeling.
The high-resolution time series of ecosystem and climate changes will help put
the observed recent changes into a long-term context to bridge climate dynamics
over different time scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.