* 1745803
* RAPID: Investigation of the Honey Lake and Warm Springs Faults using Seismic CHIRP Imagery
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2018
* Anna Kell, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 06/30/2018
* USD 25,499.00

Honey Lake is a lake basin located in eastern California, about 60 mi. north of
Reno, Nevada. Despite its name, the lake basin is often a dry playa with little
or no water. The winter of 2016/2017 brought record precipitation levels to the
western US filling the Honey Lake basin to the highest level in more than 20
years. This rare event provides an opportunity to use efficient marine seismic
imaging techniques on what is normally a dry lakebed to image two major fault
systems that transect this area. The Warm Springs fault and the Honey Lake
faults traverse Honey Lake and. are the focus of this data collection effort.
This study on Honey Lake uses high-resolution Compressed High Intensity Radar
Pulse (CHIRP) imagery that may determine the sense of motion in these faults and
their relationship to others in the region.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Honey Lake
fault and the Warm Springs fault are the northern-most boundary of the Walker
Lane Belt, an area of transtension that encompasses western Nevada/eastern
California. Questions persist regarding how tectonic strain is partitioned from
the Walker Lane back towards the Pacific Plate near the same latitude as Honey
Lake. The motion on faults in Honey Lake is critical to understanding how the
Walker Lane functions at its northern boundary. Despite the importance of these
faults and the seismic hazards they present, very little is known about the
recurrence of earthquakes, their clustering and strain rates in each of the
faults. Previous terrestrial studies on the Honey Lake fault have not
constrained its activity in the latest Holocene and very little paleoseismic
data are available for the Warm Springs fault. By acquiring a network of CHIRP
data across these two fault systems, we hope to contribute to the current state
of knowledge and inform the tectonic framework in this region.