* 1745041
* Collaborative Proposal: A High-Latitude Conjugate Area Array Experiment to Investigate Solar Wind - Magnetosphere - Ionosphere Coupling
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Marc Lessard, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 07/31/2023
* USD 659,380.00

The Geospace environment comprises a complex system of interlaced domains that
interacts with the incoming solar wind plasma flow and transfers its energy and
momentum from the Earth's magnetosphere outer layers down to the ionosphere and
upper atmosphere. These physical processes take place mainly on the Earth's
dayside, diverting most of the energy along geomagnetic field lines toward both
the northern and southern polar regions. Understanding this complex interaction
process that couples both polar ionospheres is important for developing the
physical models that can describe and predict space weather disturbances and
help mitigate their impacts on humans' technological systems - from near-Earth
space assets down to electrical grids and long pipelines. There is a strong need
to collect sufficient geophysical data to investigate the above-mentioned
processes, particularly from the southern hemisphere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
this award, the grantees will build and deploy additional ground-based
observations platforms in the East Antarctic Plateau, enhancing capabilities of
the existing meridional array of already deployed autonomous, low-powered
magnetometers. This will make the southern array of magnetometers two-
dimensional and geomagnetically conjugate to similar instruments deployed in
Greenland and Svalbard, thus making possible a global view of the magnetospheric
regions where natural, ultra-low frequency electromagnetic waves are generated.
The project involves young scientists who will operate remote Antarctic
magnetometers and analyze collected data to investigate space weather events and
validate models. This project expands the Virginia Tech's partnership with the
University of New Hampshire, New Jersey Institute of Technology, Polar Research
Institute of China, and Technical University of
Denmark.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.