* 1745125
* CAREER: Exact Algorithms for Learning Latent Structure
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2020
* David Sontag, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 06/30/2020
* USD 350,764.00

One of the fundamental tasks in science is to infer the causal relationships
between variables from data, and to discover hidden phenomena that may affect
their outcome. We can attempt to automate this scientific process by searching
over probabilistic models of how the observed data might be influenced by
unobserved (latent) factors or variables. Machine learning of such models
provides insight into the underlying domain and a means of predicting the latent
factors. However, it is challenging to search over the exponentially many
models, and existing algorithms are unable to scale to large amounts of
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER award will provide novel
algorithms to circumvent this computational intractability. Based on a classical
idea in statistics called the method-of-moments, the new algorithms will be
applied in bioinformatics to discover regulatory modules from disease expression
profiles, and in health care to predict a patient's clinical state using data
from their electronic medical record. A key component of the project is to
involve high school students from disadvantaged backgrounds in the research to
inspire them to pursue STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project advances
machine learning by introducing several new techniques for unsupervised and
semi-supervised learning of Bayesian networks. The project overcomes the
computational challenges associated with maximum-likelihood estimation by
developing new method-of-moment based algorithms for learning latent variable
models, focusing on settings where inference itself may be intractable. This
includes Bayesian networks of discrete variables where a top layer consists of
latent factors and a bottom layer consists of the observed data, a form of
discrete factor analysis. The proposed algorithms run in polynomial time and are
guaranteed to learn a close approximation to the true
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The techniques developed as part of this project
have the potential to be transformative in the social and natural sciences by
enabling the efficient and accurate discovery of latent variables from discrete
data. Furthermore, in collaboration with emergency department clinicians, the
new algorithms will be applied to learn models relating diseases to symptoms
from noisy and incomplete data that is routinely collected as part of electronic
medical records. This will advance the field of machine learning in health care
by providing algorithms that generalize between institutions without the need
for a large amount of labeled training data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The insights
about exploratory data analysis developed as part of this project will be
integrated into innovative curriculum in data science, both as part of an
undergraduate class and new Master's classes. The project will bring students
from nearby high schools to NYU throughout the academic year and during the
summer to learn about machine learning through participation in the proposed
research, having them use the unsupervised learning algorithms to discover new
medical insights. The PI will also develop and deliver tutorials on machine
learning to clinicians and the health care industry.