* 1745829
* EAGER:   SSDIM:   Simulated and Synthetic Data for Interdependent Communications and Energy Critical Infrastructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Arif Sarwat, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will develop
new mathematical foundations and computer-based learning theories for generating
a wide range of simulated and fully-synthetic datasets that model interdependent
communications and energy infrastructures in urban settings. These enhanced
datasets and associated data building tools will provide a large-scale test data
related to interdependent critical infrastructures (ICIs). New simulated and
synthetic data generation tools will enable increasing the resiliency and
flexibility of ICIs, improving their security during extreme weather conditions
and other threats. This project will involve students from diverse backgrounds
in engineering, computer science and psychology, who will be trained on
pertinent research approaches related to the challenges of simulated and
synthetic data modeling. The education plan includes a new data-centric course
called Methods for Creating Simulated and Synthetic Data, as well as a large-
scale involvement of graduate and undergraduate students in big data and smart
community research. Broad dissemination is ensured by enabling an open-access
repository of datasets created from the results of the funded research, as well
as any program codes or related tools used to generate and analyze such data.
The open-access testbed is capable of supporting both the research needs of the
host institution as well as the requirement of non-proprietary multi-domain open
datasets by other users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a
scientific basis for the generation of simulated and synthetic data on ICIs,
such as communication and energy. The objective is to develop models that can
accurately reconstruct, simulate, and evaluate a robust theoretical framework of
ICI function by leveraging available real-world datasets. This research will
lead to several innovations: 1) An advanced Transfer Learning technique that
generates simulated data on ICIs using available real-world information, leading
to improved characterization of how interdependencies can form or disappear over
time; 2) a Hierarchical Bayesian method-based technique for the creation of
synthetic data that enables ICIs to optimally manage their shared resources in
response to failures from day-to-day operations, natural disasters, or malicious
attacks; 3) a Long-/Short-term Memory-based deep learning method for predicting
simulated data on human-in-the-loop cognitive modeling of human behavior and the
effects of their decision-making in response to unexpected incidents and events
involving urban ICIs; and 4) a quality-feedback loop verification and data
management approach to fine-tune the simulated and synthetic data by comparing
it against available real-world data over a realistic network with a large-scale
simulator that integrates ICIs over an urban setting.