* 1745222
* EAGER: Ethical and Methodological Challenges in Social Media Research
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Nicole Taylor, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 35,851.00

An estimated 90% of youth are engaged in social media daily, and most are using
multiple platforms. By all accounts, this is a critical space for exploring
psychological development, stigma, and sociality. Yet little is known about what
their day-to-day engagement within social media actually looks like. As an
Early-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER), this project explores the
ethical and methodological challenges of conducting human subjects research when
recruitment is solicited through social media accounts. The ethics and logistics
of capturing data riddled with identifying information, such as photos, screen
names, posts about locations, posts where identifiable information is tagged,
etc. is a challenge in terms of storing the data, analyzing it, making it
available in a publicly accessible repository, and sharing it in resulting
publications and presentations. What challenges does this research platform
present for the removal of identifying information? To what extent does cleaning
the data to protect anonymity impact the researcher's ability to convey the
multidimensionality and richness of what happens in these social media realms?
Does the process of protecting anonymity impact the type and amount of digital
data gathered/captured? A central goal of this project is to explore the ethical
and logistical boundaries of conducing participant observation in these private
social media realms. As a project aimed at understanding the dynamics of
constantly evolving technologies and their impact on work, this project
contributes to NSF's investment in Work at the Human-Technology Frontier.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Nicole Taylor of Texas State University, San Marcos,
will conduct research on a sample of 50 male and female undergraduate students
aged 18-22. This population was chosen because little is known about how college
students experience and negotiate stigma in online social media forums.
Researchers have established that the college years represent a period of major
transition in nearly all areas of life, which influence social, physical, and
psychological development, as well as future productivity in the workforce. The
research setting serves an ethnically diverse student population and therefore
provides an opportunity to generate a more reliable, robust, and representative
research sample. Methods will include (1) a brief participant survey to gather
demographic and social media use information; (2) participant observation within
the 2-3 social media platforms most commonly used by the study population; (3)
semi-structured interviews with participants; (4) focus group interviews with
participants and their friends. A central goal of this exploratory research is
to develop and pilot a method for conducting participant observation within the
most commonly used social media platforms among college students. Dr. Taylor
will explore the ethical and logistical boundaries of conducting participant
observation in these more private social media realms where network invitations
must be invited and accepted. For example, how can social media data be captured
in a way that maintains participant anonymity and follows ethical guidelines,
while also maintaining the fluid nature of youth engagements with social media?
Findings will be disseminated in such a way as to impact public health efforts,
which are typically based on large scale quantitative surveys, by offering in-
depth accounts of how a diverse group of youth negotiate the intersection of
their online and real world communities.