* 1745304
* EAGER:  BRAIDING:  Parity control and braiding of Majorana fermions in S-TI-S Josephson junction networks
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2020
* Smitha Vishveshwara, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Non-technical Abstract:

The exciting prospect of so-called "topological quantum computation" is taking
center stage with the rapid progress in fabrication of a range of topological
insulators, exotic materials possessing hidden order and conducting surface
states. Technologies integrating superconductors and topological insulators have
provided an arena for experimentally realizing the Majorana fermion, once
proposed as an elementary particle, now a candidate for forming the building
blocks for solid-state topological qubits, which are expected to be resilient to
environmental disturbances. The project supported by this grant entails creation
of a patterned superconductor-topological insulator hybrid architecture that
supports quantum vortices in whose cores Majorana fermions are expected to
reside. The goal of the research is to establish the existence of such Majorana
fermions within this architecture and to perform the key steps required for much
sought-after quantum computational protocols. A tight combination of steps to
achieve the goals involves designing appropriate patterned channels and
configurations of magnetic fields to nucleate and move vortices, applying the
desired pulsed currents and local fields to perform qubit operations, and
employing single-electron transistors to read out qubit states. The
transdisciplinary nature of this project spanning fundamental physics, condensed
matter, and quantum computation and the collaboration between experimentalists
and theorists involved provides a rich and fertile intellectual environment for
training the graduate students who are supported by this grant. From a
technological perspective, the results of the project are highly relevant to the
future development of solid-state quantum devices, to elucidating quantum
behavior at the nanoscale and mesoscale, and to assessing topological junction
architectures as candidates for topological quantum computation.

Technical Abstract:

As a significant advance towards implementing topological quantum computation, a
pressing goal for the community is to successfully demonstrate the functioning
of Majorana fermion (MF)-based topological qubits. These MFs, expected to exist
as bound states in topological superconductors, are prime candidates for hosting
topological qubits. Non-local pairs of such fermions share an electronic state
that can be either occupied or empty, making such a pair a parity qubit.
Semiconducting nanowires, and more recently, chains of ferromagnetic atoms, have
received prominent attention for their ability to nucleate MF bound states. As
with conventional quantum computing, implementing topological quantum
computation in a materials system can be best achieved by investigating multiple
routes. The collaborative experiment-theory project targets network
architectures of lateral superconductor-topological insulator-superconductor
Josephson junctions as another viable, highly promising candidate that has
several advantages for supporting MF-based topological qubits. The goal is to
demonstrate MF braiding, a key component in topological quantum computational
protocols, and to perform associated electron parity qubit read-outs in this
system. The architecture consists of long Josephson junctions that sandwich
topological insulators between singlet-paired superconductors. Applied magnetic
flux through the junction nucleates phase slips (Josephson junction vortices)
carrying MF bound states in a controlled fashion. Pulsed currents and dynamic
applications of local fields induce motion along specific junction pathways.
Braiding via vortex manipulation consists of i) exchange of MFs in tri-junction
geometries and ii) involves bringing together and separating out a pair of MFs
in an array of four MFs. Parity qubit read-outs are performed by tunneling and
sensing electrons through coupling to quantum dots and single-electron
transistors. Establishing these steps may potentially be transformative to the
implementation of solid-state qubits for quantum computing and quantum
information processing, particularly in assessing the role of coherence in
topological systems and in comparing the strengths of different topological
architectures. The transdisciplinary nature of this project spanning fundamental
physics, condensed matter, and quantum computation and the collaboration between
experimentalists and theorists involved provides a rich and fertile intellectual
environment for training the graduate students who are supported by this grant.