* 1745411
* EAGER: Tick-host interactions and the role of host blood meal in pathogen transmission
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Andrea Swei, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 07/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

Arthropods, like mosquitoes and ticks, are responsible for transmitting the vast
majority of infectious diseases that affect humans in the United States. These
arthropods often contain within them numerous bacteria that are also called
microbes. We know very little about the role of these microbes in disease
transmitting arthropods or if and how they interact with one another. Using the
western black-legged tick, this study examines how the internal collection of
microbes develops within the tick and whether the types or numbers of these
microbes negatively or positively influence the ability of these arthropods to
transmit disease causing bacteria to new hosts. To understand how a collection
of microbes develops, ticks will be allowed to feed on different hosts, such as
lizards or mice. Then researchers will examine how the different microbe
collections within these ticks influence their ability to transmit the bacteria
that causes Lyme disease from one host to another. An improved understanding of
the role microbes play in the transmission of diseases will allow for the
development of new perspectives and strategies for managing disease risk and
conserving wildlife. This project also will train undergraduate and graduate
students and will develop citizen science opportunities. The citizen science
opportunities will include development of a mobile phone app to allow the public
to provide scientists with tick distribution and encounter data while increasing
the public's awareness of tick transmitted illnesses. This study has clear
public health implications as Lyme disease is the most reported vector-borne
disease in the United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An emerging question in the
field of disease ecology is whether the microbial community of potential vectors
can facilitate or inhibit the transmission of pathogens. This study will focus
on the tick, Ixodes pacificus, which is the main vector of Lyme disease in the
western United States, and will use a combination of lab and field experiments
to examine how feeding on different host species affects the development of the
tick microbiome and influences gut development and microbe transmission
efficiency. To determine the role of host blood meal on the tick's microbiome
and midgut structure, next generation 16S rRNA sequencing of the bacterial
microbiome and fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) techniques will be used.
To determine the effect of host blood meal history on the acquisition and
transmission of Borrelia burgdorferi, quantitative PCR, microbiome analyses, and
visualization techniques will be used. By experimentally manipulating and
evaluating the factors that structure tick microbiomes and by understanding the
mechanistic role that microbes play in pathogen transmission, this study will
advance our understanding of how microbe-vector-associated communities are
shaped and how these relationships influence disease ecology more broadly.