* 1745164
* Workshop on the Role of Immigrants and Foreign Students in Science, Innovation and Entrepreneurship
* SBE,SMA
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2019
* Shulamit Kahn, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 12/31/2019
* USD 45,900.00

The foreign-born play an increasingly important role in the US Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) workforce. This workshop
highlights current research and the need for additional research on the roles of
immigrants and foreign students in science, innovation and entrepreneurship. The
goal of the conference is to increase understanding of the factors that will
help the United States maintain and continue to develop a STEM labor force that
is of the highest quality as well as diverse and resilient. Understanding how
labor markets for innovators and scientists work is important for learning about
the drivers of innovation and economic growth. Yet labor markets for STEM
workers are complex and their dynamics are not fully understood by economists.
Some economists have suggested that foreign students are disproportionately more
likely to patent or publish scientific articles, while others have argued that
admitting large numbers of foreign students reduces earnings for US-born
scientists and weakens incentives for natives to enter scientific careers.
Research has shown that immigrants are more likely to start new science-based
businesses than natives, but the reasons for this and the implications for
policy have not been fully developed. In the context of the current public
debate on immigration, there is a pressing need for evidence and consensus-
building on the economic impacts of immigration on the STEM workforce and
innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is designed to stimulate and
share academic research on high-skilled immigration and the STEM labor force,
synthesize and disseminate this research to the policy and business communities,
and engage in dialogue with these communities to inform researchers about
unanswered questions. In recent years, new datasets and promising new empirical
approaches to causal inference have emerged that will make significant
contributions to the economics literature on high-skilled STEM-related
immigration. New work has appeared on several themes within the area of
immigration and innovation. Examples of emerging themes in recent research
include work related to H-1B visa policies; impacts of foreign students on the
production and diffusion of scientific knowledge in the US and on native
educational enrollment, employment and wages in STEM fields; return migration of
US-trained scientists and engineers; and immigrant high-technology
entrepreneurship. The workshop engages interested academic and non-academic
experts in a dialogue on these themes.