* 1745382
* EAGER:   SSDIM:   Leveraging Point Processes and Mean Field Games Theory for Simulating Data on Interdependent Critical Infrastructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Duen Horng Chau, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 08/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project addresses
modeling and inference problems in order to improve understanding of
interactions and interdependencies within interdependent critical
infrastructures (ICIs). The key application areas are financial services,
healthcare systems, communication technologies. This work will result in novel
machine learning methodologies to generate data on infrastructure
interdependencies. Findings will be widely disseminated in scholarly fora, with
accompanying efforts in graduate-level training. Data and computer software
produced in this project will be made publicly available via online data
repositories.

This project includes the development of new generative models and algorithms to
simulate and synthesize extensive interdependent CI data for comprehensive
study. This research focuses on modeling and simulation of interdependent
critical infrastructure (ICI) data by leveraging point process models and mean
field games (MFG) theory. In particular, multivariate Hawkes processes are used
to model interactions and interdependencies of behaviors in a variety of
domains. Additionally, an MFG framework is employed to capture the implicit
optimization strategies that individuals perform, along with the cost functions
that drive those strategies. This work addresses both mechanistic and human
aspects of the ICIs, captured in point process models and their evolution. This
work advances the theory and computational methods for generative methods and
algorithms for quantitative understanding and rigorous analysis of ICIs.