* 1745384
* Air-Sea Momentum Transfer in Extreme Wind Conditions
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Brian Haus, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 05/31/2021
* USD 747,197.00

Hurricanes develop and intensify by "feeding" off the energy of warm oceanic
waters. This air-sea interaction is a key factor in numerical modeling of
hurricanes, but how this interaction changes in very high wind speeds is unknown
due to the difficulty of making measurements in major hurricanes. This project
will make use of a large wave tank at the University of Miami that can generate
winds of Category 5 hurricane intensity to fill the current gap in observations
and to study the roles of wind and waves in air-sea interactions. The project
has the potential to improve numerical modeling of hurricanes, which directly
impacts public safety and the economy. The research team also plans to engage
the public through a variety of outreach mechanisms, such as social media and
facility tours. The project will also help to train the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team plans to establish new
relationships for the air-sea momentum exchange in extreme wind and wave
conditions with a focus on improving hurricane modeling. The main goal of the
project is to identify the roles of various wind and wave related processes in
controlling the air-sea momentum transfer in high winds, and to measure the rate
of transfer in such conditions. The possible mechanisms cited by the research
team are: sheltering of the air flow in the lee of steep breaking waves,
enhanced dissipation of waves by wind, and vertical density gradient decrease
due to spray and foam entrainment. The researchers hypothesize that the air-sea
momentum transfer undergoes a fundamental change of governing physical processes
between low-to-moderate, high, and extreme wind conditions. To address this
hypothesis, four main tasks are laid out: 1) Conduct a series of laboratory
experiments in the SUrge-STructure-Atmosphere INteraction (SUSTAIN) facility at
the Univ. of Miami; 2) Derive a new relationship between air-sea momentum flux
and mean wind, wave-state, and spray concentration and streak coverage; 3)
Formulate a new wind input source function; and 4) Conduct numerical simulations
in a fully coupled atmosphere-wave-ocean model and validate against field
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.