* 1745292
* Collaborative Proposal: Friendships, Identity Development, and Adolescent Adjustment in High School
* SBE,BCS
* 06/16/2017,07/31/2019
* Adriana Umana-Taylor, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 07/31/2019
* USD 304,269.00

As U.S. adolescents become more ethnically diverse, all youths' social and
academic success depends in part on their experiences with diverse peers in
school. Among those from ethnic or racial minority backgrounds, having a strong
Ethnic-Racial Identity is predictive of positive social and academic outcomes.
Ethnic-Racial Identity (ERI) refers to a person's beliefs about and
understanding of their own ethnicity or race and how their ethnicity or race
relates to their sense of self. This research investigates not only how
adolescents' own ERI shapes their experiences but also how the ERIs of their
peers impacts their development. The study will provide important new insights
into how adolescents' ERI unfolds and how adolescents' interactions with each
other support positive educational outcomes during the high school years.

Longitudinal data will be collected from students in two high schools, each in a
distinct geographical region of the U.S. Hypotheses will be tested regarding the
extent to which ERI development occurs transactionally in the context of peer
relationships as well as the role of individuals' and peers' ERI and peer
relationship characteristics in adjustment. Youth with a stronger ERI and who
have friends with a stronger ERI are expected to exhibit the most optimal
outcomes, as they not only draw on their own internal resources but also benefit
from by being embedded in a network of peers who can draw on similar resources.
Peer relationship characteristics are expected to mediate associations between
individuals' ERI and their adjustment over time, particularly for younger
adolescents. The study will use innovative, longitudinal social network modeling
methods. The implementation of this project will have a transformative effect on
multiple fields by (a) impacting how researchers conceptualize and
operationalize contextual influences on ERI development in future work; (b)
increasing understanding of how contexts moderate and mediate the links between
ERI and adjustment; (c) moving the field toward examining micro-informed
mechanisms of peer network influence rather than focusing exclusively on
selection and socialization processes, which dominates the current discourse in
this area; and (d) serving as an exemplar of an interdisciplinary approach.