* 1745154
* Integrating Different Perspectives on Social Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Mirta Galesic, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2019
* USD 76,505.00

Social learning is the cornerstone of human culture, underlying important social
processes such as spread of beliefs, social norms, and collective decision
making. A number of disciplines investigate how individuals learn from each
other, often asking similar questions but being unaware of promising methods and
established results in other fields. For instance, conformity has been studied
in evolutionary&lt;br/&gt;anthropology, animal learning, statistical physics,
social psychology, political science, and other fields; but there are few cross-
citations between their often overlapping findings. This workshop will bring
together leading researchers studying social learning within different fields.
Besides theoretical integration and progress, the workshop will inform pressing
current questions on the circumstances that promote or restrict social learning.
Effective social learning is important for human culture, but the same processes
can also lead to spread of erroneous beliefs, damaging social norms, and faulty
collective decision making. Understanding the factors that promote or inhibit
social learning processes also has important management implications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many different research communities investigate how
individuals learn from each other and, consequently, how beliefs spread in
societies. These communities include cognitive and social psychology, sociology
and social network science, biology and animal learning, evolutionary
anthropology and political science, computer science, statistical physics,
organization and management science. Each of these perspectives has been
extremely productive and useful, but their findings were often unnoticed in
other fields. Even though they often investigate similar questions, they use
different methodologies and vocabularies. The workshop will enable theoretical
integration of previously disconnected strands of research on social learning in
different disciplines. One promising direction is the integration between
cognitive psychology, organization science, network science, and statistical
physics to investigate determinants and processes supporting the emergence of
collective intelligence. Another promising direction is development of new
artificial learning algorithms, based on insights from theories of social
influence developed in social psychology. These and other directions will be
discussed and discovered during the workshop.