* 1745567
* PPSR: Blending cultural and environmental resilience with contemporary technology: cutting-edge environmental sensor workshop for loko i`a
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Brian Glazer, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 06/30/2018
* USD 49,941.00

With funding from a previous OCE award (1538697), Dr. Glazer recently developed
low-cost sea level and water monitoring sensors and has successfully deployed
these sensors in a local fishpond, Paepae o He`eia, on the island of Oahu. These
sensors are an important innovation that will supplement or replace data from
monitoring devices that previously cost tens of thousands of dollars per unit.
The objective of this workshop is to make the new instruments widely available
to the public in Hawaii for understanding spatial and temporal variability of
coastal water level and tidal processes that threaten communities through
nuisance flooding and sea level rise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two-day workshop
will train Hawaiian community members to assemble, install and use the new
sensors at fishponds located throughout the Hawaiian Islands. The PI will order
all sensor parts, pre-assemble difficult/critical components, 3D print custom
housing chassis components, and assemble DIY kits with fabrication documentation
to distribute to about forty workshop participants during the hands-on sensor
assembly and training sessions. The DIY sensor kits will allow Hawaiian
communities to monitor and quantify in near-real-time coastal tides, inundation,
and beach run-up risks. After the workshop, the PI will continue to engage
participants, coordinate data feeds, maintain data archives, and provide web
visualization tools using crowd-sourced data from the newly assembled and
deployed sensor kits. Workshop co-organizing partner Kua'Aina Ulu 'Auamo (KUA)
will facilitate post-workshop assessments and surveys. Ultimately, the data
produced by these sensors will allow scientists to access data with an accuracy
and spatial scale that was not previously possible.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The structure of the proposed
workshops and the general plan for encouraging productive interactions between
scientists and members of the public is well developed. Community partners,
including the grassroots non-profit organization KUA and the Kamehameha Schools,
are supporting various portions of the workshop, demonstrating significant
interest by the public in this effort. The workshop will focus on an important
scientific question that is highly relevant to the local communities, and the
resulting data will potentially transform the capability for monitoring and
predicting coastal hydrology, inundation, and nuisance flooding by augmenting
NOAA tide gauge spatial variability at unprecedented scales .
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader impacts of this workshop are
especially strong. The workshop will support public participation in scientific
research and will increase public understanding of critical environmental
issues. The end result will be a ?mentored citizen scientist? approach that
leads to reliable crowd-sourced coastal observatory data.