* 1745442
* Collaborative Research: Interpersonal Coordination and Coregulation during Collaborative Problem Solving
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Sidney D'Mello, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 03/31/2022
* USD 836,292.00

Collaborative problem solving (CPS) is an essential skill in our increasingly
connected and globalized world. Yet, there is a paucity of knowledge on how to
define, measure, and develop this skill, especially in the context of STEM
learning. A team of investigators from Notre Dame University, Florida State
University, and Arizona State University will seek to discover how interpersonal
interactions arise and influence CPS processes and outcomes in digital STEM
learning environments. The research will focus on groups of high school and
college students collaborating virtually within a STEM educational game called
Physics Playground. The hypothesis is that CPS effectiveness can be improved by
providing real-time automated feedback on the ongoing collaboration. The
investigators will collect an array of data, ranging from individual
physiological measures to learning outcome measures to group communication
patterns. Their goal is to improve the design of future CPS learning
environments, making them more enjoyable, engaging, and effective. The project
is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that
advances the fundamental research literature on STEM
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will involve dyads and triads
collaborating virtually within a learning environment called Physics Playground,
a STEM educational game. Data will be collected in both the lab and classroom,
using a diverse sample of high school and college students from three sites
across the U.S. The team will integrate data from a range of sources including
modeling of small group problem solving and collaborative learning and from the
modeling of low-level data from eye tracking, facial feature tracking,
psychophysiology, and linguistic/paralinguistic speech analysis. Additionally,
the team will study the moderating effects of task constraints and group
composition on CPS processes and outcomes. A further goal is to model dynamic
CPS processes using nonlinear time series analyses and multimodal deep recurrent
neural networks. The computational models will be integrated into the learning
environment to test the hypothesis that CPS outcomes can be improved by
providing automated feedback on unfolding collaborative processes. Thus, by
blending basic experimental research, multisensor-multimodal analysis,
computational modeling, and dynamic computerized intervention, the researchers
will attempt to make foundational theoretical, methodological, and technological
advances.