* 1745930
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Acoustic Ecology of Foraging Antarctic Blue Whales in the Vicinity of Antarctic Krill
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Kathleen Stafford, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Maria Vernet
* 09/30/2021
* USD 132,957.00

Understanding the interaction between blue whales and their prey is essential
for understanding Antarctic ecosystem dynamics. In the austral summer of 2019 an
international interdisciplinary research voyage will head to the Antarctic with
the overall goal of mapping Antarctic krill and blue whale distributions to
determine if foraging preferences of blue whales are dictated in part by the
density and shape of Antarctic krill swarms. This research voyage will combine
advanced research technologies (including autonomous underwater vehicles, short
term-tags, photogrammetry, and ship-based, real-time passive listening and
active echosounders) to answer questions about how the density, swarm shape and
behavior of Antarctic krill influence Antarctic blue whales. U.S. participation
on this voyage on an Australian research vessel will allow collection of
concurrent predator and prey data through the use of passive listening and
echosounders from a fixed mooring. By coupling moored data collection with the
ship-based survey focusing on Antarctic blue whale behavior and krill dynamics,
the project will contribute to the understanding of basic questions relating to
the dynamics between blue whales and their prey as well as adding to the
development of instrumentation and technologies that will enhance current
capabilities for in situ observing on the continent and the surrounding ice-
covered waters. The project will provide an educational platform for high school
students and the general public to virtually experience Antarctica via "virtual
sailing" through a project website and blog. Students and the general public
also will be allowed the opportunity to participate in post-cruise data
analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Australian Antarctic Division and
the University of Tasmania will lead an international voyage to the Antarctic in
the austral summer of 2019. The overall goal of the voyage will be to map
Antarctic krill (Euphausia superba) and blue whale (Balaenoptera musculus)
distributions to determine if the foraging preferences of blue whales are
dictated in part by the density and shape of Antarctic krill swarms. US
participation in voyage will entail the deployment of passive and active
acoustic instrumentation on a fixed mooring in concert with real-time acoustic
and visual tracking and localizing of blue whales that will then allow better
directing of ship operations towards aggregations of animals such that fine-
scale acoustic tracking and prey field mapping can be achieved. This approach
will be the first time such an acoustic system is deployed in Antarctica and
used in an integrative fashion to assess foraging behaviors and krill. Thus, the
project will advance understanding of the relationships between the acoustic
ecology of blue whales, krill abundance, and blue whale densities. The
technology deployment and testing will also be used to assess its potential use
in ice-covered waters for similar studies in the future. Broader impacts of this
project will occur through outreach and education, as well as through the
collaborations with the broader international scientific community. The project
will provide educational platforms for high school students and general public
to virtually experience Antarctica. Research findings will be communicated to
both the scientific community and the wider public through peer-reviewed
publications, presentations, student lectures, seminars and communication
through appropriate media channels by institutional communications
teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.