* 1745650
* SBIR Phase I:  Digitization of Skeletal Evaluations for Developmental and Reproductive Toxicology (DART) Studies.
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2018
* Michael Johnson, Visikol, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is the development of a digital skeletal evaluation
workflow for reproductive toxicology studies that will better ensure that
potential therapeutics with teratogenic effects will not make it to the
marketplace, and at reduced time and cost. The current approach for
characterizing the impact of new therapeutics and chemicals on skeletal
development relies upon human-based qualitative characterization, while the goal
for this digital and quantitative approach will be to more accurately
characterize the effect of therapeutics. An improved skeletal characterization
workflow in this $2.5 billion toxicology market also will allow for the reduced
usage of animals. The imaging and characterization platform developed through
this project will be commercialized as a service where contract research
organizations or pharmaceutical companies may send fetal skeletons for analysis.
Alternatively, customers may purchase the platform. This biphasic business model
will allow small contract research organizations to outsource labor intensive
characterization and large contract research organizations to switch to this new
digital approach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to
optimize a prototype optical coherence tomography (CT) scanner for the 3D
digitization of rodent skeletons at high resolution. Using this system, rodent
skeletons will be transformed into three-dimensional data matrices that can be
evaluated digitally by a fetal pathologist or characterized quantitively by a
computer for defects. The illumination and imaging parameters of the optical
scanner will be systematically optimized to reduce noise and to enable the clear
differentiation between different skeletal features. Once rodent skeletons can
be imaged in a reproducible manner to create three-dimensional data sets, these
data sets will be compared quantitatively side-by-side to data sets acquired
from the same animals using more expensive X-ray CT imaging. Following imaging
optimization and validation, a digital analysis program will be developed that
will determine if bones in a rodent model deviate from control samples. This
program will begin to allow for the complete digital evaluation of rodent
skeletons for developmental and reproductive toxicology studies.