* 1745611
* EAGER: Interdisciplinary and Social Science Extreme Events Reconnaissance (ISSEER)
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Lori Peek, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,950.00

Extreme events are increasing in frequency, magnitude, and scope as the
population grows and infrastructure development further expands into hazard-
prone areas. This project is concerned with how hazards and disaster research
communities will respond to disaster events when they occur. At present, social
science and interdisciplinary disaster research communities have no formal
structure for organizing before or in the event of a disaster, no established
process for communicating pressing research needs or ongoing projects, and hence
no established culture regarding scientific agenda setting in terms of rapid
reconnaissance research. In response, this EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) project will establish a scientific platform and coordinating
network for Social Science Extreme Events Reconnaissance (SSEER) and a second
platform and network for Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering Extreme
Events Reconnaissance (ISEEER). SSEER and ISEEER will draw upon insights from
the science of team science (SciTS) and leverage databases and information
resources available through the Natural Hazards Center at the University of
Colorado Boulder to build the capacity of the social science, engineering, and
interdisciplinary hazards and disaster research communities. The ultimate vision
for the work is to prepare individual researchers and teams to carry out extreme
events rapid reconnaissance research that is coordinated, comprehensive,
coherent, ethical, and scientifically rigorous.

This project will result in the development of two new platforms and
corresponding networks, SSEER and ISEEER that will help researchers respond to
and overcome long-standing challenges that have stymied the advancement of the
hazards and disaster field, including lack of identification and coordination of
researchers and research teams; inadequate guiding research frameworks for rapid
reconnaissance investigations; a lack of inventories of existing research
protocols, instruments, and secondary data; over-emphasis on large-scale sudden-
onset events; time-limited data collection and lack of replication across
events; and lack of interdisciplinary integration in rapid reconnaissance teams.
The work plan will contribute to existing knowledge and applications by: (1)
identifying, cataloguing, and mapping researchers from a range of disciplines
engaged in hazards and disaster research; (2) coordinating those researchers in
the event of a major disaster; (3) developing research frameworks and ethical
guidance for social science and interdisciplinary disaster research; (4)
cataloging existing research protocols, instruments, validated scales and
measures, and secondary data sets to allow researchers to more quickly
characterize affected communities; and (5) convening social scientists,
engineers, and scholars working in the science of team science to inform the
project and advance the science and practice of rapid reconnaissance research.