* 1745846
* SBIR Phase I:  Enhanced solar-thermal vapor generation for salt mining and stilled clean water
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Zongmin Bei, SUNNY CLEAN WATER LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 04/30/2019
* USD 224,934.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will serve two complementary unmet market needs
by: (1) accelerating the evaporation rate of brine ponds and enhancing salt
production efficiency by 2-3 times; (2) condensing the moisture evaporated from
contaminated/salty water so that one can obtain clean drinking water with n
consumption of electricity. We will develop an enhanced solar vapor generation
strategy based on a patent-pending electricity-free solar thermal technology.
Specifically, we will develop/optimize functional materials to enhance the
solar-driven vapor generation rate. The target is to double or even triple the
salt production of mining companies relying on evaporation of brine ponds
exposed to natural sun and wind. We will work with selected industrial partners
to perform the field test in lithium brine ponds, which is the key source
material for future Lithium battery industry. In addition, by condensing the
evaporated moisture, we will aim to produce clean water using low cost materials
and systems, which is a promising and sustainable solution to address the global
drinking water scarcity using affordable electricity-free products in coastal
and resource-limited areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will aim
to commercialize a patent-pending technology to realize an enhanced solar-driven
water evaporator, which is highly desired for both solar mining production and
clean water generation. Due to the superior solar energy absorption, heat
conversion, and thermal insulating properties of our disclosed structure, most
of the absorbed energy can be used to evaporate surface water with significantly
reduced thermal dissipation. Remarkably, our pilot system has realized a record
solar thermal conversion efficiency of &gt;88% under illumination of 1 kW/m2
with no solar concentration. The corresponding vapor generation rate is ~1.28
kg/m2/h - a full 3X higher than the natural evaporation of bare water surfaces
in the same environment. This Phase I SBIR effort will aim to overcome the
remaining technical barriers for material and system optimization and scaling up
strategies for manufacturing. By comparing the roll-to-roll coating and direct
dying processes in this proposed research, we will select the best overall
technology to complete our supply chain for the production in Phase II. In
particular, we will perform field tests by working with solar mining industrial
partners as well as Non-Government Organizations (NGO's) to get their feedback
on how to improve the product in relevant environment.