* 1745960
* EAGER:  The Burridge-Willis-Eshelby Waves from a Self-Similarly Expanding Ellipsoidal Region of Phase Change and Application to Deep-Focus Earthquakes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Xanthippi Markenscoff, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2020
* USD 201,969.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award supports
fundamental research to obtain the complete mechanics based analysis of the
acoustic and energetic aspects of the Burridge-Willis-Eshelby wave problems.
This model will be applied to predict the acoustic emissions due to phase
transitions in the process that generates deep focus earthquakes, a physical
phenomenon that has defied modeling for over 50 years. The results would enable
future collaborations between applied mechanics researchers and the geophysical
research community to perform quantitative predictions and interpretation of
field data on deep focus earthquakes. The project will also connect to ongoing
mentoring programs for women researchers at the University of California - San
Diego.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A model of the solution for waves emitted by a self-
similarly expanding ellipsoidal region, in which the material undergoes phase
change as it expands under high pressure, will be derived. This problem
constitutes the dynamic generalization of the seminal Eshelby ellipsoidal
inclusion problem both in isotropy and anisotropy. The equivalent transformation
strain will be obtained for the specific phase transitions occurring in the
experimental analogs and the theoretical acoustic emissions will be compared
with experimental ones from previous geophysics research.