* 1745922
* EAGER: Building Human Social Networks to Develop Data-Driven Approaches that Expand Lifelong Learning Opportunities
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Alan Cheville, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 08/31/2022
* USD 299,895.00

Industry demands more highly qualified graduates who can adapt to a rapidly
changing work environment, while government demands higher quality in
undergraduate education. These demands raise questions about how higher
education institutions can meet such needs. Unfortunately, government, industry,
and higher education do not naturally come together often enough to achieve the
needed student outcomes. The recent focus on ?big data? is further raising
questions about how the government, industry, and higher education capture vast
amounts of information about student learning. This project will explore the
intersection of big data with educational opportunities across a learner?s life,
the opportunities and challenges created by these intersections, and what roles
different institutions (e.g. K-12, industry, universities, government) will or
should play in improving undergraduate education. Through a series of workshops,
this project aims to facilitate interactions among constituents from industry,
the government, and higher education institutions. The goal is to identify the
kinds of big data that can tell us how to expand learning opportunities across a
student?s lifetime. Through these workshops, participants will be guided to use
big data to investigate trends in undergraduate engineering education,
including: redefining engineering education in relation to the skills needed to
be a working engineer; exploring how real-time feedback can promote learning;
increasing the efficiency at which engineers acquire new knowledge and skills;
understanding the interconnections across the educational systems; and
rethinking the shift towards more automation, which may radically change the
skills needed for employability. Big data and other trends will fundamentally
change how education is obtained, who has access to various forms of education
(e.g., on-line vs in person courses), and the activities that define a high-
quality engineering education. By exploring the implications of big data on
education, this project has the potential to transform engineering education
specifically and STEM education more generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, this project will involve a series of four workshops that are
designed to achieve the following: (1) map the engineering education ecosystem
from the perspective of how the affordances created by big data will impact
processes, cultures, and structures in higher education; (2) explore
opportunities at productive interfaces within the ecosystem; (3) understand
resource allocation and flow; and (4) develop heuristics to allow various
stakeholders to navigate cultural and structural shifts. Additionally, the
project will integrate data collection through ethnography and survey
methodologies adapted for complex, dynamic systems to more broadly capture
perspectives across engineering education and explicitly focuses on network
building and disseminating materials to help various entities across engineering
education navigate change. This project is designed to advance knowledge of how
different sectors within the engineering education ecosystem capitalize on,
adapt to, or are threatened by education and workforce trends broadly driven by
big data. The workshops will draw a broad audience from many sectors, including
both industry and university representatives with broad expertise, and networks
of people involved in personalized learning. Advances in information technology
and the ability to monitor and analyze the interactions of millions of learners
with online content has the potential to lead to transformative shifts in
education. While these technologies have the capacity to create more equity and
access to education, without opportunities for the range of stakeholders to
communicate and build robust networks, such a transformative outcome cannot be
assured. The opportunities for networking and relationship building in this
project are supported scenario analysis and systems thinking, in a framework
that has been shown to affect participant narratives.