* 1745811
* The Authentic Inclusion of Community Colleges in National Efforts to Broaden Participation in Computing: A Workshop Proposal
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Calhoun Calhoun, Santa Fe College
* Standard Grant
* Fay Cobb Payton
* 07/31/2019
* USD 86,260.00

Santa Fe College proposes a workshop to bring the voices and perspectives of
Community Colleges into the national conversation about broadening participation
and education in computing (BPC). As a first Community College-driven BPC
education event, it will bring together theoretical and practitioner
perspectives to listen to each other and use an inclusive, more holistic
perspective to drive next steps for engaging the Community College community in
the BPC movement effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Community Colleges (CC) serve a
more diverse population than 4-year institutions, so they are a natural but
often overlooked venue for increasing diversity. This workshop -- led by a
multi-institutional leadership committee with representatives from three
community colleges, one research university, and two education research
organizations, all of whom are active in CS BP research and interventions --
will develop a conceptual model for increasing the participation of CC in BPC
initiatives that leverages existing CC collaborations and investments, including
the National Center for Women and Information Technology's (NCWIT) Community
College Outreach group, and attendees of the 2017 CISE BP Community Meeting.
What is missing from most current BPC CC-focused research or interventions is an
understanding of what CC themselves want to know and how they would like to be
involved in research and intervention projects. The conversational prompts for
this meeting will include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. The current state of
knowledge on issues that relate to equity and inclusion in computing disciplines
at CCs. Some examples of known issues are faculty shortages, professional
development, lack of consistent articulation/transfer guidelines, lack of
student supports (e.g., financial, remediation) and unclear or disconnected
curricular pathways.&lt;br/&gt;2. Identification of opportunities to enable CCs
to more fully engage in the national movement to broaden participation in
computing. This will include organizational constructs that need to be in place
(e.g., administrative buy-in), effective interventions (e.g., culturally
responsive and gender equitable teaching practices), relevant partners (e.g.,
university, industry, K-12) across geographies; and incentives to spur
action.&lt;br/&gt;3. Next steps for CC engagement.