* 1745466
* EAGER:  Designing Novel Polymorphic Gates as Hardware Security Primitives
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Gang Qu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Kundu
* 08/31/2020
* USD 199,999.00

Conventional digit logic gates will generate a deterministic output signal for a
given set of input signals (called input vector). Polymorphic gates are
different in the sense that their output for the same input vector may vary
depending on the operating environment such as temperature, voltage, and
humidity. So we can consider polymorphic gates as logic gates that can implement
multiple functions and behave as one of them according to certain controllable
factors. This happens because polymorphic gates have unconventional structure at
the transistor level. However, such unconventional structure is hard to find as
it has been demonstrated by researchers since this concept was proposed by NASA
researchers in 2001 in an effort to minimize chip area of the design. In this
EAGER project, we propose to investigate systematic methods to construct novel
polymorphic gates for Internet of Things (IoT) and cybersecurity
applications.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on the development
of three enabling technologies to establish polymorphic gates as a hardware
security primitive. First, since polymorphic gates are rare, how can researchers
construct sufficient types of them so we can integrate them into the
conventional CMOS technology as well as new nano-technology? We will answer this
question by studying the novel concept of partial polymorphic gates and the
associated evolutionary algorithms to find the transistor structure that
implements such polymorphic gates. Second, what security applications can
benefit from the polymorphic gates? We propose to demonstrate the great promise
of polymorphic gates as a hardware security primitive on several concrete
cybersecurity applications, such as intellectual property protection, circuit
obfuscation, device authentication, and random number generation. Third, how
good is polymorphic gates based security? We will conduct both theoretical and
empirical analysis on the proposed security applications with proper attack
models and potential countermeasures. Any success from this EAGER project will
be revolutionary to the research community that is interested in polymorphic
gates and their applications, hardware security, evolutionary algorithms, device
physics and circuit theory.