* 1745949
* Bioengineering &amp; Translational Medicine Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2017,03/31/2018
* Efrosini Kokkoli, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Carol Lucas
* 03/31/2018
* USD 9,500.00

This award provides support to the 2nd Bioengineering &amp; Translational
Medicine Conference as a pre-conference to the American Institute of Chemical
Engineers annual meeting. It will be held October 27-28, 2017, in Minneapolis,
MN. The organizing committee consists of academic and industry representatives,
and the overall goal is to bring together physicians, scientists, and engineers
to discuss ways of turning appropriate biological engineering discoveries into
drugs and medical devices that can be used in the treatment of patients.
Sessions will be organized in 5 scientific themes in addition to a theme focused
on the process of translation, including venture capital, intellectual property,
regulatory issues, and business practices. These funds will be used to partially
fund travel grants for young scientists and engineers to attend the conference
so that they can have the opportunity to network with academics from other
universities, physicians, and industry representatives. The scientific objective
of the meeting seeks to advance the translation of bioengineering into medical
devices and systems, which will subsequently have a positive impact on health
outcomes and, potentially, reducing health care
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bioengineering &amp; translational
medicine is a distinct field at the intersection of cutting edge advances in the
translation of biopharmaceuticals, gene and drug delivery, immunoengineering,
biomanufacturing, stem cells and regenerative medicine. The ultimate goal is to
move benchtop scientific and engineering discoveries to actual clinical practice
and improve patient outcomes. This meeting will discuss the latest advances in
the science and engineering related to these themes as well as the steps
required to move them to clinical translation. In addition, the meeting will
address issues related to translation on the non-science side, including venture
capital, regulation, and intellectual property. As this is a single track
conference, the diverse group of attendees will have an opportunity to broaden
their understanding of a broad scope of bioengineering as well as improve their
foundation of knowledge related to the translation process itself. The award
will provide partial travel support to invited speakers as well as partial
travel grants and registration waivers to students and post-doctoral fellows to
allow them to attend the conference and network with leaders in the field from
both academia and industry.