* 1745408
* Life Under the Ice
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Ariel Waldman, Waldman, Ariel
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 02/28/2019
* USD 1.00

Life Under the Ice is a project supported by the Antarctic Artists and Writers
program. The Principal investigator will create an interactive web exhibition
for the public to experience the unadulterated visual beauty of Antarctic
ecosystems that are otherwise invisible to the naked eye. Life Under the Ice
will bring to light the microscopic world of Antarctica. The goal is to collect
various types of photo and videos of extremophile microorganisms endemic to
Antarctica and present them to the public in a novel way, by turning viewers
into Antarctic explorers. This exhibition will seek to elicit the same sense of
wonder that scientists feel about how even the smallest, simplest life forms of
Antarctica, shaped by their harsh home environments, are also immensely complex.

The Principal Investigator, a multidisciplinary artist who has made a career out
of being an effective liaison between art, technology and science, will
participate in active fieldwork with researchers studying extremophile organisms
in the Dry Valleys and on the sea ice. At these sites, the PI will collect
original, in-situ compound and stereo microscope photography, video, and
macrophotography. The PI will then design, deploy, and widely circulate an
immersive web exhibition that intermingles the captured photographs and videos
in a seamless digital terrain that invites and encourages viewers to explore
these ecosystems in their own way. The idea of this proposal is to use a Google
Maps-like panning interface to display the photos and videos collected. The web
exhibition will deliver the experience of observing microorganisms through the
lens of a graphic artist, magnifying and highlighting their forms, colors, and
movements. The artist's outreach efforts will target social media and online
communities, traditional media outlets, as well in-person events. All the
photographs and videos captured in Antarctica will be licensed under a Creative
Commons license, enabling the public-at-large to reuse and remix it for
communicating science themselves.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.