* 1745612
* EAGER:   Large Scale Photonic Molecules and Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Daniel Blumenthal, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 06/30/2019
* USD 150,000.00

Title: EAGER: Realizing light-based photonic molecule circuits and applications.

Abstract Nontechnical Description The proposed exploratory research is aimed at
realizing devices and functions with photonic molecules, the optical equivalent
of electronic molecules. Research in photonics molecules seeks to use optically
coupled photonic resonant microstructures to implement functions and behaviors
with photons that are analogous to electronic atomic and molecular systems.
Optical resonators can be thought of as photonic atoms and collections of
photonic resonators can be designed to act like photonic molecules, enabling
wide classes of new functions, systems and applications. The research outcome is
expected to transform the field of photonic molecule technology by enabling new
device functions that can be implemented using large-scale optical resonator
arrays compatible with wafer-scale foundry integration. The ability to engineer
molecular behavior based on photons has the potential to impact a wide variety
of applications and revolutionize the performance, power, size and scaling of
circuits difficult to realize with traditional electronics. The proposed work
combines photonic molecule techniques with a silicon nitride based integrated
low-loss optical waveguide technology to demonstrate two transformative
functions, a non-magnetic optical isolator and a fast acquisition high quality
factor photonic circuit for real-time low-jitter frequency and phase recovery.
These functions have proved to be difficult to realize with current integrated
photonic technologies. Optical isolators and real-time frequency and phase
recovery are both device functions that will impact the development of
integrated optical digital and analog circuits and a wide variety of
applications. New device simulation and design tools, layout tools, fabrication
methods and testing methodologies will be developed. Broader impact of the
proposed technology is the potential to decrease size, weight, cost and power of
high-speed data communications technologies, special purpose hardware
simulations of complex problems out of reach of today's computers include many
body physics, economic and transportation modeling, and medical solutions for
biological sampling and disease detection.

Technical Description In this exploratory research, the PI proposes to study the
design and fabrication of photonic molecules utilizing large arrays of optical
resonators, ranging from micrometer to millimeters sizes, implemented in ultra-
low loss silicon nitride wafer-scale integration technology. Photonic molecules
can realize functions and behaviors with photons analogous to electronic atomic
and molecular systems. The goal of this project will be to demonstrate two
functions based on photonic molecule technology: (i) a non-magnetic optical
isolator and (ii) a fast acquisition high-Q circuit for fast frequency and phase
recovery. These functions have proved to be difficult to realize with other
device technologies. The approach to non-magnetic optical isolation utilizes
discrete coupled-ring resonators whose refractive indices are modulated with a
constant phase offset such that temporal spatial modulation imposes an effective
angular moment and breaks optical reciprocity. Fast optical signal acquisition
with high Q requires overcoming the time bandwidth product limits of passive
resonators by implementing optical isolation between coupled low-Q resonators
and high-Q resonators. The resonators will be designed and fabricated using deep
etched coupled silicon nitride rings controlled with low power piezo electric
tuning in a wafer-scale integration platform. The methods used will incorporate
detailed numerical simulations, device design and layout techniques, advanced
fabrication of low loss optical waveguide coupled resonator arrays and
programming interconnects. The proposed work helps to develop new tools to
design and fabricate photonic molecule based circuits that can be scaled to very
large arrays and used for functions and applications difficult to implement
today including digital optical circuits for communications and computation.