* 1745097
* Collaborative Research: Observing the Atmospheric Boundary over the West Antarctic Ice Sheet
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* John Cassano, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Allen Pope
* 08/31/2024
* USD 403,796.00

The near surface atmosphere over West Antarctica is one of the fastest warming
locations on the planet. This atmospheric warming, along with oceanic forcing,
is contributing to ice sheet melt and hence rising global sea levels. An
observational campaign, focused on the atmospheric boundary layer over the West
Antarctic ice sheet, is envisioned. A robust set of year-round, autonomous,
atmospheric and surface measurements, will be made using an instrumented 30-m
tall tower at the West Antarctic ice sheet divide field camp. An additional
unmanned aerial system field campaign will be conducted during the second year
of this project and will supplement the West Antarctic ice sheet tall tower
observations by sampling the depths of the boundary
layer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader subject of the Antarctic ABL clearly
supports a range of research activities ranging from the physics of turbulent
mixing, its parameterization and constraints on meteorological forecasts, and
even climatological effects, such as surface mass and energy balances. With the
coming of the Thwaites WAIS program, a suite of metrological observables would
be a welcome addition to the joint NSF/NERC (UK) Thwaites field campaigns. The
meteorologists of this proposal have pioneered 30-m tall tower (TT) and unmanned
aerial system (UAS) development in the Antarctic, and are well positioned to
successfully carry out and analyze this work. In turn, the potential for these
observations to advance our understanding of how the atmosphere exchanges heat
with the ice sheet is high.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.