* 1745784
* I-Corps: Weather Augmented Risk Determination System
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Amir AghaKouchak, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project includes
providing weather-related risk information to construction contracting
companies, private farmers, insurance and re-insurance companies, risk
management companies, local, federal agencies, state agencies, and any other
company that may be impacted by adverse weather. This product provides insight
into the impacts of adverse weather conditions, allowing its constituents to
plan and prepare. Construction companies need to stay on schedule to avoid
liquidated damages, so it is important to determine the impacts of weather on
work stoppage, as well as decreased labor productivity. Insurance and risk
management companies need information on the impacts of weather events on their
constituents, to be able to competitively price their insurance policies.
Furthermore, government agencies, such as the Departments of Transportation and
Public Works need information on the impacts of weather on duration of their
projects, to determine the best starting date for construction, considering
impacts of weather on delays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project provides
a software tool (Weather Augmented Risk Determination System, WARDS) for
estimating probabilities of work stoppage and labor productivity for each hour
using long-term observations. WARDS provides both the likeliest delay (e.g., in
days or months) and the likelihood that a user-defined addition of time for
weather delay will actually occur. The research potential for this product
include analyzing the differences in labor productivity and work stoppage across
multiple locations. Furthermore, the technology platform can determine the
historical observed changes in labor productivity and work stoppage. The product
can determine the monetary impacts of changing labor productivity and work
stoppage due to weather.