* 1745378
* EAGER/Collaborative Research:Science-Based Exploration of Invariant Signatures of Architecture/Engineering/Construction Objects to Enable Interoperability of Building Info Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Xiaoyun Shao, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 08/31/2021
* USD 111,834.00

Building Information Modeling integrates 3D models with physical and functional
characteristics of an infrastructure project and has the potential to facilitate
the exchange of information between different parties involved in the same
project throughout its lifecycle, ranging from design and construction to
maintenance and operation, and beyond. However, the fundamental problem -- lack
of interoperability (ie., inability to exchange information between different
platforms), due to model inconsistency and missing information -- prevents the
exchange of such information. Existing research efforts to address this lack of
interoperability have been heavily focused on standardization and semantic
modeling. These standard methods do not address the underlying problem and still
depend on the computer models involved. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) project aims to both scientifically and empirically study the
intrinsic properties and discover invariant signatures of architecture,
engineering, and construction (AEC) objects, such as footings, slabs, walls,
beams, and columns, to support seamless and universal interoperability of
Building Information Modeling. Invariant signatures of an AEC object are defined
as a set of intrinsic properties (e.g., geometry, location, material) of the
object that distinguish itself from other objects and that do not change with
software implementation, modeling decisions, and/or language and cultural
contexts. An interdisciplinary approach involving geometry theorems, computer
algorithms, and material mechanics will be employed to explore and quantify
these intrinsic properties. If successful, the approach is expected to open the
door for full automation of building information modeling analysis, which will
significantly improve the project performance in all
respects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The underlying hypothesis of the project is that
invariant signatures of an AEC object collectively defined by the Cartesian
points-based geometric, relative location and orientation, and material
mechanical properties will enable seamless and universal interoperability of
building information modeling (BIM) software in various analysis phases from
architectural design and preliminary structural design to detailed structural
analysis and construction cost estimation. The project is divided into two
thrusts: 1) test the hypothesis particularly on the kinds of geometric,
locational and material signatures that can be identified as inherent signatures
from a wide range of AEC objects; 2) test the ability of discovered signatures
to support BIM interoperability in the automated quantity takeoff and structural
analysis scenarios. Publicly available BIM data will be used to support the
exploration of the invariant signatures and the testing of these signatures.
This project is the first systematic effort designated to test the idea of
leveraging the intrinsic properties of AEC objects to support BIM
interoperability, which is radically different from the existing efforts that
are focused on data schema standardization and/or term-based semantics of AEC
objects. If the underlying hypothesis is supported, this research has the
potential to transform the way future BIM standards are developed and used to
support seamless and universal interoperability of BIM models among all modeling
and engineering analysis tasks. The results of this research could be widely
applicable in construction engineering and beyond, and could ultimately lead to:
(1) seamless and universal interoperability of BIM models; (2) full automation
of BIM analysis; and (3) optimized specifications of material selections for
future construction in different environments. The methods and results of this
project will be integrated into university coursework at both collaborating
institutions. This project will also broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups by giving priority to women/minority students when
recruiting the research assistants.