* 1745228
* I-Corps: Modular Biodiesel Production with Glycerol Recycle
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Joseph Smith, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 12/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project can transform
the waste vegetable oil industry and influence the markets of other biofuels.
The innovative method comes from using a modular design with novel supercritical
processing technology that utilizes value added by-product recycle. This
technology improves profitability by bringing processing facilities closer to
the consumer and creating local jobs in rural communities, thus improving rural
economic activity. The commercial potential of this technology can transform how
waste vegetable oil is used, rendered, and processed in the United States and
around the world. These marketplaces are of significant interest to the federal
and state governments because of energy security, rural economic growth and
sustainable energy production. Commercial impacts of this technology influence
other biofuels markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will explore
the market potential of a Transportable Micro Bio Refinery (TmBR) that converts
waste vegetable oil (WVO) into biodiesel to using a novel 2-stage Separative-
reactor. Generating biodiesel from WVO is commonly done using a Base-Catalyzed
Low-Pressure process referred to as the Fatty-Acid Methyl Ester (FAME) process.
Bio-diesel produced in centralized bio-refineries are not competitive with
petro-diesel with low priced crude. Capital costs, feedstock supply costs, and
environmental costs to dispose of process waste make centralized refineries
uneconomically. By comparison, the TmBR process uses an advanced super-critical
separative reactor without a catalyst to reduce process waste and operating
costs. In addition, the TmBR process includes a bio-digestor to convert waste
glycerol to methanol which is recycled to reduce the need to purify and dispose
of waste glycerol. The TmBR process requires a smaller operating footprint,
involves lower capital costs and reduced operating costs and has less
environmental impact that makes this technology more economically competitive
compared to standard FAME based biodiesel plants.