* 1745832
* 13th World Congress in Computational Mechanics; New York, New York; July 22-27, 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Haim Waisman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 12/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

This grant provides financial support for the conference entitled the 13th World
Congress of Computational Mechanics to be held jointly with the 2nd Pan American
Congress of Computational Mechanics from July 22-27, 2018 in New York City.
Building on the success of previous World Congresses since 1986, WCCM2018 is the
premier forum for sharing and dissemination of the latest scientific and
engineering advances in the field of computational mechanics. Computational
Mechanics is the development and application of numerical methods and digital
computers to the solution of problems faced in engineering and applied science
with the objectives of understanding and harnessing the resources of nature.
While Computational Solid Mechanics (CSM) and Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD)
are at the traditional core areas of computational mechanics, subjects such as
Thermodynamics, Electro-Magnetism, Rigid Body Mechanics, Control Systems, and
Particle Physics also fall within the scope of the definition. WCCM2018 will
bring together researchers, professionals, and engineers in a setting which
facilitates rich discussions and interactions, and aims to highlight the
important advances in WCCM on a global scale. Student participation is greatly
encouraged to give the students exposure to recent advances in WCCM, and thus
help prepare the next generation of leaders in this field. This meeting is open
to all interested individuals, including a mixture of attendees from research,
government, industry, and educational professions. Funding from this grant will
support the travel of graduate students, early career researchers, and the Forum
for Women in Engineering, with active focus on underrepresented group
participation. WCCM has helped to revolutionize multiple disciplines, ranging
from vehicle crash simulation to petroleum reservoir modeling to additive
manufacturing. The key topical areas that will be considered at WCCM2018
include: (1) computational biological science (2) computational material science
(3) computational mathematics (4) computational engineering and design, (5) high
performance computing, (6) verification, validation, and uncertainty
quantification, (7) forum for women in engineering, (8) student poster
competition and (9) networking initiatives worldwide. This world congress will
include over 1000 presentations comprising four concurrent sessions, including a
special symposium that explores the broadening participation of greater
diversity in computational mechanics. The program has been designed to maximize
interaction among modelers, applied mathematicians, experimentalists and
engineers and provide a balance between breadth of information and depth of
discussion and interaction opportunities; various types of institutions across
academia, government, and industry will be represented. WCCM2018 will attempt to
provide the most experientially diverse meeting possible, with a mixture of
senior and junior investigators, post-doctoral trainees and students.
Participation from minority groups will be particularly encouraged and
supported.