* 1745866
* EAGER:   Engaging Stakeholders with Prototypes: Practitioner  Approaches during Front-end Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Shanna Daly, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2021
* USD 232,026.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) grant supports
fundamental research into the use of prototypes during the earliest stages of
engineering design projects. This is a critical juncture in most projects.
Engineering designers formulate a design problem based on their understanding of
user needs and wants. Misunderstandings at this stage can imperil the success of
a project. Prototypes can be key to understanding what people need and want in a
product, and thus determining the ultimate success of the design. However,
current reports of prototype usage suggest that they are not leveraged to their
full potential when designers are interacting with potential users of the
design. The goals of this research are to capture best practice strategies used
by industry practitioners based on their descriptions of engineering design
projects as well as observations of them in action as they use prototypes to
engage with users. The study will focus primarily on medical device design
problems due to their richness as an engineering design problem and their
importance to society. Fundamental strategies identified in this study will be
transferrable, impacting the ways practitioners in many engineering areas
approach stakeholder engagement. This will promote greater productivity and
innovation in engineering product design and, ultimately, better products for
end users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates design practitioner
behaviors and strategies for using prototypes during the front-end phases of
design, especially for engaging stakeholders for the purposes of defining design
problems and eliciting product requirements. Research methods include a
combination of design project-centered semi-structured interviews (both
retrospective and near real time), document review, and observations. Data
analysis draws takes an iterative approach, allowing patterns and themes to
emerge. A combination of inductive and deductive analyses will ensure the
results are robust and appropriately contextualized. Outcomes of this research
include a framework for using prototypes to engage with stakeholders during
early design phases and a series of case studies documenting how prototypes have
been successfully leveraged.