* 1745246
* EAGER: Online Processing of Data in Large Facilities using National Advanced CyberInfrastructure
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Manish Parashar, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 08/31/2020
* USD 292,445.00

Open, large-scale scientific facilities are an essential part of science and
engineering enterprise. These facilities provide shared-use infrastructure,
instrumentation, and data products that are openly accessible to a broad
community of researchers and/or educators. Current facilities provide increasing
volumes of data and data products that have the potential to deliver new
insights in a wide range of science and engineering domains. However, while
these facilities provide reliable and pervasive access to the data and data
products, users typically must download the data of interest and process them
using local resources. Consequently, transforming these data and data products
into insights requires local access to powerful computing, storage, and
networking resources. On the other hand, the NSF Advanced Cyberinfrastructure
(ACI) is playing an increasingly important role as an open platform for
computational and data-enabled science and engineering and can provide the
necessary capabilities to allow a broad user community to effectively process
the data in large facilities. However, despite clearly complementing each other,
large scientific facilities and NSF ACI remain largely disconnected. As a
result, users are forced to actively be part of the process that moves data from
large facilities to local computational resources or NSF ACI. Therefore, this
data-delivery mode becomes inefficient and limits the potential utility that the
data would have if processed in an automatic manner. The outcome of this
research can have a significant impact on the scientific and engineering
community by improving the accessibility of data and the way scientists interact
with both data sources and computational infrastructures. Bringing national ACI
and large scientific facilities together will democratize access to science and
improve the impact of the NSF-funded infrastructure. This is especially
important for small public institutions that have limited resources and do not
have high bandwidth Internet connection to the Academic/Research network. The
development of human resources, including the training of students, researchers
and software professionals, as well as the outreach to minorities and
underrepresented groups, will be an integral aspect of this effort. The project
uses an open repository to disseminate research papers, prototype
implementations, and associated data products to the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to explore how NSF-
funded ACI, such as the Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment
(XSEDE), can be integrated with large facilities generally, and the Ocean
Observatories Initiative (OOI) specifically, in an automated manner to support
end-to-end user workflows. Specifically, we propose to enable workflows that
when triggered can seamlessly orchestrate the entire data-to-discovery pipeline.
This involves executing queries on the OOI cyberinfrastructure (possibly based
on the occurrence of events of interest), streaming data to appropriate ACI
facilities using high bandwidth interconnects (such as Internet2) in order to
stage this data close to computing/analytics resources (e.g., XSEDE JetStream),
and then launching the modeling and analysis processes to transform such data
into insights. In this way, the project will leverage high-performance networks
that typically connect these facilities to support data movement, and process
this data using state-of-the-art high-performance systems.