* 1745258
* Collaborative Research:  Circulation and mixing in a coastally trapped river plume
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Nicholas Nidzieko, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 12/31/2017
* USD 11,657.00

Under downwelling conditions, buoyant coastal currents can transport river-
derived material hundreds of kilometers down the coast. The fate of this
material is ultimately determined by the extent of mixing with the ambient
coastal waters. Despite the importance that mixing plays in controlling the
along-shelf dispersal of river-derived materials, few studies have directly
measured mixing in the far-field of river plume. This study will quantify mixing
and circulation in the Chesapeake Bay by combining a comprehensive field program
with numerical models. The Chesapeake is ideal for this study because of its
predictable coastal current and its proximity to extensive research
infrastructure at the USACE facility in Duck, NC. The four primary objectives of
the study are: to quantify mixing within the nose region, the interior, and the
offshore edge of the plume during downwelling conditions, to obtain detailed
measurements of plume propagation speeds and the structure of the circulation
behind the nose in a buoyant coastal current under downwelling favorable winds,
to identify the dominant mechanisms responsible for mixing and entrainment of
salt into the coastal current, and to document the dominant dynamic balances
that govern plume propagation during downwelling conditions under a range of
wind forcing. This comprehensive field program will consist of moored,
shipboard, and microstructure-AUV observations of circulation and mixing within
the plume. High resolution simulations using ROMS will complement the field
program by providing more comprehensive estimates of mixing, diagnose the
dynamics of the plume, and assess the role of wind, waves and internal shear in
driving plume mixing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coastally-trapped river plumes
represent a class of gravity currents that have been extensively studied using
numerical models and laboratory experiments. Detailed field observations
resulting from this study will provide new insights into mixing and circulation
processes in a buoyant gravity current. This project will provide unprecedented
measurement documenting the relative roles of mixing and advective straining in
modifying the plume?s stratification. The relative importance of mixing in the
nose region versus broadly distributed mixing behind the plume due to winds and
waves will also be examined. Results will also elucidate the role of
ageostrophic dynamics in the nose region and along the off-shore edge of the
plume, once isopycnals become vertical. The field program will use adaptive
sampling that combines both ship-based surveys and AUV-microstructure
observations of a propagating coastal current. Utilizing the AUV to adaptively
sample an ephemeral coastal feature is expected to lead to technological
advances in observational oceanography. Lagrangian data will be complemented by
a mooring array that will provide unprecedented near-surface resolution of
stratification and shear in the far field of a river plume. Detailed near
surface observations of turbulence will help to identify the dominant mixing
mechanisms responsible for entraining ambient sea water into the
plume.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will serve as the basis for
one graduate student's thesis at Rutgers. Several undergraduate students will
also be included in the field effort through the NSF-funded Research Experience
for Undergraduates at Rutgers and Woods Hole. The objectives for Broader Impacts
are to translate the science themes and data sets from this study into
innovative undergraduate teaching materials and to encourage STEM learning for
future scientists (grades K-12) through hands-on activities related to the
research. The expertise of the NSF-funded Centers for Ocean Science Education
Excellence Networked Ocean World and the Ocean Observing Initiative's Education
and Public Engagement (OOI EPE) Implementing Organization (IO) will be leveraged
to create an online learning module for undergraduates. These lessons will be
disseminated broadly through an OOI EPE online portal and workshops at ocean
science meetings (e.g., AGU and ASLO Oceans). The modules will highlight the
benefits of teaching with authentic data with the focus of engaging
undergraduates in the scientific process.