* 1745369
* Convergence NNA: Coordinate a Transdisciplinary Research Network to Identify Challenges of and Solutions to Permafrost Coastal Erosion and Its Socioecological Impacts in the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Vladimir Romanovsky, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 12/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

The Permafrost Coastal Erosion-RCN (PCE-RCN) will bring together leaders in
fields of natural and social science and engineering to address the challenges
faced by coastal communities in the Arctic due to rapid coastal erosion. Rapid
coastal erosion can force communities to consider moving inland and limit access
to resources. One goal of the proposed PCE-RCN will be to better understand the
challenges associated with coastal erosion, which is driven by permafrost thaw
and changing sea ice conditions. Another goal is to identify potential solutions
and their socio-ecological impacts. These goals will be addressed through a
series of international workshops, publications and direct interaction with
local media. Engagement with regional and local resource managers and
communities will be incorporated throughout many of the activities of the PCE-
RCN. This project promotes convergence by focusing on a topic of high societal
concern, coastal erosion in the Arctic, and by approaching this topic in a
manner that will integrate diverse fields, including social science and natural
science disciplines (coastal geophysics, soil physics, climate modelling, and
atmospheric science) and disciplines in civil and environmental engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Permafrost Coastal Erosion-RCN
(PCE-RCN) will bring together national and international leaders in the diverse
scientific and engineering disciplines needed to address the pressing societal
issue of rapid coastal erosion. Rapid coastal erosion is underway throughout the
Arctic, and is impacting coastal communities in profound ways, including
displacement and loss of livelihood. The goal of the proposed PCE-RCN will be to
further resolve through synthesis activities how coastal erosion is driven by
permafrost thaw and changing sea ice conditions and to identify potential
solutions and their socio-ecological impacts. These goals will be addressed
through a series of international workshops, white papers and other outlets.
Engagement with regional and local resource managers and communities will be
incorporated throughout many of the activities of the PCE-RCN.