* 1745944
* EAGER Germination Renewal: Piloting a Center for Transformative Research at Boise State University
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* William Hughes, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Louise R. Howe
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,930.00

This project addresses the critical need to foster transformative research ideas
that can effectively address societal needs by developing a Center for
Transformative Research at Boise State University. The project builds on a pilot
award in which this team demonstrated preliminary proof-of-principle of the
ability to build an ASSERTive community - Aligning Stakeholders and Structures
to Enable Risk Taking. The proposed Center will have three major components:
professional development for research-active faculty and post-doctoral fellows;
alignment of university structures to support germination of transformative
research questions and ideas; and longitudinal tracking of participants to
measure the long-term impact of the Center. Successful development of this
Center for Transformative Research could have several important impacts. Not
only might it lead to development of new research programs that grapple with
societally significant research problems, but it could also serve as a model for
other emerging research-active universities.

In piloting a Center for Transformative Research, Boise State University will
test a scalable platform for assisting faculty and post-doctoral fellows to pose
transformative research questions, and engage students in research. The Center
will reside structurally and culturally within the College of Innovation +
Design, and will have strong ties to the Division of Research and Economic
Development. During the grant period, the PIs will provide focused professional
development for participants through retreats and workshops, enhancing their
ability to develop their research identity, formulate transformative research
questions, and advance their research agenda. A parallel goal is to re-imagine
university structures to support the possibility of transformative research
among the participants. Necessary conversations will include discussions of
promotion and tenure policies, and mechanisms for rewarding high-risk projects
and team science. Boise State can be considered representative of emerging
research-active US universities - the middle class of higher education. The
proposed approach could be scalable and transferable to similar institutions.
Boise State's participation in the Vertically Integrated Project (VIP)
Consortium, comprised of 24 national and international institutions, offers a
potentially tractable route for dissemination.