* 1745774
* EAGER Germination Renewal: Cultivating Creativity in STEM Research through Mindfulness Training
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Pamela Norris, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Louise R. Howe
* 08/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Non-Technical Description: A multidisciplinary collaborative team from the
University of Wisconsin (UW)-Madison and the University of Virginia (UVa) is
pursuing a renewal project to further investigate, refine, and evaluate inter-
institutional implementation of a new learning framework recently piloted at UW-
Madison for engineering graduate students. The framework is based on mindfulness
training, i.e. instruction in meditation and other contemplative practices. The
underlying hypothesis is two-fold: 1) mindfulness training will cultivate
creativity, innovation, intellectual risk-taking, altruism, and overall well-
being, and 2) these characteristics will enhance trainees' ability to conceive
of and pursue novel research ideas that address societal challenges.
Importantly, because engineering and computer science graduate students
frequently transition to research careers in academia, industry and national
laboratories where they will become the next generation of innovators in their
field, enhancing their creative capacity will benefit society through the
innovations they produce both in the short term and over the course of their
careers. Mindfulness training also has the potential to benefit the
participants' overall health and emotional well-being.

Technical Description: The College of Engineering and the Center for Healthy
Minds at the University of Wisconsin (UW)-Madison are partnering with the School
of Engineering and Applied Science and the Contemplative Sciences Center at the
University of Virginia (UVa) to pursue an expansion of a recently conducted,
NSF-funded, pilot study of a new mindfulness-training learning framework for
engineering graduate students. The framework is intended to cultivate
creativity, innovation, intellectual risk-taking, and altruism -- all of which
are at the heart of conceiving and conducting transformative engineering
research that focuses on societal grand challenges. The rationale for
introducing graduate students to contemplative practices is two-fold. First,
recent studies suggest that mindfulness meditation improves insight problem
solving, reduces cognitive rigidity, and positively impacts creativity outcomes,
as well as increasing empathy and compassion. These links are further supported
by underlying theories about the neuroscientific mechanisms of mindfulness.
Additionally, mindfulness meditation has been shown to have numerous health
benefits, both emotional and physical, including reduced stress, and thus has
the potential to holistically increase one's capacity for creativity and
societally-focused innovation. The specific objective of this renewal project is
to refine the "Cultivating Transformative Research Through Mindfulness" training
program based on data from the pilot study, investigate its impact with a larger
cohort of graduate students at UW-Madison, and assess transferability of the
learning framework to UVa. The project is expected to yield extensive evidence
of the efficacy of mindfulness training as an inherently scalable and adaptable
learning framework for training engineering and computer science graduate
students, enhancing their ability and interest to conduct innovative societally-
focused transformative research.