* 1745353
* EAGER: SSDIM: Data Simulation to Support Interdependence Modeling in Emergency Response and Multimodal Transportation Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Heather Nachtmann, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 08/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

Access to data on the design and operation of interdependent critical
infrastructures (ICIs) is now recognized as essential for developing new data
analytic, design and decision-support tools. This EArly-concept Grant for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will create and make available synthetic
and simulated data on ICIs by developing new data creation techniques and model-
based approaches to simulating data on ICIs and human cognition and/or behavior
with ICIs. It will provide research communities in broad areas, such as
multimodal transportation, emergency services, wildfire and infectious disease,
with tools for modeling complex ICIs involving human activities and decisions.
Seminars on these tools will be offered to state and local transportation
officials to assist these stakeholders in designing, analyzing and improving
multimodal transportation systems against disruptions and failures. The new
knowledge will be broadly disseminated through journals and conferences in the
areas of infrastructure risk management, applied statistics, reliability
engineering, and spatiotemporal computation. Moreover, the PIs with track
records will promote interdisciplinary education, recruit underrepresented
students for maintaining workforce diversity, and expose K-12 teachers and
students to cutting-edge research experiences.

This project investigates a methodology for topology and data generation for
ICIs. The research will (1) create a two-layer framework that integrates
heterogeneous data to model the complex topology of ICIs and vice versa; (2)
simulate data for targeted ICIs and make the data publicly available for
evaluating and improving the preparedness for emergency events; and (3)
demonstrate the feasibility of using the framework and data to determine the
viable options of emergency services for resilience improvement of ICIs. To
ensure that the proposed two-layer framework is well rooted in engineering
practice, the project will focus on three ICIs identified by the Department of
Homeland Security, including inland waterways (ports, dams and locks along major
waterways), ground transportation systems that are connected or close to the
inland waterways, and emergency services.