* 1745080
* Collaborative Research: The Antarctic Scallop as Key to Paleoenvironments and Sea lce Conditions: Understanding the Modern to Predict the Past
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* David Gillikin, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 37,144.00

The goal of this project is to discover whether the Antarctic scallop,
Adamussium colbecki, provides a guide to sea-ice conditions in nearshore
Antarctica today and in the past. Scallops may grow slower and live longer in
habitats where sea ice persists for many years, limited by food, compared to
habitats where sea ice melts out annually. Also, the chemicals retained in the
shell during growth may provide crucial habitat information related to not only
changing sea-ice conditions but also the type of food, whether it is recycled
from the seafloor or produced by algae blooming when sea ice has melted.
Unlocking the ecological imprint captured within the shell of the Antarctic
Scallop will increase our understanding of changing sea-ice conditions in
Antarctica. Further, because the Antarctic scallop had relatives living at the
time when the Antarctic ice sheet first appeared, the scallop shell record may
contain information on the stability of the ice sheet and the history of
Antarctic shallow seas. Funding will also be integral for training a new
generation of geoscientists in fossil and chemical forensics related to shallow
sea habitats in Antarctica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scallops are worldwide in
distribution, are integral for structuring marine communities have an extensive
fossil record dating to the late Devonian, and are increasingly recognized as
important paleoenvironmental proxies because they are generally well preserved
in the sediment and rock record. The primary goal of this project is to assess
the differences in growth, lifespan, and chemistry (stable isotopes, trace
elements) archived in the shell of the Antarctic scallop that may be indicative
of two ice states: persistent (multiannual) sea ice at Explorers Cove (EC) and
annual sea ice (that melts out every year) at Bay of Sails (BOS), western
McMurdo Sound, Antarctica. This project will investigate growth and lifespan
proxies (physical and geochemical) and will use high-resolution records of
stable oxygen isotopes to determine if a melt-water signal is archived in A.
colbecki shells and whether that signal captures the differing ice behavior at
two sites (EC versus BOS). Stable isotopes of carbon and nitrogen in association
with trace elements will be used to examine subannual productivity spikes
indicative of phytoplankton blooms, which are predicted to be more pronounced
during open ocean conditions. Small growth increments in the outer calcite layer
will be assessed to determine if they represent fortnightly growth, if so, they
could provide a high-resolution proxy for monthly environmental processes.
Unlocking the environmental archive preserved in A. colbecki shells may prove to
be an important proxy for understanding changing sea-ice conditions in
Antarctica's past. Funding will support a Ph.D. student and undergraduates from
multiple institutions working on independent research projects. Web content
focused on Antarctic marine communities will be designed for museum outreach,
reaching thousands of middle-school children each
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.