* 1745769
* I-Corps: Infrared Lidar System
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Mark Arend, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 06/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to reduce or
eliminate damage/loss of property and protect public health and safety by
introducing infrared and eye-safe laser radar (lidar) technology for high
sensitivity remote plume characterization. The technology has the potential to
meet a diverse range of customer sectors for such applications including: early
detection of wildfires; tracking pesticides drift in agricultural settings;
tracking dispersion and transport of air toxins and pollutants in civilian and
military settings; and detecting emissions and leaks in industrial settings.
Lidar has already successfully penetrated a range of markets including range
finders, speed monitors, 3D imaging and surveying systems, cloud ceiling height
measurement at airports and weather centers, and most recently for remote wind
measurements in wind energy applications. Successful introduction of laser radar
systems to new markets can have significant economic, safety and health
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project capitalizes on compact eye-
safe infrared lidar technology developed for remote characterization of
atmospheric aerosols or target trace gases with high sensitivity. The systems
utilize robust infrared laser transmitters such as semiconductor lasers, fiber
lasers, or quantum cascade lasers, operating at eye-safe levels, and yet
achieving high detection sensitivities. Because these sources are invisible to
the human eye, they do not interfere with operators of machinery or aircraft and
can be broadly deployed. The systems are built on a rigid carbon fiber platform
to add to their robustness in a broad range of ambient temperatures. The lasers
operate in the pulsed mode with pulse duration in the nanosecond range and at
high pulse repetition rates to tens of kilohertz. The lidar receiver section
employs state-of-the-art infrared detectors together with hardware and software
signal processing to achieve required performance levels.