* 1745263
* Western Regional Noyce Alliance
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2024
* Kimberly Seashore, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 03/31/2024
* USD 3,299,995.00

A national shortage of STEM teachers is still a reality. According to 2016
report from the Center for Public Education, "Fixing the Holes in the Teacher
Pipeline: An Overview of Teacher Shortages," STEM teaching vacancies remain the
hardest to fill nationwide. Schools with a high percentage of minority or low-
income students find it much more difficult to hire and retain STEM teachers
(Center for Public Education, 2016). The overarching goal of the NSF Robert
Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program is to increase the quality, diversity, and
number of the nation's STEM teachers who are well prepared to engage students in
high-need school districts. Another critical need is continued engagement of
outstanding Noyce teachers to support them in persisting in the teaching
profession. To continue to meet this goal, the Western Regional Noyce Alliance
(WRNA) proposes to provide Noyce participants in twelve western states with four
tiers of professional growth opportunities. These opportunities include three
annual regional conferences, eighteen regional networking workshops, six
mathematical and summer institutes, and research experiences for Noyce Scholars
and Fellows. The states in the western region are California, Washington,
Oregon, Nevada, Idaho, Arizona, New Mexico, Colorado, Utah, Texas, Wyoming, and
Montana. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project intends to support nine institutions
to provide the coordinated professional development over three years. These
institutions are San Francisco State University (as the lead), California
Polytechnic State University, California State University-Fresno, Northern
Arizona University, San Diego State University, the University of Arizona, the
University of Portland, the University of Texas at Arlington, the University of
Wyoming. Over the three-year project, WRNA conferences are expected to serve
about 950 Noyce participants. In addition, the project intends to reach 150
Noyce teachers through summer institutes and 1,200 participants through regional
networking workshops, and to engage nine additional Noyce participants in
immersive summer research. The WRNA is expected to help increase the number of
future STEM leaders in the region's high-need school districts who are well-
prepared to effectively implement the Next Generation Science Standards and/or
the Common Core State Standards in Mathematics, as more Western Region states
fully adopt or include similar standards in their STEM curricula. Noyce leaders
will have more opportunities to gain a better understanding of Noyce evaluation
and research efforts both nationally and locally. Noyce projects that have had
years of success will mentor and support newer projects. This effort may help
sustain Noyce influence at each of the western region campuses over time and
beyond the lifetime of the award. Supporting the continued growth of Noyce
teachers as outstanding STEM professionals is expected to assist in their
persistence as classroom teachers and instructional leaders. The indirect impact
of WRNA is expected to be that hundreds of thousands of students in high-need
school districts will receive a high-quality STEM education from teachers who
are well-trained in new and exciting directions in STEM education. Moreover, the
findings from the robust project evaluation conducted by the American Institute
of Research (AIR), along with an individual educational researcher, has the
potential to assist other STEM educators to provide effective professional
growth opportunities, in support of retaining outstanding teachers in the
teaching profession, particularly in those serving in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.