* 1745309
* Collaborative Research: Forging Collaboration and Encouraging Research on the Arctic Economy
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Michael Goldstein, Babson College
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 07/31/2018
* USD 11,785.00

Unprecedented ice melt in the Arctic Ocean is opening a "new ocean," creating
the potential for new and expanded economic opportunities. To date, there has
been little research on developing Arctic economies and the potential effects on
the social, cultural, and ecological system of the Arctic. This award would
support a workshop of environmental, natural resource, international, finance,
and subsistence economists to discuss changing Arctic economies and how economic
research can contribute to our understanding of these changes. The research
agenda shaped during this workshop has relevance in other regions; while there
are many unique issues in the Arctic, the challenges of balancing economic uses
and environmental health are similar to those being addressed in coastal regions
around the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a small
exploratory workshop to define an agenda for economic research related to the
Arctic. The project will a) define key research issues and appropriate
methodologies, b) identify gaps in existing data systems that need to be filled
for research and policy purposes, and c) form the nucleus of a network of
experts that will improve the opportunities for scholars to collaborate and
encourage more professional journal articles and conference presentations. Over
two days of discussions, 10-12 experts will address a set of questions that will
be sent to attendees in advance of the workshop, and respond to a commissioned
paper intended to stimulate the discussions from different fields of economic
research. These fields include regional, environmental, natural resource,
international, finance, and subsistence economics. The workshop will also
include representatives from the practitioner community with knowledge of the
important policy-relevant questions that would benefit from economic research;
potential funders of economic research; and an Arctic ecologist to assist with
making the linkages between the environment and economics. The event will be
held in Monterey, California, and hosted by the Center for the Blue Economy.