* 1745267
* EAGER: The evolution of cranial spines in sculpin fishes (superfamily Cottoidea)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Brian Sidlauskas, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 08/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

Many vertebrate groups have protected their skulls, with the horns and antlers
of mammals having attracted the most attention from evolutionary biologists.
This project promotes the progress of science by expanding research on animal
weaponry into an unexplored group of fishes called sculpins. Sculpins have large
and variable head spines. It is assumed that they use them to fight and compete
for mates or to defend themselves from being eaten by predators. The latter has
been assumed, but never tested. This project will be first study of its kind in
an aquatic system, and it will help determine whether the evolution of spines
follows the same rules and patterns discovered in terrestrial systems. The
project will benefit society by offering numerous educational experiences,
including research opportunities to graduate and undergraduate students, a new
version of a previously successful training workshop, and a travelling class
that uses 3D visualization of animal weapons to excite precollege students about
biology. It will also open access to scientific data by making 3D
reconstructions of the skeleton of nearly 1000 CT scanned fish specimens
publicly and freely available. Because of its novel combination of disciplines
and methods, the project has the potential to pioneer a scientific approach that
may become a new community standard. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team of experts in
ichthyology, comparative phylogenetic analysis, macroevolution, biomechanics and
3D morphometrics will unite these disciplines to discover why the heads of
sculpins bear impressively variable preopercular spines. Have these fishes
evolved their weapons to escalate and enhance male-male competition? Or, do the
spines defend their bearers from engulfment by gape-limited predators? To answer
that question the project will link microCT scans of more than 150 species,
synthetic phylogenies, and databases of functional trait diversity to
reconstruct the history of spine evolution in these fishes. Further, it will
shed light on the generality of rules governing the evolution of cranial
appendages in these fishes follows those discovered in terrestrial systems.