* 1745845
* SBIR Phase I:  Integrated  Additive Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Shomeek Mukhopadhyay, Obsidian Advanced Manufacturing LLC
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 03/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will develop a new approach for Additive Manufacturing
(AM) of objects made from ceramics, metals, and polymers. Developed a generation
ago, AM had the potential to transform the design and manufacture of products.
However, legacy AM approaches have failed primarily because of the high cost of
inputs, and because output lacks precision, quality and durability. Our proposed
approach has broad industry potential. The broader societal impact is to change
the entire competitive stance of US manufacturing by revolutionizing industrial
design and enhancing local manufacturing. This project has the potential to
advance science and the prosperity of US manufacturing industries. Its
commercial impact may span industries from product design to aerospace, space,
defense, and human health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will
demonstrate the integrated production of objects made from ceramics, metals, and
polymers additively at room temperature from stock inputs such as rods and
discs. Over 95% of metallic AM output today uses metallic powders as inputs.
These inputs are costly, explosive, and harmful to human health if ingested.
Furthermore, current AM output suffers from imprecision, poor quality,
inconsistency, and lack of durability. Additionally, legacy Metallic AM
platforms are large, expensive, operate at high temperatures, and are isolated
from the engineers who rely on them. The key objectives of this project are (1)
to demonstrate the feasibility of a room-temperature fabrication approach and
(2) to achieve several crucial milestones involving the precision of location,
thickness, strength, uniformity and reliability of AM output.