* 1745338
* I-Corps:  Stem cell-derived scaffolds for spinal fusion and maxillofacial bone repair
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Roland Kaunas, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 12/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project addresses the
treatment of musculoskeletal disease and injury, which are among the most common
reasons patients seek medical treatment. These procedures arise from treatment
of traumatic injury, congenital defects, tumor resection, and joint
replacements. Bone fractures comprise a majority of these disorders with 6.2
million fractures. However, it is estimated that up to 10 percent of these bone
defects are associated with improper healing. Without the aid of a bone graft
material, these defects result in low structural integrity and potentially
result in amputation. The gold standard of treatment relies on using bone from
the patient as a graft. The technology under developed by this project,
extracellular matrix derived from osteogenic stem cells, offers a bone graft
material with equivalent healing properties to a patient's bone graft without
the potential chronic pain and risk of infection associated with the harvesting
a bone graft. From a scientific perspective, this project represents a
disruptive change to all cell-derived matrix technologies, and as a result has
the potential to drive innovative tissue engineering-based solutions to
regenerate other tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project aims to
generate an osteogenic bone graft material derived from cultured mesenchymal
stem cells (hMSCs). The technology coaxes hMSCs to differentiate into an
intermediate osteogenic phenotype that can be used generate extracellular matrix
that mimics the primitive stroma deposited during embryological bone development
and during bone repair in adults. When purified from the cells, this material
exhibits remarkable biocompatibility and significantly increases retention of
engrafted hMSCs, with far greater binding capacity than commonly employed bone
substitutes. Importantly, these properties accelerate bone repair and spinal
fusion in animal models. Methods have been developed to produce and harvest this
matrix from hMSCs derived from induced pluripotent stem cells that can be
theoretically expanded indefinitely, hence it is possible to now produce large
amounts of osteogenic matrix with reliable properties. Further, these cells are
actually able to produce matrix in much higher quantities than that produced by
bone marrow-derived hMSCs. This is a platform technology to harvest and combine
this matrix with surgical collagen sponge or other suitable scaffolds as a
replacement for currently used allogenic scaffolds.