* 1745130
* Thermal Sensitivity of Antarctic Embryos and Larvae:  Effects of Temperature on Metabolism, Developmental Rate, and the Metabolic Cost of Development
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Amy Moran, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 06/30/2024
* USD 458,971.00

Cold-blooded animals in the Antarctic ocean have survived in near-constant,
extreme cold conditions for millions of years and are very sensitive to even
small changes in water temperature. However, the consequences of this extreme
thermal sensitivity for the energetics, development, and survival of developing
embryos is not well understood. This award will investigate the effect of
temperature on the metabolism, growth rate, developmental rate, and
developmental energetics of embryos and larvae of Antarctic marine ectotherms.
The project will also measure annual variation in temperature and oxygen at
different sites in McMurdo Sound, and compare embryonic and larval metabolism in
winter and summer to determine the extent to which these life stages can
acclimate to seasonal shifts. This research will provide insight into the
ability of polar marine animals and ecosystems to withstand warming polar ocean
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Antarctic marine ectotherms exhibit universally
slow growth, low metabolic rates, and extended development, yet many of their
rate processes related to physiology and metabolism are highly thermally
sensitive. This suggests that small changes in temperature may result in
dramatic changes to energy metabolism, growth, and the rate and duration of
development. This project will measure the effects of temperature on metabolism,
developmental rate, and the energetic cost of development of four common and
ecologically important species of benthic Antarctic marine invertebrates. These
effects will be measured over the functional ranges of the organisms and in the
context of environmentally relevant seasonal shifts in temperature around
McMurdo Sound. Recent data show that seasonal warming of ~1 deg C near McMurdo
Station is accompanied by long-lasting hyperoxic events that impact the benthos
in the nearshore boundary layer. This research will provide a more comprehensive
understanding of both annual variation in environmental oxygen and temperature
across the Sound, and whether this variation drives changes in developmental
rate and energetics that are consistent with physiological acclimatization.
These data will provide key information about potential impacts of warming
Antarctic ectotherms. In addition, this project will support undergraduate and
graduate research and partner with large-enrollment undergraduate courses and
REU programs at an ANNH and AANAPISI Title III minority-serving
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.