* 1745743
* Collaborative Research: A multiple-technique approach for deconvolving tropical cyclone effects on Late Quaternary geomorphic change in arid southwestern North America
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Eric McDonald, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 02/28/2022
* USD 150,320.00

The Eastern Pacific Ocean in the Northern Hemisphere is one of the most prolific
regions on Earth in terms of generation of intense tropical cyclones that make
landfall on the coasts of arid southwestern North America and dramatically
enhance runoff, flooding, and associated erosion and sedimentation. Recent
research indicates that these large-scale events have altered the hydrological
and ecosystem balances over historical and geological timescales (decades to
thousands of years). This project will assess how far north along the coast of
southwestern North America these storms have occurred in the geologic past, and
how far inland they controlled geomorphic change events through rain and
erosion. The specific goal is to determine if previously documented periods when
tropical cyclones dominated runoff and sediment deposition across large alluvial
fan systems of the southern Baja California peninsula can be detected in central
Baja California, the southern California deserts, and even as far north as the
southern Arizona Sonoran Desert. Data will test whether dissipating cyclones
were drivers of alluvial fan sedimentation over thousands of years, and if a
temporal correlation can be established to a period of transition between a
milder, humid paleoclimate to the current arid climate. For the first time, a
tropical cyclone landfall chronology covering the last few millennia will be
developed for the Pacific coast of southwestern North America. This research has
the potential to inform large-storm prediction scenarios for southern California
and northwestern Mexico, which is relevant to hazards management for communities
in need of risk assessment of rare and extreme events. The project will
contribute to the training of the next generation of earth scientists using a
tiered approach, with field-based collaboration of postdoctoral fellows,
graduate and undergraduate students. This approach has been proven successful
for inclusion of underrepresented minorities, enhanced also with planned
research alongside Mexican collaborators and students. The project will provide
unique broader educational experiences for grade-school students in Indiana and
Arizona, through the use of technology to connect fieldwork and
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will compare a recently
established alluvial fan chronology in southern Baja California, with newly-
obtained alluvial fan and paleotempestological records. A Holocene
paleotempestological record of overwash deposits in the Pacific coastal Vizcaino
Desert will be developed for the first time. The inferred tropical storm
activity will be compared with inland alluvial fan deposition in this area and
in the northern Sonoran Desert, enabling discrimination of signals from
different moisture sources, based on observed coastal and alluvial
sedimentology, stratigraphy, and specific proxy records. Effects of different
sources of moisture that drive sedimentation will be assessed by probing
different time periods, and compared to independent paleoclimatic proxies.
Bayesian analysis of luminescence, cosmogenic, and radiocarbon geochronology
will improve age control precision. The coupled alluvial and coastal record at
orbital timescales will help to understand linkages between Quaternary alluvial
sedimentation and hydroclimatic variability in the region, and will increase our
understanding of basic principles of alluvial fan aggradation in response to
change in arid hydroclimates. The project will test effects of millennial- and
orbital-scale shifts in tropical circulation on landscape evolution of the
region, which are, in turn, critical to test models of occurrence and effects of
hydrological extremes and associated landscape changing
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.