* 1745535
* Student Travel Support for 2017 Workshop for Women and Underrepresented Minorities in NLP
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Marine Carpuat, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 06/30/2018
* USD 20,000.00

The Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) is the primary international
organization for computational linguistics and natural language processing. It
also is one of the primary application areas for researchers in machine learning
and artificial intelligence. The proceedings of its annual meeting provide the
foundation of the field; it is the most cited and most respected publication in
computational linguistics. Yet demographic representation within the authors and
leaders in the ACL community is notably lop-sided. This project is to subsidize
travel to the workshop for women and underrepresented minorities in NLP (WiNLP),
which will be a part of the 2017 meeting of the ACL held in Vancouver, Canada on
July 30, 2017. The workshop aims to highlight and foster the work by researchers
of diverse backgrounds within the ACL community. This contributes to America's
pool of researchers with the variety of backgrounds, experiences, interests and
areas of expertise required for science and engineering to be successful and
benefit broad segments of society.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The WiNLP workshop
provides a venue for women and underrepresented minorities to present their
work, and to get feedback and advice from mentors who are senior researchers in
the field. The workshop solicits submissions in the form of a 2-page extended
abstract focusing on all areas of NLP. Accepted abstracts are presented either
as a poster of a talk. The workshop will also include a mentoring sessions and
invited talks by established researchers in the field. This enables women and
underrepresented minorities to get feedback from the broad ACL community, to
participate in that community, and for that community to become more aware of
their work.