* 1745439
* Gordon Research Conference on Multifunctional Materials and Structures: Bridging the Gap between Biological and Synthetic Systems; Ventura, California; 14-19 January 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/15/2017,03/31/2018
* Nancy Sottos, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 03/31/2018
* USD 29,998.00

This award will provide financial support to the 2018 Gordon Research Conference
on Multifunctional Materials and Structures: Bridging the Gap between Biological
and Synthetic Systems to be held in Ventura, California, 14-19 January 2018.
This conference seeks to address fundamental scientific issues associated with
translating and scaling model biological functions to synthetic materials and
structures. The potential societal benefits and impact of multifunctionality
are: materials sustainability and energy resource management through lifetime
extensions of engineered components, safer systems through adaptive and self-
aware systems, and improved energy efficiency through mass and/or volume
reductions, energy recapture, and ambient harvesting. The conference will seek a
broad balance in the speakers, discussion leaders, and attendees including young
and established scientists and engineers, U.S. and international representation
from academic, industry, and government institutions/groups, and gender and
racial diversity. Funding through this award would increase the number of junior
faculty and researchers participants to prepare the next generation of
scientific leaders in this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will address
key scientific issues associated with translating and scaling the science of
multifunctionality in biological/natural systems for creating synthetic
materials and structures with unique multifunctional capabilities and new levels
of performance. The conference is being organized by leading researchers in this
emerging field with deep ties to the worldwide community of scientists and
engineers engaged in multifunctional research. The conference outcomes are
expected to have broad impacts on future research and applications in self-
sustaining systems that can mitigate and heal structural damage, energy
harvesting devices and adaptive structures.