* 1745496
* EAGER: Individual variation in mast seeding patterns
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Jalene LaMontagne, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 08/31/2022
* USD 216,924.00

A common reproduction strategy of perennial plants is called "mast seeding", the
intermittent and synchronous production of abundant seed crops across years by a
population. The rare and high reproduction "mast" years have cascading effects
on food webs within ecosystems, as seeds are a food source for a variety of
bird, mammal, and insect species. Evolutionarily, it is thought that this
pattern of producing low numbers of seeds for several years, followed by a mast
year is a way to keep seed predator populations low, in order to have higher
chances for seeds to establish. Another hypothesis is that individuals
reproducing at the same time will have higher pollination efficiency, which will
lead to more seeds being produced. The critical components of mast seeding are
years with high reproduction followed by years with low seeding, and all
individuals in the same region doing the same thing. Although studies of
individuals in masting populations are rare, some have shown considerable
variation in reproductive patterns within a population. Some individuals do not
mast at the same time as the rest of the population. This project will build on
a unique individual-based dataset of hundreds of white spruce trees to
investigate patterns of reproduction by individual plants, and to test the
consequences for individuals that have different patterns of reproduction from
others in their population. Understanding fluctuations in plant reproductive
investment is a key challenge in ecology, conservation, and management. White
spruce is an economically valuable species, and this project may have
consequences for its management. Additionally, both undergraduate and graduate
students will be trained in science and communication.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Individual variation has impacts on population and
community stability, and individual variation in mast seeding has relevance to
forest regeneration and higher ecological levels of organization. Field data
will be collected on annual cone production from ~900 trees, extending an
existing dataset to eight years. Cones from a subset of trees will be assessed
for cone size, seed number, and germination success to test fitness consequences
of reproductive patterns relative to when high reproduction occurs locally.
Resource allocation and mast seeding will also be examined in the context of
surviving an insect attack. Growth and reproduction of individual trees leading
up to an insect outbreak will be measured, to test if individuals that allocated
energy differently from the population have a higher likelihood of survival.
This project will provide empirical data, new insights, and a novel approach
into understanding the magnitude of individual variation and its consequences in
a mast seeding system.