* 1745207
* EAGER: SSDIM: Ensembles of Interdependent Critical Infrastructure Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,04/30/2019
* Madhav Marathe, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 04/30/2019
* USD 200,000.00

The need to represent and analyze socially coupled interdependent infrastructure
networks poses significant scientific and technical challenges. A central
challenge is the lack of realistic data sets that represent the networks, their
interactions, and the points of connection with consumers. This EArly-concept
Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will develop ensembles of such
coupled systems, along with methods to assess concerns of data quality and
validity. Ensembles of coupled power and communication networks will provide
realistic data for algorithm development. The tools and techniques developed
under the project will also be disseminated to the broader community of analysts
and researchers interested in the science and engineering of complex networks.
The work will result in unique open-access realistic data sets for the academic
and other interested communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop mathematical techniques and associated algorithms for generating
ensembles of infrastructure networks and social interactions. It will also yield
methods for the validation and verification of these interdependent synthetic
populations and network ensembles. A key focus will be on large, realistic power
and communication networks. This work will lead to highly scalable, data-driven,
dynamic methods for sensitivity analysis, uncertainty quantification, and
verification and validation. The research will provide data to support new ways
of characterizing and assessing vulnerabilities inherent in today's societal
infrastructures. The ensemble of realistic networks will facilitate the study of
vulnerabilities resulting from interdependencies among infrastructures as well
as from vulnerabilities and risks that result from interaction of individuals
with the infrastructure as well with each other.