* 1745243
* Lake-effect Snow: Understanding Predictability and Dynamics through Ensemble-Based Convective-Permitting Data Assimilation, Modeling, and Sensitivity Analysis
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2023
* George Young, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 12/31/2023
* USD 493,141.00

Lake-effect snow (LES), the result of a cold air mass being advected over
relatively warm water, is responsible for some of the heaviest snowfall
accumulations in the eastern half of the United States. These storms can
generate intense snowfall rates of several inches (5-10 cm) per hour, leading to
accumulations of more than a meter of snow in the course of a day, and can be
accompanied by near zero visibility, strong winds, bitter cold, and even
thunders. This project will investigate lake-effect precipitation over the Great
Lakes region of the Northeastern U.S.: a multi-scale phenomena combining strong
synoptic and mesoscale forcing with fine convective-scale structures that
present a prediction challenge. This research will contribute to the graduate
theses and dissertations of multiple students, as well as provide material for
classroom exercises on numerical weather prediction and effective use of
ensemble data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF-sponsored Ontario Winter Lake-
effect Systems (OWLeS) field campaign provides an excellent test environment for
the evaluation of data assimilation techniques due to the rich observation
dataset, including sounding systems, ground measurements, aircraft sensors, and
mobile radars, as well as the rich, diverse scientific interests of a large
group of collaborators investigating fundamental science. This project will
implement and compare the most advanced four-dimensional ensemble and hybrid
data assimilation systems, and evaluate their relative strengths and weaknesses
for analysis and prediction of lake-effect snow. Radar products for winter
weather will be assimilated, and their impact on timescales of predictability
determined. Results will quantify the impacts of each observing system on
forecast quality, establish the intrinsic and practical predictability of lake-
effect snow, and assess the contributions of the lake surface boundary, model
errors, and synoptic and mesoscale initial conditions and their underlying
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An additional broader impact is the development
and evaluation of the best data assimilation techniques. This has the potential
to provide guidance to operations as the nation moves toward a national
convective scale ensemble. The next-generation regional operational prediction
systems will require kilometer-scale convective-permitting model resolution and
rapid updates ingesting all available observations using the most effective
four-dimensional ensemble and/or hybrid data assimilation techniques. Improved
forecast lead time and accuracy for lake-effect events will have positive
societal impacts on residents of lake-effect prone regions. Reanalysis fields
produced by this research are a vital component to the analyses of collaborators
investigating the structure and evolution of lake-effect snow bands and the role
of upstream lake-atmosphere interactions.