* 1745547
* EAGER:   Collaborative Research:   Spatially Continuous Modeling of Power System Oscillations with Renewable Energy Penetration
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Anuradha Annaswamy, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2019
* USD 125,000.00

This project will contribute to modeling and analysis of electric power grid
dynamics, developing a methodology that is expected to provide insights into
power system dynamics. There is a need for new and powerful analytical tools for
predicting the nature of oscillations and dynamics in the power grid. This is
especially true given the increasing presence of renewable energy resources
(such as wind and solar-based power generating units) whose energy output varies
unpredictably. Traditional modeling of power system dynamics is based on
discrete component models, but with the rise of renewable energy sources, it has
been observed that for large networks, more accurate continuous component models
provide better prediction of system oscillations. For example, it becomes useful
in these circumstances to use continuous transmission line models, rather than
simple buk circuit representations. These continuous models involve partial
differential equations (PDEs) instead of the ordinary differential equations
(ODEs) that are traditionally used in power grid models. Unfortunately,
currently there is little theoretical insight on how these PDE models can be
defined over network topologies other than in the case of strings, or how the
oscillations arising from the wave equations of these PDE models can be
controlled by boundary power system stabilizers (PSS) or flexible AC
transmission systems (FACTS), or how these models might change with more wind
and solar generation coming in at different points in the system. Therefore, in
this project a PDE-based approach for modeling the power grid is proposed, and
forms the focus of this proposal. The proposal aims to develop a solid
theoretical foundation, which addresses mathematically challenging questions on
power system dynamics, stability and control that can be viewed from a
completely new and fresh perspective of spatially continuous modeling and model-
based control.

The problem of swing dynamics becomes even more important as renewable
penetration increases. For example, the US grid is going through a tremendous
amount of transmission expansion to connect renewable generation sites more
closely to remote load centers. Thus, electrical quantities at buses that were
weakly connected before are now becoming much more strongly coupled.The thesis
in this project, in contrast, is that when the number of generators is
relatively large the fundamental mechanism that produces the phase and frequency
oscillations is a continuous one. As a result, accurate and physically oriented
methods for mitigating and suppressing these oscillations are better realized
through the use of partial differential equations (PDEs). The goals of the
project consist of developing a PDE-based approach for modeling the power grid,
and more importantly a PDE control methodology that is model-based. These goals
have not been explored in much depth in the literature. The few PDE-based
modeling methods reported in the literature date back thirty years. No PDE-based
control methods have been proposed in the past for the power grid. As such, this
project represents a potentially transformative research idea that can be viewed
as high-risk, high-payoff. The project goals, when successful, can therefore
transform the way in which wide area oscillations are controlled.