* 1745992
* SBIR Phase I:  Highly Selective and Rapid Separation of RNA to Reduce Medical Diagnostic Costs
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,09/30/2018
* Kevin Hagedorn, Life Magnetics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to develop technology that will substantially reduce
the cost and complexity of ribonucleic acid (RNA)-based medical testing.
Isolation of RNA from biological samples is the first and often the most
difficult step in RNA diagnostic testing. All living things from bacteria to
humans are threatened by viral infection and have strong natural defenses; these
protein defenses are beneficial to humans but interfere with RNA testing. DNA
contamination also interferes with RNA testing. As a result, there is a $2.3B
market for reagents to clean-up protein and DNA contamination in RNA samples.
The proposed product selectively isolates RNA from samples with near perfect
selectivity, eliminating the need for these expensive RNA clean-up reagents.
Simplification of the RNA isolation step has the broader impact of allowing for
smaller and easier to operate devices that can be deployed to local clinics,
allowing for easier and faster testing in point-of-care and rural
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a
new carbon-based coating for magnetic beads that selectively isolates RNA from
samples with better yield than current products and without DNA or protein
contamination. The company has developed a preliminary technology that performs
better than competing products when used to isolate RNA from cultured cells.
During this Phase I project, the material properties and usage protocols will be
optimized to maximize performance in real-world applications, such as isolation
of RNA from blood. The material properties as they relate to performance in this
application will be studied using x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and
optimized to maximize selectivity for RNA over contaminating molecules such as
DNA and proteins. RNA will be isolated from diverse biological substances such
as soft tissue, blood, and cell cultures, and each step in the process will be
optimized to maximize yield and RNA integrity (RIN) while maintaining perfect
purity as determined by northern blot, fluorescence spectroscopy, and qRT-PCR.
The company also will begin to explore a manufacturing system for commercial
production of the material.