* 1745124
* Ross Ice Shelf Geothermal Flux (RISGF) - Direct Borehole Measurements as Part of the New Zealand Ross Ice Shelf Programme
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Slawek Tulaczyk, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 06/30/2022
* USD 92,223.00

The geothermal flux is a significant source of heat in polar subglacial
environments. It affects the temperature at the base of ice sheets, influencing
the distribution and rate of basal melting or freezing. These processes affect
ice-sheet mass balance because basal melting facilitates fast sliding of ice.
The geothermal flux is used in ice-sheet models that predict the contribution of
the West Antarctic Ice Sheet to global sea-level rise. Yet, despite the
importance of the geothermal flux, there are relatively few direct measurements,
mainly because it is so difficult to access sub-ice environments. This project
aims to obtain new constraints on the magnitude and spatial distribution of
geothermal flux beneath the Ross Ice Shelf through collaboration with a New
Zealand research project that is planning to drill through the ice shelf.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the paucity of observations, the geothermal flux
distribution used in ice-sheet models typically falls within a relatively narrow
range and is represented at low spatial resolution, based on geological or
remotely-sensed properties of the underlying lithosphere. However, these models
of Antarctic geothermal flux distribution do not appear to be consistent with
each other in both magnitude and distribution, suggesting that spatial patterns
of geothermal flux below the West Antarctic Ice Sheet are underconstrained.
Using data collecting from a down-borehole geothermal probe, the team will test
the hypothesis that the central part of the West Antarctic rift system is
characterized by lower geothermal flux values than the previously sampled
southern rift shoulder.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.