* 1745363
* RAPID:   A regional plan to rescue the orphaned University of Louisiana Monroe Fish Collection
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Henry Bart, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 227,997.00

An award is made to Tulane University for moving the University of Louisiana-
Monroe (ULM) herbarium to BRIT. In March 2017, the University of Louisiana
Monroe (ULM) announced that it could no longer keep its ichthyological (fish)
and herpetological (amphibian and reptile) research collections, because the
space the collections were being temporarily stored in was scheduled to be
renovated for another purpose starting in early August 2017. The ULM fish
collection, comprising roughly 85,000 lots (jars) representing over one million
fish specimens, ranks among the largest fish collections in North America. This
project will support the transfer of ownership of the entire ULM fish collection
to the Tulane University Biodiversity Research Institute (TUBRI); parts of the
collection will be transferred to other interested institutions in Louisiana,
Arkansas, Mississippi, and Texas. A commercial transportation company will pack
and move the entire ULM fish collection to TUBRI. The ULM specimens document the
natural heritage of Louisiana and surrounding regions and can provide valuable
insight into understanding critical environmental issues affecting the region
and the nation, including documenting invasive species, changes affecting water
resources, wetlands loss, and ocean acidification.

Roughly 13% of the jars of specimens in the ULM fish collection were donated to
ULM by Louisiana Tech University in 1999, but were never cataloged in the ULM
fish collection database. Data for these lots will be entered into the ULM
database, specimen counts will be added to the database for jars missing this
information, and curatorial needs of jars (added alcohol, replacement lids) will
be met. Once all this work is completed, curators of fish collections at
Louisiana State University, Southeastern Louisiana University, Arkansas State
University, the Mississippi Museum of Natural Science and University of Texas,
Austin, will be sent data for specimens from their states and other geographic
areas, and the curators will be asked to approve material destined to be sent to
them. The material will be re-boxed and packed by the project technician for
transportation to each of these receiving collections. Any remaining material
will be retained in the fish collection at TUBRI.