* 1745132
* African American Female Engineering Faculty in the Academy: What Does it Take To Succeed? A Workshop of Senior Women in the Academy
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2019
* Pamela McCauley, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 05/31/2019
* USD 49,999.00

The organizers of this workshop will convene a forum of women of color who hold
Full Professor rank in engineering programs as well as their peers from the
Diversity Committee, Women in Engineering, and Minorities Divisions of the
American Society of Engineering Education (ASEE). The workshop is intended to
advance knowledge and understanding of evidence-based strategies for increasing
the entry, retention and advancement of African American women in the
engineering academy. The quality of previous work done by the proposers as well
as the resources available to them means leadership in this effort by a highly
qualified team that has key insights into the challenges of this population. The
proposers have national resources and relationships to broadly disseminate the
outcomes as well as access to institutions and organizations where these
strategies can be implemented. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will result in
models for enhancing the participation of African American and other
underrepresented individuals in engineering as faculty and leaders. This forum
is likely to produce collaborations and alliances that will result in future
efforts for implementing organizational change strategies to address inequities.
The results will be disseminated broadly and will result in actionable proposals
to enhance the participation in engineering by individuals traditionally
underrepresented in engineering. The longer term potential benefits to society
include increasing role models in engineering and increasing the diversity in
the innovation sector.