* 1745348
* EAGER: Global assessment of the causes and consequences of commonness and rarity in freshwaters
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Sophia Passy, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2019
* USD 199,997.00

Human activity has caused a decline in global biodiversity through resource
overexploitation, habitat modification, and introduction of non-native species.
When rare species are lost, communities exhibit decreased functionality and
provide devalued services to humans, which is an environmental and a
socioeconomic problem. Although biodiversity loss is global and affects all
ecosystems, biodiversity in freshwaters is threatened by much higher extinction
rates compared to terrestrial habitats. Therefore, a better understanding of the
causes and extent of rarity in freshwaters is urgently needed. Species rarity
can be assessed using the species abundance distribution (SAD), which is a
measure of the relative abundances of common and rare species. Although the SAD
has been investigated for more than 70 years, little is known about the
underlying mechanisms that determine the patterns of abundance inequality. The
study will address this knowledge gap by developing a novel framework which
predicts the response of the SAD in freshwater habitats along environmental and
spatial gradients. The study will also investigate how the SAD affects regional
biodiversity. Finally, the study will inform decisions for watershed management
and biodiversity preservation by elucidating the causes of rarity in species
targeted for conservation. This project will also provide research training for
one postdoctoral associated, one graduate student and several undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project formulates specific hypotheses,
predicting the SAD variability in response to niche and dispersal-related
mechanisms as a function of scale, body size, and connectivity. These hypotheses
will be tested with global data on freshwater algae, invertebrates, and fish,
collected from running and standing waters by US and foreign agencies. Then, it
will be determined how, in turn, the SAD constrains the patterns of beta
diversity, a key component of regional biodiversity, by employing null model
approaches. The SAD of communities and species groups of conservational or
environmental importance will be fit with appropriate models. The variability of
the parameters of these models will be analyzed statistically along gradients of
water chemistry, climate, land use, latitude, longitude, and altitude, and
across scales, habitats, and organismal groups. Implementation of the proposed
framework would lead to better integration of metacommunity ecology and
conservation.