* 1745008
* Measurements of Stratospheric Aerosol to Altitudes above 35 km in Austral Autumn
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Terry Deshler, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 743,472.00

Particles in the atmosphere play key roles in controlling the Earth's
hydrologic, chemical, and radiation balances. In the troposphere aerosols
provide surfaces for cloud formation, for the absorption of trace gas
pollutants, and they either warm or cool the Earth depending on their optical
properties. In the stratosphere they provide surfaces for the conversion of
chlorine from a passive to an active state which will catalytically destroy
ozone, crucial as a filter against damaging UV radiation. Stratospheric aerosols
also contribute to increasing the solar albedo, and to the absorption of
terrestrial infrared radiation. Particles are self-limiting through the
formation of new particles, growth through diffusion, coagulation, condensation
of trace gases, and ultimately sedimentation and deposition or capture by
clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent developments extend the
observational possibilities. These are i) year round (aircraft) access to
McMurdo during austral autumn (April-June) and ii) development of smaller,
lighter, inexpensive condensation nuclei counters (CNC) allowing (balloon borne)
profiles to higher altitude(&gt;35km). This new instrumentation can now be
deployed in the fall, when chances of recovery are limited, and flown to
altitudes above 35 km, necessary to measure meteoritic smoke particles.
Providing additional quantification of the contribution of meteoritic smoke
particles to stratospheric aerosol will improve the understanding of the
stratospheric aerosol budget. There will be training opportunities in polar
measurements for a post-doctoral scholar&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.