* 1745903
* SBIR Phase I:  Laser-Enabled Massively Parallel Die Transfer for ?LED Displays
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Matthew Semler, Uniqarta, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2019
* USD 224,618.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to reduce the power consumption of display
and lighting products by 90%. It will do so by enabling the pervasive use of
light emitting diodes (LEDs) in such products. LEDs consume substantially less
power than other display/lighting technologies and also offer benefits such as
superior picture or lighting quality and longer lifespan. The foremost barrier
to the emergence of such products is the difficulty of economically placing
large quantities of LEDs onto a product grid. For example, if current-day
methods are used to create a full high definition display, its assembly would
take about a month and drive its cost far beyond what the market could accept.
This project's innovation addresses this problem with a laser-based, ultra-high
speed LED placement solution. Beyond this immediate application, it will further
the industry's technical capabilities relative to electronics component assembly
in general. The commercial potential for chip-based LED display and lighting
products is expected to reach about $10 billion within five years. The market
for LED placement solutions in support of these products will be about $1
billion in this same time frame.

The proposed project addresses the above problem by demonstrating an ultra-high
speed LED placement method that can reduce the one month assembly time in the
example above to just one minute. This solution, unlike others in development,
increases the placement rate of LEDs by a factor of 10,000 and includes the
ability to pre-screen and replace non-functional LEDs. This project will
demonstrate the core aspect of this solution involving the placement of
multiple, very small LEDs ("microLEDs") using a single laser pulse diffracted
into multiple scanned beams. It will use this solution to demonstrate the
extremely fast assembly of a quantum dot-based microLED display. The project
will build upon a related, previously demonstrated capability applied to larger,
silicon dies. Each aspect of the technology (wafer preparation, single laser
beam placement, multi-beam placement) will be individually optimized for the new
conditions imposed by the smaller sized, sapphire-based microLEDs. This new,
LED-tailored capability will then be used to demonstrate the assembly of a four
thousand pixel microLED display in under one second thereby achieving the
project's goal of demonstrating a >50M units/hour LED placement rate.