* 1745137
* CAREER: Cross-Instrument Synthesis of Antarctic Radar Sounding Observations
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Dustin Schroeder, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 671,374.00

Earth's geologic record shows that the great ice sheets have contributed to
rates of sea-level rise that have been much higher than those observed today.
That said, some sectors of the current Antarctic ice sheet are losing mass at
large and accelerating rates. One of the primary challenges for placing these
recent and ongoing changes in the context of geologically historic rates, and
for making projections decades to centuries into the future, is the difficulty
of observing conditions and processes beneath the ice sheet. Whereas satellite
observations allow tracking of the ice-surface velocity and elevation on the
scale of glacier catchments to ice sheets, airborne ice-penetrating radar has
been the only approach for assessing conditions on this scale beneath the ice.
These radar observations have been made since the late 1960s, but, because many
different instruments have been used, it is difficult to track change in
subglacial conditions through time. This project will develop the technical
tools and approaches required to cross-compare among these measurements and thus
open up opportunities for tracking and understanding changes in the critical
subglacial environment. Intertwined with the research and student training on
this project will be an outreach education effort to provide middle school and
high school students with improved resources and enhanced exposure to
geophysical, glaciological, and remote-sensing topics through partnership with
the National Science Olympiad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The radar sounding of ice
sheets is a powerful tool for glaciological science with broad applicability
across a wide range of cryosphere problems and processes. Radar sounding data
have been collected with extensive spatial and temporal coverage across the West
Antarctic Ice Sheet, including areas where multiple surveys provide observations
that span decades in time or entire cross-catchment ice-sheet sectors. However,
one major obstacle to realizing the scientific potential of existing radar
sounding observations in Antarctica is the lack of analysis approaches
specifically developed for cross-instrument interpretation. This project aims to
directly address these barriers to full utilization of the collective Antarctic
radar sounding record by developing a suite of processing and interpretation
techniques to enable the synthesis of radar sounding data sets collected with
systems that range from incoherent to coherent, single-channel to swath-imaging,
and digital to optically-recorded radar sounders. The approaches will be
assessed for two target regions: the Amundsen Sea Embayment and the Siple Coast.
All pre- and post-processed sounding data produced by this project will be
publically hosted for use by the wider research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.