* 1745463
* Convergence HTF: A Research Coordination Network to Converge Research on the  Socio-Technological Landscape of Work in the Age of Increased Automation
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Kevin Crowston, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2022
* USD 499,796.00

The landscape of jobs and work is changing rapidly, driven by the development of
new technologies. Intelligent, automated machines and services are a growing
part of jobs and the workplace. New technologies are enabling new forms of
learning, skills assessments, and job training. The potential benefits of these
technologies include increased productivity and job satisfaction, and more job
opportunities. But technology connected to work can also come with risks. This
research coordination network (RCN) addresses the future of work at the human-
technology frontier by focusing on the use of intelligent machines in work
settings. The RCN supported by this award will promote convergence across
computer science, engineering, and social and behavioral science disciplines to
define and address key challenges and research imperatives in the future of work
at the human-technology frontier with intelligent machines. This convergence RCN
will employ deep integration of knowledge, theories, methods, and data from
multiple fields to form new and expanded frameworks for addressing scientific
and societal challenges and opportunities. The results will include the
identification and sharing of new research directions and tools to reinforce
positive outcomes and mitigate negative consequences of intelligent machines in
work settings. Ultimately this has the power to strengthen the U.S. economy, and
improve worker performance and job satisfaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RCN
will focus on advancing the knowledge needed to develop actionable design
principles that attend to both sides of the human-technology frontier in work
settings that use intelligent machines. Such machines include not only
autonomous robots and vehicles, but also algorithms and machine learning
processes that support all types of autonomous behavior. At present, the
technology side of this frontier is advancing more rapidly than the human side:
people, organizations, legal frameworks, and social values, to name a few. What
is necessary to bring these two side into alignment is a systems design approach
that draws on both social and technological requirements as well as their
interdependencies. This RCN aims to adopt this goal, thereby developing the
knowledge needed to ensure that the benefits of intelligent machines are gained
while the negative consequences reduced. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RCN will
bring together investigators from many disciplines including computer science
(artificial intelligence, machine learning), robotics, human computer
interaction, cognitive science, economics, sociology, law, organizational
science, ergonomics, industrial and organizational psychology, engineering, and
information systems, to communicate, coordinate, and integrate their research
and educational activities across disciplinary and organizational boundaries.
Toward this goal, this award will support three primary RCN activities over its
five-year term. First, the RCN will organize annual Convergence Conferences that
will focus on the contribution of convergent research on topics regarding the
socio-technological landscape of work in the age of increased automation.
Second, it will support a series of workshops at different disciplinary
conferences to expand the reach of the network and to consolidate, test, verify,
and evolve research ideas as they develop. Third, the RCN will maintain a set of
shared online resources to support the community and its research efforts.