* 1745836
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Societies Without States
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Lisa Blaydes, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2020
* USD 23,236.00

Many states across the developing world lack the capacity to provide their
citizens with basic human welfare needs, a trend linked to internationalized
violence, illegal economic activity, and other deleterious dynamics. Yet welfare
outcomes often starkly diverge within these country cases. Moreover, differences
often manifest between cities or villages with similar ethnoreligious
demographics and official political party representation. This project draws
upon local-level data on social service provision, qualitative interviews, and
an original survey to understand this variation in the context of contemporary
Lebanon. Of particular interest to the researcher is why some Lebanese cities
enjoy access to local "public" goods, such as waste management and consistent
street lighting, while in others attempts to provide such services stall or are
actively blocked. The author argues that local relationships between elite
family networks play a crucial role in shaping how people access services.
Specifically, in areas where one elite family or an alliance of families
monopolizes political power, such public services are an effective way to ensure
the support of local constituents. In areas with higher levels of competition
between families, however, more individualized attempts at vote-buying
predominate. The project disaggregates and thus provides a more micro-level
understanding of so-called "weak states," where policymakers have recently begun
to investigate the conditions under which non-state governance succeeds or
fails. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many lower and middle-income countries, the
central government fails to provide even basic social services, yet welfare
outcomes drastically diverge at the sub-national level. In the case of Lebanon,
explanations focusing on the role of national electoral institutions, official
parties, or religious categories fail to explain important micro-level variation
in distributive politics. This project uses a multi-method research design to
explain why local political elites extend a variety of critical quasi-public
(club) goods in certain Lebanese municipalities, while resorting to more
transactional vote-buying in others. Drawing upon fifteen months of fieldwork
across numerous Lebanon cities, over a hundred interviews, quantitative spatial
analysis, and an original survey, the author argues that the relationships
between local kinship networks - nested within political factions and religious
communities - shape opportunities for elite collective action. Specifically,
areas where one elite family or a familial coalition has excluded rivals from
political power consistently provide more local public services, though usually
via informal means that allow elites to secure private economic benefits. In
areas with consistent inter-familial competition, highly individualized
exchanges occur, while local infrastructure and communal goods are neglected.
These findings suggest that formalized local institutions intended by the state
to promote order, such as municipal councils and associated elections, are often
co-opted and supplanted by informal social networks, producing counterintuitive
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.