* 1745209
* I-Corps: Computer Vision based Pre-Harvest Yield Mapping
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Ibrahim Isler, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 09/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the practical
deployment of a computer-vision based yield estimation system in fruit orchards.
With this technology, the farmers will be able to obtain a map of the number and
size of fruit across their farms from images recorded by a standard camera. This
capability will provide farmers with a useful tool in planning their harvest and
sales, as well as in managing the long-term health of their plants. It will also
potentially reduce the inherent risk in fruit growing, thereby improving the
affordability and availability of fresh fruit in the US. Furthermore, by
allowing the adoption of precision agriculture techniques to high value crops,
this project may help save water and contribute to reduction of runoff pollution
from fertilizer and chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
addresses the task of customer discovery for applications of the technology of
vision-based yield detection and mapping in fruit orchards. The core of the
technology is a set of computer vision algorithms to detect fruit in images
under natural farm conditions. This application presents several computer vision
task challenges. Fruit may be occluded by leaves and other fruit. Shadows and
specularities make color information unreliable. Also, fruit across frames are
matched to avoid double counting. Geometric algorithms are used for estimating
fruit diameter. This I-Corps project will allow for customer discovery in this
and other market spaces, test the product-market fit for the proposed yield
estimation technology, and guide future technology development in this area.