* 1745143
* EAGER:  SAPPHIRE BASED INTEGRATED MICROWAVE PHOTONICS
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Shui-Qing Yu, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 05/31/2021
* USD 250,917.00

Microwave photonics refers to a field that utilizes light as carrier to process
high frequency electrical signals. It has shown great success in both defense
and civilian applications. The future applications of microwave photonics demand
a dramatic improve in performance while, in the same time, electronic devices
should have more favorable features such as small size, lightweight, and low-
power consumption. This project proposes to develop a new "Integrated Microwave
Photonics chip" which could potentially integrate several functions of microwave
photonic components on a single chip and also offer reduced size-weight-and-
power at a very low cost. If successful, the developed technology would find
tremendous applications in defense systems, such as Radar, and many civilian
applications, such as cell phones, sensing, and datacom. The proposed research
activities provide comprehensive training for graduate students in the areas of
integrated photonics; semiconductor device design, simulation, fabrication, and
characterization; as well as in preparation, analysis, interpretation, and
dissemination of scientific data and results. The project will be used to
recruit undergraduate honor students who may use certain aspects of this
research for their thesis. A strong interaction plan with a local Historically
Black Colleges and Universities/Minority Institution has been formed to inspire
underrepresented minority students to participate
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrated Microwave Photonics (IMWP)
incorporates the functions of microwave-photonic components/subsystems in a
monolithic or hybrid photonic chip, which offers reduced size-weight-and-power
at a very low cost. This project proposes to utilize R-plane sapphire as a
transformative, high-performance and self-consistent IMWP platform which
provides a feasible approach for realizing fully-integrated MWP systems. The
proposed approach enables the integration of complete sets of microwave and
optical components such as light sources, analog and digital signal processing
circuits, light detectors, control circuits, and Silicon on Sapphire (SOS)
radio-frequency (RF) circuits all-in-one sapphire platform to achieve high-
performance and low-cost mixed-signal optical links. Sapphire has a lower
refractive index with an index difference of 0.3 with Si3N4. Therefore, it could
leverage the mature Si3N4 low-loss waveguide technology to produce similar low-
loss waveguide-based passive components by drop-in replacing quartz wafers with
sapphire wafers. For RF applications, the sapphire platform has a potential to
obtain much higher dynamic range due to low-loss optical waveguides while the
competing Si-photonics platform combined with off-chip 1.55 micron laser suffers
from the strong two-photon absorption and therefore has a limited dynamic range.
As a transparent substrate, sapphire would enable a versatile 3-D
photonics/electronics integration architecture. This project aims to, first,
study the "feasibility" of the proposed approach by identifying and
investigating key "fundamental challenges", then, conduct a proof-of-concept
study to provide an effective route for overcoming the identified obstacles,
and, eventually, provide a conclusive recommendation as to whether the proposed
research is feasible. As a fully integrated solution to fundamentally address
the most important technical challenge in IMWP, if successful, the new platform
would find tremendous applications in defense systems, such as Radar signal
processing, and many civilian applications. The broad wavelength coverage
enables on-chip sensing applications. It could potentially replace the current
Si-photonics for datacom and be used in harsh environments such as space and
nuclear applications.