* 1745839
* Workshop: Enabling US Early Career Researchers to Advance Polar Science using High Performance Computing and Earth System Modeling
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Jennifer Kay, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 12/31/2018
* USD 49,003.00

Recent advances in both high performance computing and scientific understanding
are dramatically improving Earth system models. The new processes and
capabilities that are being added to Earth system models are leading to new
discoveries and improved understanding, especially for polar science and polar
prediction capabilities. Continued success in advancing polar research and
leveraging of high performance computing resources requires engaging and
involving early career polar scientists in today's Earth system modeling and
supercomputing frontiers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In order to train the next
generation scientists in polar research and frontiers in high performance
computing, a two-week long Polar Modeling Workshop will take place in August
2018. The workshop will support the attendance of about 15 early career polar
scientists. All workshop activities will focus on the Community Earth System
Model (CESM) and high performance computing supported by the National Science
Foundation (NSF) at the NCAR-Wyoming Supercomputing Center (WYSC). Workshop
participants will gain experience planning, designing, and executing CESM
simulations using the NWSC Supercomputing Resources. In the first week,
participants would attend the highly successful and well-established CESM
tutorial. In the second week, participants would engage in advanced activities
focused specifically on capacity building for conducting polar research using
the CESM. This 2-week workshop represents a timely opportunity to empower a new
generation of polar scientists to use high performance computing and Earth
System Modeling in their research.