* 1745525
* Workshop: Exploring Quantum Phenomena and Quantum Matter in Ultrahigh Magnetic Fields; September 21-22, 2017, Alexandria, VA
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Nai Phuan Ong, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2020
* USD 75,685.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports a workshop on September
21-22, 2017 in Alexandria, Virginia. The workshop discusses frontier areas of
materials research, especially quantum phenomena and quantum matter, that will
open up if magnetic fields well beyond the current state-of-the art become
available. The workshop facilitates interaction, knowledge exchange, and
collaboration among participants. The discussions focus on the challenges in the
research field, as well as how the materials research community can better
articulate the importance of the quantum phases of matter accessible in strong
magnetic fields. High magnetic fields have major impacts in many areas of
fundamental research, as well as applied areas such as medical technology,
transportation, and power generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;High magnetic fields have led to a large body of exciting
results in quantum matter. Examples include quantum Hall effects and the rich
assortments of many-body states at distinct fractional fillings, new Landau
level phenomena in graphene, novel dimer states in quantum magnets, novel
excitations in topological quantum matter, and vortex liquid states in cuprate
superconductors. This workshop discusses scientific frontiers that will be
opened up if magnetic fields beyond the current state-of-the art (45 tesla for
stead-state field and 100 tesla for pulsed filed) become available. The
scientific case for having a new large-scale instrument/facility that includes
high magnetic fields is discussed.