* 1745272
* Renewal of the IODP Science Support Office
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2022
* Holly Given, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* James Allan
* 12/31/2022
* USD 0.00

Part 1: This Award will support 5 additional years of operation of the Science
Support Office for the International Ocean Discovery Program (IODP), an
international collaboration of 24+ nations supporting proposal-driven,
scientific ocean drilling. Three drilling platforms operate in the IODP: the
JOIDES Resolution, an all-purpose light drillship provided by the United States
to IODP for approximately 10 months operations per year; Chikyu, a heavy
drillship provided by Japan to IODP for approximately 2 months per year, and
Mission Specific Platforms, various drilling platforms provided approximately 2
months per year by the European Consortium for Ocean Drilling, and used
primarily in shallow water or high latitudes with ice present. The Science
Support Office manages drilling proposal submitted by the scientific community
to IODP, supporting proposal review by the Science Evaluation Panel, the
Environmental Protection and Safety Panel, and external reviewers. It also
supports the JOIDES Resolution Facility Board, a scientist-led Board that
oversees scheduling and operation of the JOIDES Resolution, and also supports
the IODP Forum, an executive-level group that is the custodian of the IODP
Science Plan, monitoring its progress. It also manages the IODP.org website,
serving as the interface of IODP to the science community and general public.

Part 2: Part 1: This Award will support 5 additional years of operation of the
Science Support Office for the International Ocean Discovery Program (IODP).
Three drilling platforms operate in the IODP: the JOIDES Resolution, an all-
purpose light drillship provided by the United States to IODP for approximately
10 months operations per year; Chikyu, a heavy drillship provided by Japan to
IODP for approximately 2 months per year, and Mission Specific Platforms,
various drilling platforms provided approximately 2 months per year by the
European Consortium for Ocean Drilling, and used primarily in shallow water or
high latitudes with ice present. The Science Support Office manages drilling
proposal submitted by the scientific community to IODP, supporting proposal
review by the Science Evaluation Panel, the Environmental Protection and Safety
Panel, and external reviewers. It also supports the JOIDES Resolution Facility
Board, a scientist-led Board that oversees scheduling and operation of the
JOIDES Resolution, and also supports the IODP Forum, an executive-level group
that is the custodian of the IODP Science Plan, monitoring its progress. It
further coordinates efforts regarding policy amongst the three facility boards
overseeing each IODP drilling plan. It also manages the IODP.org website,
serving as the interface of IODP to the science community and general public.