* 1745753
* Collaborative Research:  EAGER:  Customized cell biosensors for interrogating cancer cell physiology
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Joshua Leonard, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

Understanding the physiological state of normal and cancerous tumor cells has
limited our understanding of how cells grow and respond to their environment. In
this collaborative project the PIs will construct synthetic living biosensors
that can be mixed with other cells to provide readily detectable and measurable
information on the cells physiological state, including the response of tumor
cells to therapeutic agents. This will improve our ability to model normal and
cancer cell biology, contributing to our understanding of how potential
therapeutic agents affect cells. This approach will permit detecting multiple
physiological states simultaneously, in a high-throughput manner. In terms of
broader impacts this project will enhance ongoing outreach activities to engage
undergraduate students, K-12 students, and the public in STEM through several
ongoing programs at each institution as well as by new activities to enhance
interactions between institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop synthetic biology tools and experimental approaches that will enable the
development of more sophisticated models of normal and cancer cell physiological
properties, including information about the immediate environment and response
to therapeutic agents. The first step will be to develop genetically encoded
live cell sensors that will report information about multiple cell physiological
states, including treatment biomarkers. The second step will be to develop real-
time reporting by the sensors via loading of barcoded synthetic RNA molecules
distinct for each biomarker to be detected by next-generation sequencing. The
goal of this EAGER is to develop and validate each of the key technological
foundations required to be successful. In terms of broader impacts, this project
will contribute to the training of the next generation work-force in synthetic,
cellular, and cancer biology. This project will also include cross-institutional
virtual meetings to enhance student networking by the iGEM teams at each
institution.