* 1745889
* EAGER GERMINATION Renewal: Extending a platform to germinate transformative science through diverse collaboration
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Marshall Poole, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Louise R. Howe
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

This award to the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign builds on lessons
learned in a previous EAGER award to extend and further assess a platform for
idea generation, leveraging the productive interaction of diverse voices and
perspectives. The platform is intended to increase the probability of
germinating transformative research ideas that address important societal
challenges. Targeted participants are late stage graduate students, early stage
faculty, and postdoctoral scholars who show potential for engaging in cross-
institutional interdisciplinary research linking scholars from American Indian
Tribal Colleges, Historically Black Colleges and Universities, Hispanic-Serving
Colleges and Universities, and Land Grant Universities. Two important societal
impacts are anticipated. Firstly, enhancing the ability of researchers to
address key national/global challenges is expected to confer both social and
economic benefit. Secondly, collaboration with minority-serving institutions
should increase the participation, training and professional advancement of
historically underserved populations.

The proposed platform uses existing knowledge on learning and ideation with the
goal of fostering creativity and interdisciplinary approaches. Specifically,
favorable conditions for hatching transformative research ideas include:
interaction of multiple, radically different perspectives; engaging in a
structured collaboration process; and working through multiple cycles of
ideation, gestation and crystallization. The initial EAGER award to this group
demonstrated proof-of-principle for this approach through focusing on resilience
to global climate change. Under the aegis of the renewal award, two additional
cohorts will be assembled focusing on distinct societal challenges (Food and
Water Security; Energy Sustainability) to refine and extend this framework, and
thereby test the generalizability of the approach. The research team will be
composed of personnel from the American Indian Higher Education Council (AIHEC),
the Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities (HACU), the National
Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education (NAFEO), and from the
National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA). A repeated measures
design will enable collection of multiple behavioral metrics. Quantitative and
qualitative analyses of dynamics across groups will explore the framework's
capacity to identify, codify, and execute creative ideas. Anticipated project
outcomes are: (1) creative idea generation; (2) sustainable cross-institutional
and interdisciplinary networks to promote future research addressing scientific
grand challenges; (3) a refined procedure for facilitating the first two
outcomes; and (4) evidence of efficacy and scalability. The inclusion of
minority-serving institutions in a way that gives them true voice breaks new
ground in this area of inquiry. Bringing together scholars from multiple groups
with substantively different sociocultural backgrounds will allow evaluation of
the hypothesized benefit for transformational thinking relative to socially
homogenous teams.