* 1745711
* The 2019 International Conference on Language Documentation &amp; Conservation: Connecting Languages, Communities, and Technology
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Gary Holton, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/29/2020
* USD 59,863.00

With more than half of the world's 7000 languages currently at risk of
disappearing -- at least 170 of them in the United States alone -- there is an
urgent need both to create an enduring documentary record of endangered
languages and to support teaching and learning of those languages. Technology
offers great promise to accelerate both the documentation and revitalization of
endangered languages, since tools developed for major languages can in theory be
repurposed to support small, endangered languages. However, this promise of
technology has yet to yield significant results. Linguists continue to use ad-
hoc and antiquated tools, some developed in the 1980's. Apps for language
learning are popular but too often have no grounding in research on language
acquisition. Additionally, software development proceeds in a top-down fashion,
with little input from stakeholders. To address this disconnect, this project
will open a dialogue between linguists, language community members, and software
developers to forge robust and reliable solutions for supporting language
documentation and conservation. This will be done through a series of targeted
workshops and roundtable discussions devoted to bringing stakeholders together
around various aspects of language technology. The conference will also feature
an Exhibitor Fair with the express purpose of connecting language communities to
interested software developers, leading to new collaborations and new science
that closely aligns with community goals. Broader impacts include the potential
to develop new technology tools and language infrastructure for use by both
citizen scientists and linguists; the fostering of relationships with industry
through the Exhibitor Fair; and the public online availability of the conference
presentations. In addition, conference attendees typically include a large
number of citizen scientists from historically underrepresented groups in the
sciences, such as Native Americans, Native Alaskans, Native Hawaiians and other
Pacific Islanders, offering opportunities for broadening participation in the
language sciences as another broader impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will bring together leading scholars from across the world to explore
connections between language and technology as part of the 2019 International
Conference on Language Documentation and Conservation (ICLDC), hosted by the
University of Hawai'i at Manoa. Since its inception in 2009, ICLDC has become
the flagship venue driving scholarship in the documentation, maintenance and
revitalization of endangered languages. Participants include undergraduate
students, graduate students and faculty from linguistics, anthropology, biology,
computer science, and other academic disciplines. ICLDC offers its highly
diverse audience opportunities for informal science education and training that
includes new methodologies and best practices in cutting edge language
documentation and that crosses traditional disciplinary boundaries. A recognized
need among linguists is to better integrate and extend these tools as well as
develop new ones for data management, and this conference has the potential to
increase digital support for the language sciences, for archiving and for open
access more generally. In addition, this conference serves as one of the
foremost venues for the dissemination of research findings in language
documentation and conservation and related disciplines.