* 1745372
* Water-Ice-Sky
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2019
* April Waters, Waters                  April          D
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 02/28/2019
* USD 1.00

The artist April Waters is an accomplished painter focused primarily on water
and the scientists who study it. Her deployment to Palmer Station, Antarctica
will afford her the opportunity to observe, sketch. and produce study-paintings
of the ocean, sea ice. icebergs, and glaciers around the station that will
inform her large-scale canvasses, which she will paint in her home studio. The
focus on water is intended to bring a fresh and unique perspective to observe
and express the Antarctic wilderness. Her goal is to communicate the beauty as
well as the vulnerability of Antarctica's ecosystem and help communicate the
region's sense of wonder to the public. Her unique perspective will provide a
distinctive addition to the Antarctic Artists and Writers portfolio.

This artist's portfolio of oil paintings focused on water has afforded her
multiple opportunities to speak about water issues in forums that bring together
scientists, government officials and the public. Her work in Antarctica will be
a natural extension of her prior work. Her new work, comprised of 10-12 large
canvasses, will be exhibited across the state of Oregon, with multiple on-going
opportunities to speak with students and the public about her Antarctic
experiences. She will also exhibit at the NCAR Art Gallery in Boulder, Colorado.
Over an extended period, her work will bring awareness and appreciation of
Antarctica to a significant audience.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.