* 1745287
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Role of High Schools in Diversifying and Promoting Undergraduate Engineering Degree Attainment
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Rajeev Darolia, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 02/28/2021
* USD 113,971.00

The proportions of women, African American/Black, Hispanic/Latino, and Native
American students earning degrees in engineering at U.S. institutions have
remained relatively stagnant in the last ten years. Yet, the United States' need
for a larger and more diverse scientific and technological labor force continues
to grow. Increasing the number and diversity of students pursuing engineering
degrees is an important strategy to help meet the nation's workforce demands.
The objective of this research project is to examine students' pathways from
high school through college to determine high school level factors that predict
college engineering degree attainment. Examining the role of high schools is
especially critical because pre-college academic preparation is a key
contributor to college academic success, and because many students tend to
decide to pursue an engineering degree before applying to colleges. The results
of this research have the potential to significantly advance our understanding
of students' college preparation, major choice, and likelihood of graduating
with an engineering degree. Key stakeholders can apply findings from this
research to inform strategies and refocus educational interventions to increase
female and minority students' participation in engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project applies an institutional perspective
to identify high school structural factors that play a role in the longitudinal
patterns of academic engineering achievement among students, with a focus on
variation across gender and race/ethnicity. The high school structural factors
to be examined include: the availability of math and science courses and an
engineering-inspired curriculum, proximity to colleges with engineering
programs, demographic composition and characteristics of the student body, and
access to information about postsecondary education attendance and likelihood of
success (e.g., student college-going rates). The research team will apply
econometric methods, including regression and instrumental variables approaches,
to analyze an extended panel of administrative micro data from the Missouri
Department of Higher Education, which will be merged with data from the United
States Census and the Common Core of Data provided by the National Center of
Education Statistics. The multidisciplinary research team from engineering
education, public policy, and economics will integrate their content knowledge,
multiple theoretical perspectives, and methodological approaches to generate a
boundary-spanning examination of diversity, student access, and engineering
achievement to advance the research literature and promote policy design for a
wide range of academic and applied audiences. Thus, the project will generate
evidence that stakeholders and policymakers in school districts, higher
education institutions, and government agencies can apply to help remove
obstacles, target resources, and create partnerships that can potentially lead
to larger scale, systemic transformations in the pathways to engineering
education.