* 1745779
* Meeting: Predicting vertebrate responses to a changing environment: modeling genomes to phenomes to populations (G2P2PoP), Northern Arizona University, March, 2018
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Charles Buck, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2019
* USD 40,000.00

A grand challenge in biology is developing an understanding of the mechanistic
interrelationships among genes, environment, and phenotype, and how these
interactions emerge at the population level. Limits in the understanding of
these inter-relationshps constrain the ability to predict organismal responses
to changing environments. This project involves a workshop to bring together
scientists from mathematical modeling and biological fields that do not normally
interact to discuss novel approaches and techniques to unraveling genotype to
phenotype to environment connections. Specific workshop goals include:
Identifying data resources that scientists can access; synthesizing how
environmental drivers impact the genome-population hierarchy; and generating
strategies, priorities and goals for research exchanges. Networking among
participants will enable development of multilevel mechanistic models that
integrate existing and new data to predict responses by vertebrates to
environmental stressors. Of the workshop participants, about half are early
career, over half are female, and many are underrepresented minorities.
Scientific, regional, gender and ethnic diversity of the participants will
broaden participation and expose participants to diverse social and scientific
cultures. Through the synthesis of empirical science and modeling, new knowledge
can be generated and used to inform key stakeholders including policymakers,
land managers, and the general public. Finally, the workshop will promote
teaching, training, and learning and thereby increase public scientific literacy
and public engagement with science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
workshop will advance discovery and understanding by fostering integration and
synthesis of knowledge spanning from genomes to populations. This understanding
is essential to the creation of quantitative models for predicting animal
resilience and vulnerability to rapid environmental change. Modeling across
levels of biological organization is inherently integrative, interdisciplinary
and transformative. The objective of the proposed workshop is to coalesce
biologists and modelers working at different levels of biological organization
who typically do not interact. The goal is to establish a new collaborative
network of scientists with expertise that spans from genomes to populations to
facilitate development of novel quantitative approaches to address the urgent
challenge of predicting how vertebrate species and populations will respond to a
changing environment. Primary activities include: lectures by and discussion
with prominent environmental scientists; fostering of discussion and interaction
among mathematical modelers and organismal scientists; education of participants
in predicted changes of abiotic drivers under various environmental change
scenarios and by region; and establishment of training opportunities through
exchanges between participating laboratories.