* 1745823
* EAGER: Linking lynx gene variations to inter-individual differences in cognitive function
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Almut Hupbach, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2022
* USD 317,000.00

Individuals differ greatly in their cognitive and creative abilities. Naturally
occurring genetic variations are assumed to account for a significant proportion
of these differences. The investigators will assess how naturally occurring
variations in one gene family, the lynx genes, relate to cognitive and emotional
functions in humans. Lynx gene variations alter brain function and cognitive and
emotional behavior in mice model; this exploratory project addresses the link
between lynx gene and behavior in humans. Results could inform the development
of new therapeutic approaches for the treatment of cognitive impairments, such
as those associated with Alzheimer's Disease, or observed after brain injury.
The project could furthermore uncover the role of genetic factors for creative
and artistic abilities and anxiety disorders. This in turn could help
destigmatize mental disorders by providing a neurobiological basis for them and
undergraduate students will be involved in every step of the scientific research
process. The researchers are committed to increasing the representation of women
and underrepresented minorities in STEM fields and will coordinate recruitment
activities accordingly.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Candidate genes have been
identified in mouse models that regulate neuronal plasticity and influence
cognitive and emotional behavior. This project aims to test how naturally
occurring variations in these genes, lynx1 and lynx2, relate to inter-individual
differences in cognitive and emotional functions in humans. A large number of
individuals will be screened for single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and
tested on a variety of cognitive and control measures in order to develop unique
cognitive profiles of individuals harboring mutations in these genes. Predicted
differences in fear learning and memory updating will be tested by comparing
performance of individuals with and without SNPs in aversive conditioning and
memory updating paradigms. The project is the first one to assess how lynx gene
variations relate to cognitive and emotional functions in humans, and is
therefore exploratory, but has the potential to uncover important biological
pathways impinging on complex human cognition.