* 1745775
* EAGER: Bio-inspired Assurance and Regression Testing to Secure Organic Programs
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Myra Cohen, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 01/31/2019
* USD 315,371.00

Software Engineering needs to address an increasingly significant class of
programs that are self-adaptive and self-healing. These programs sense changes
to their environment and react by modifying configurations, libraries or program
code. Furthermore, automated approaches for program repair and program
transplantation change a program?s source code directly to fix, optimize or add
new functionality. Together, self-modification provides continual availability
in the presence of change and can harden a system against intruders. While this
organic nature of self-modification is a powerful paradigm, the overall
dependability and security of such programs is at risk. Prior test results or
assurance cases developed to reason about their functionality, safety and
security are invalid as soon as any adaptation occurs. Yet the time needed to
run a full regression testing cycle, or to develop new evidence and arguments
for an assurance case can take hours, days or weeks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal explores the feasibility of reasoning dynamically and efficiently about
the changes made to organic programs and their associated test suites and
assurance cases during adaptation. Given that these programs mimic living
systems, and many adaptations are already implemented with evolutionary
algorithms, the proposed work draws inspiration from nature and uses bio-
inspired techniques to achieve its goals. Both traditional functional faults as
well as security vulnerabilities are targeted in this proposal, given the
criticality of vulnerabilities in an online, unmonitored system. More
specifically the proposal will first explore techniques to identify the
evolution timeline for assurance, finding intervals at which re-validation must
occur. Second, it will model interactions and test coverage in organic programs.
Finally, it will use biologically inspired algorithms to select, order and
generate tests for regression testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the
research performed in this proposal will form the foundations for being able to
validate the correctness and safety of organic programs over time. The broader
impacts include co-mentoring undergraduate, inter-disciplinary teams to compete
in the International Genetically Engineered Machine (iGEM) competition, and to
build assurance cases for reasoning about the safety of their projects.