* 1745675
* EAGER: DMP Roadmap: Making Data Management Plans Actionable
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Guenter Waibel, University of California, Office of the President, Oakland
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2021
* USD 275,178.00

The California Digital Library (CDL) will work with an extensive coalition of
national and international collaborators to convert static data management plans
(DMPs) into machine-actionable documents useful for structuring the course of
research activities and communicating with other systems. Open data policies are
proliferating worldwide and researchers are now required to submit DMPs with
most grant proposals that describe the data they will produce and plans for
sharing and preserving it. Researchers do not always know exactly what data they
will produce at the beginning of a project, however. Furthermore, they have no
incentives or easy methods for updating a DMP to keep things organized over the
course of their research, which can lead to poor data practices and chaotic,
unusable data shared at the end. DMPs in their current, static form pose similar
challenges for other stakeholders across the research ecosystem, e.g., funders
who must monitor compliance manually. This project will solve this problem by
building out DMPRoadmap, a new, internationalized platform to reposition DMPs as
true hubs of the networked research ecosystem. The principal impact of the
proposed project is to transform one component of the increasingly digital
research enterprise, the DMP, into an actively updated and machine-actionable
hub to document and disseminate the products of research activity. Converting
free-text responses to funder requirements into dynamic, verifiable data feeds
will vastly improve the entire toolchain for all stakeholders and increase the
velocity and availability of information across all disciplines. The software
outputs of the pilot will be shared publicly with an open source license so that
the community can continue to enhance and reuse the technology, extending the
scholarly cyberinfrastructure in a scalable manner. All supporting data
collected during the project will be made fully available for human and machine
consumption. Since DMPs are rapidly becoming a global phenomenon, the outputs of
the project will be of great interest to the entire research community. The
breadth of the impact extends into the future of DMP policies worldwide, as
machine-actionability makes change easier and continuous improvements possible.
The project will provide insight into how to maximize investment in institutions
and infrastructures in a manner that achieves policy goals by providing public
access to government-funded research, and advances the overall public good. By
advancing best practices for data-intensive research across all disciplines the
project will further the goals of the scientific
endeavor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CDL will design, develop, and prototype
machine-actionable DMPs based on community generated use cases; field research
on DMP and data management practices; and pilot projects conducted with
disciplinary and institutional partners. The work plan encompasses iterative
phases of developing, implementing, and testing with various stakeholder groups
using an agile methodology. Specific use cases include implementing a set of
common standards and exchange protocols for DMPs to enable information to flow
between DMPs and existing research information systems (e.g., offices of
research, data repositories, faculty profile systems); leveraging persistent
identifiers (e.g., DOIs for articles and datasets, ORCID iDs for people) to
trigger push/pull notifications across systems that enable stakeholders to plan
resources, connect research outputs, automate reporting and monitoring, get
credit, and promote data discoverability, reuse, and reproducibility; among
others.