* 1745862
* STTR Phase I:  The BaroFuse, a Microfluidic Multichannel Measurement of Tissue Oxygen Consumption For Drug Testing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Daniel Cook, EnTox Sciences, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 01/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase 1 project is aimed at providing technology to address the high
costs of developing effective and safe drugs. Bringing a new drug to market
typically involves screening 100?s of thousands of compounds for efficacy and
toxicity utilizing cell, tissue and animal models to ultimately select a lead
compound that will be tested in clinical trials. This process can take years,
billions of dollars, and in the worse case leads to compounds that fail during
clinical trials due to safety concerns. Advances in microfluidics and
3D-printing have enabled the construction of tissue culture devices with nearly
unlimited numbers of tissue chambers and flow channel complexity. Combined with
optical sensors with unprecedented sensitivity, instrumentation can be built
that maintain large numbers of biopsied tissue samples, while assessing the
effects of exposure of the tissue to libraries of drugs. This technological
platform provides resolution of drug effects on human tissue with high
sensitivity thereby reducing the cost of animal testing and the risk of bringing
toxic drugs to clinical trials and the market. In addition, the technology will
impact the fields of personalized medicine, where drugs could be tested on an
individual?s own tumor or tissue, and environmental health.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measuring in vitro cellular responses to pharmaceutical
compounds is critical for identifying toxic effects of candidate drugs prior to
costly in vivo animal and clinical testing. To address this need,
instrumentation to maintain and assess biopsied tissue in real time is being
developed. The technology utilizes microfluidics for optimal maintenance of
tissue viability and function, and optoelectronics to measure oxygen uptake with
unprecedented sensitivity. The fluidics are driven by gas pressure,
circumventing the need for unwieldy pumps, and the channels are fabricated by 3D
printing, allowing for nearly unlimited numbers of chambers and flow channel
complexity. The technological platform will aid in the selection of lead
compounds for clinical trials, estimation of doses for first-in-human tests, and
support applications to the FDA. In this Phase 1 SBIR proposal we will build 2
96-channel turnkey instruments for a contract research program and for beta
testing by pharmaceutical companies. The functionality of a low-capacity
(8-channel) system has been previously demonstrated. The funding will support
scaling up the throughput of the system as well as enabling additional modes of
operation. The instrumentation will be used for contract research and for direct
sales to the large market of drug discovery within the pharmaceutical industry.
&lt;br/&gt;