* 1745518
* Student Travel Support for the 25th IEEE International Conference on Network Protocols (ICNP)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Despoina Perouli, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2018
* USD 20,000.00

ICNP 2017, the 25th annual edition of the IEEE International Conference on
Network Protocols, is a conference covering all aspects of network protocols,
including design, analysis, specification, verification, implementation, and
performance. This award supports partial travel costs for graduate students
enrolled in United States academic institutions to attend the conference.
Depending on fund availability, postdoctoral researchers and faculty members
from underrepresented groups that are employed in US institutions will also be
considered for travel support. ICNP 2017 will be held in Toronto, Canada, from
October 10th to 13th, 2017. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This travel grant aims to
broaden ICNP participation by lowering the financial barrier of attendance for
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers at institutions in the Unites
States. Enabling students and postdocs to attend a high-quality conference at an
early stage of a researcher's academic career is a wise investment in the future
of the field. Providing opportunities for attendance to underrepresented
students in particular will result in a greater diversity of ideas that will be
discussed during the conference. One goal of this award is to encourage women
and minorities to participate in a high-quality research event.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research in network protocols is advanced by the
interactions of participants at conferences such as ICNP. The travel support
will have a significant impact in at least three ways. First, graduate students
who would have been unable otherwise to attend ICNP will be greatly benefited by
listening to the speaker's talks and participating in resulting discussions.
Second, even the ICNP participants that will not receive the grant will be
indirectly benefited by the presence of the grant recipients. Since the award
committee will make an effort to select a diverse group of students, the
demographics of the conference will become more diverse as well. Finally, the
research community as a whole will be positively impacted by the continuing
success of the ICNP. The participation of scholars at early stages of their
careers, some of which come from underrepresented groups, will advance training
and the quality of the next generation of research leaders in the field.