* 1745150
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Interaction among Migration, Outcome and Social Structure
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Andrew Upton, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2018
* USD 9,262.00

The goal of this research is to investigate how network relationships among
complex and smaller-scale societies structure, and are restructured by,
migration. Prior scholarship on intercultural contacts emphasizes interaction
spheres, hybridization, technological transfer, or models of exchange as
measures for constructing borders and defining societal membership.
Understanding and accounting for historical and relational context, on the other
hand, is critical to the development of a coherent and generalizable theory of
intercultural contact. Archaeology is well suited to explore the complex
sociocultural formations that result from intercultural contact by capturing
transformations in relationships between communities following contact. This
research contributes to broader social and intellectual benefit by enhancing
understanding of the impact of migration on social structure, which is an
important analytical issue due to the prevalence of migration induced by war,
climatic instability, economic insecurity, and social unrest in contemporary and
prehistoric settings. Historical context will also be provided for understanding
how and perhaps why different approaches to multicultural coexistence may lead
to stable advantageous outcomes or encourage instability and conflict.

This project will examine the role of network interrelationships as indicators
of how both local societies and non-local migrant peoples approach intercultural
social and economic relations. Through the application of a multiple relations,
or multilayer, social network analysis methodology it is possible to gain
insight into the various networks that connect communities to one another. It is
also possible to scrutinize changes in social structure following a migration
process. Andrew Upton, a doctoral student at Michigan State University will
address the role of ceramic industry in the transformation of communal-scale
interaction and identification networks across the Middle to Late Mississippian
transition in the Late Prehistoric central Illinois River Valley. . Analysis of
network models will clarify how a circa 1300 A.D. in-migration of an Oneota
tribal group restructured social relationships in a Mississippian chiefly
environment and how communities negotiated multicultural regional cohabitation.
Laser ablation inductively couple plasma mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) will
provide clues to model networks of clay resource acquisition and exchange of
cooking and serving pottery. Analysis of distributions of stylistic decorations
on pots will reveal networks of categorical identification based on ascription
to common social units and nonverbal communication. Technological
characterization data related to pottery vessel form will elucidate shared
relationships of learning and the transmission of culture through time. In
providing a dynamic and multi-faceted view on social structure, this research
contributes to a more nuanced understanding of social and economic
transformations resulting from cultural contact.