* 1745451
* EAGER: SSDIM: Simulated and Synthetic Data Generation for Interdependent Natural Gas and Electrical Power Systems Based on Graph Theory and Machine Learning
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Zhaoyu Wang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 400,000.00

Natural gas and electric power systems have become the backbone of the U.S.
energy infrastructure. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
project will investigate practical data-based approaches for producing simulated
and synthetic datasets that faithfully represent the interdependence between the
two critical infrastructure systems from mechanistic and human aspects. The
project contributes to the grand national challenge of modernizing energy
systems by laying the data foundation for future research in interdependent
critical energy infrastructures. The research results will lead to publications
as well as multi-disciplinary training opportunities that integrate data
analysis and energy engineering for graduate and undergraduate students. By
forging strategic alliances with the utilities in the Midwest and national
laboratories, webinars on natural gas and power network data analysis will be
given to a broad array of engineers and researchers on the results of this work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will pioneer data-based approaches to
understand and model the interdependence between natural gas and power networks.
The interactive data generation method provides high-fidelity datasets with
different spatial-temporal granularities and operation conditions. In
particular, mechanistic principles and human impacts inherent in gas-electric
systems are identified from practical data using graph-based and learning-based
approaches. These generated datasets will be validated using practical data, and
be available online through a project website, together with a list of use cases
that leverage the data and existing modeling approaches to advance the
understanding of gas/power network interdependence in terms of strong/weak
coupling effects, economic operations, cascading outages, etc. The project
promotes an interdisciplinary effort in science and technology from data
analysis, graph theories, complex networks, as well as power and natural gas
engineering to provide fundamental knowledge about synthetic data generation for
critical interdependent infrastructures.