* 1745826
* Workshop: 10th IW on Bulk Nitride Semiconductors (IWBNS-X): Growth, Properties and Devices;  Sept 18 - 22, 2017; Espoo, Finland
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Siddha Pimputkar, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 02/28/2018
* USD 5,000.00

Nontechnical Description: The 10th International Workshop on Bulk Nitride
Semiconductors (IWBNS-X) held in Espoo, Finland, from Sep 18. - Sep. 22, 2017
brings together researchers from around the world focused on understanding,
developing, and applying semiconductor crystal growth technologies. Sharing and
discussing the current state-of-the-art greatly contributes to advancing science
and technology, thereby impacting society by enabling applications of these
materials, such as inexpensive disinfection tools to reduce infections or
energy-efficient electrical power conversion to reduce energy waste. Cross-
pollination of scientific ideas across multiple specialized research fields
positively impacts the scientific community in various countries. This workshop
provides a unique opportunity for scientists to share and stimulate new ideas,
learn new challenges and directions, and explore and promote new collaborations.
The requested funding supports the participation of both junior and senior
researchers from the U.S., while also increasing access for women, to enable
further education as well as development of collaborations with international
experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This workshop brings
together internationally leading scientists and engineers who are experts,
working at the frontiers of wide bandgap materials, including device research
and development. Leading experts present their recent achievements in the field
of bulk nitride growth, controlling their properties and integrating these
materials into optoelectronic or electronic devices and applications. Specific
goals of this workshop include discussions of critical scientific challenges
related to enabling nitride devices, while also facilitating international
collaborations. Topics discussed at the workshop include: development of bulk
nitride growth methods, understanding connections between growth parameters and
materials properties, controlling doping uniformity and targeting desired doping
levels, defect reduction and mitigation, advances in characterization of bulk
materials, implementing advanced computational growth models, (vertical) device
structures, and homoepitaxial growth of nitride devices. The workshop helps
advance the field by sharing results and methods, inspiring new ideas, and
initiation of new collaborations - all while enhancing career development of the
participants by facilitating interactions with international experts.