* 1745725
* I-Corps: Water Treatment using Electrically Regenerated Ion-exchange
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Ashok Gadgil, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 12/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is providing an
affordable and effective means to produce freshwater supplies from brackish
water sources. Freshwater shortages have pushed many communities to increasingly
rely on groundwater supplies. Several hundred million people worldwide already
experience serious water-stress, and their numbers are expected to increase as
freshwater availability declines owing to increasing demand. While available
fresh groundwater aquifers are limited, there exist considerable amounts of low-
to-intermediate salinity brackish groundwater sources that remain unused.
Unfortunately, existing desalination technologies are either too energy
intensive, have low water recovery rates, or are prohibitively expensive. There
is a significant need and commercial opportunity for new technologies that can
efficiently convert brackish aquifers into viable freshwater supplies. This
project allows for the development of a robust, low cost, energy efficient
brackish water desalination technology with potential use beyond drinking water
treatment, including food processing, agriculture, and other industrial
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will evaluate the
commercialization potential of a new technology that will potentially lower the
cost of brackish water treatment by reducing the capital, operation and
maintenance, and waste management costs compared to existing alternatives. The
lower capital cost is achieved by using novel composite electrode materials
developed using inexpensive and industrially-scaled precursors. The reduction in
operation and maintenance costs are benefits from realizing unique operating
modes made possible by the novel electrodes. The new operating modes also
eliminate need for harsh chemicals, and instead use low-voltage electricity to
regenerate the electrodes after they have captured the dissolved salts from the
water being treated. The regeneration leads to a reject stream of concentrated
brine, while the adsorption leads to a stream of treated water that is fresh
(less saline than the inlet water). The higher water recovery rates in this
system minimize the amount of waste generated, subsequently allowing for cost
savings in waste management.