* 1745759
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Visible Markers of Group Affiliation and Social Position
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Ronald Towner, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2020
* USD 29,794.00

In this doctoral dissertation award Benjamin Bellorado a graduate student from
the University of Arizona, working under the supervision of Dr. Ronald Towner,
will collect data for his PhD dissertation. Thus, in addition to the resultant
knowledge this grant will serve to further the intellectual development and
career trajectory of a promising young scientist. Using long term archaeological
data the project investigates the often subtle ways in which individuals signal
group affiliation as well as within group status based on visible symbols. The
research employs an archaeological example drawn from the prehistoric US
Southwest to examine variation in symbol usage over time and correlate it with
dramatic changes which occurred in social organization. While it is clear within
a present day context that symbols such as jewelry or head covering may reflect
group affiliation, this archaeological analysis offers the opportunity to
examine variation over time spans measured in centuries. This study will be of
particular interest to Southwest Native Americans as it provides insight into
tribal history. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the Ancestral Pueblo region during
the tenth through thirteenth centuries as a case study, this research will
considers the complex ways groups transformed the visibility of different
aspects of their material world to communicate important messages about
boundaries, group inclusiveness, and social identities over time. It also
addresses much broader issues of adaptation and identity in times of great
cultural changes on religious and political levels at multiple scales, providing
new information about societal disruption and reformation associated with the
Chaco system and its reorganization. Museum collections will be studied to
measure and photograph sandals, acquire samples for AMS (Accelerator Mass
Spectrometry) dating, and compile data from prior descriptive and chronometric
documentation of building murals and rock art depicting sandals. With these data
it will be possible to construct a tight chronological sequence to determine how
sandal design styles were manipulated to signal membership within groups of
different scales and organizational structures during the turbulent Chaco and
post-Chaco eras.