* 1745232
* EAGER:   Acoustic Diode as Architectural Material (ADAM)
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Piervincenzo Rizzo, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 07/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

Acoustic noise is the slyest form of pollution because its effects on the human
health are underestimated. Exposure to noise may hamper the nervous system,
trigger stress and sleep disorder, and may cause heart problems and high blood
pressure. People are exposed to noise almost anywhere. For this reason engineers
and architects strive to create effective and fine solutions to mitigate indoor-
generated noise in order to enhance the comfort of the occupants, improve
personnel efficiency in the workplace, guarantee privacy, and to provide
distraction-free spaces. With this societal problem in mind, this EArly-concept
Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will explore a new architectural
system, based on the concept of acoustic diode acting as a sound barrier. The
outcome of this EAGER will enable to carry out a comprehensive study that will
address a societal issue that impacts a large fraction of the human population.
Additionally, the project will be of interest for architectural and structural
engineering, and will be impactful in many ways including the: (1) the cross-
pollination of a few different disciplines such as acoustics, nonlinear
dynamics, and architectural engineering; (2) supervision of a diverse pool of
students with skills in computation and experimentation; (3) integration of the
research findings into a multidisciplinary education program to engage senior
undergraduates, professional M.S. and graduate students; (4) outreach and
dissemination activities to inform the academic community, professional
engineers, professionals and some general young audience of the economic and
societal impacts of designing better acoustic barriers using the novel concepts
of acoustic metamaterials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Like their electrical
counterpart, acoustic diodes offer low resistance to sound in one direction and
high resistance in the opposite direction. In other words, acoustic diodes offer
the opportunity to forbid sound transmission along one direction. The hypothesis
of this research is that a diode, embedded in the novel architectural material,
can be scaled at multiple lengths to shield indoor noise and eventually transit-
generated noise. The new noise barrier will be composed of three elements: a
membrane, an acoustic diode made of 1-D chains of spherical particles with
intruders, and a plate. The idea is that the noise to be shielded reaches the
wall and is converted into vibration in the membrane. This vibration triggers
the formation and propagation of nonlinear solitary waves along the diode where
they are trapped and decay by the effect of multiple reflections. The merit of
this project lies in the investigation of the fundamental physical concepts that
will lead to the development of a novel architectural noise barrier.