* 1745919
* EAGER:   The Question Improvement Model: A Simple and Scalable Model for Improving the Question Formulation Skills of Ph.D. Students
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Dan Perlman, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Louise R. Howe
* 08/31/2020
* USD 299,962.00

This project is designed to achieve a simple, yet ambitious goal; to create a
model that all doctoral students can use to improve their ability to ask
questions. Question formulation is an often overlooked yet profoundly important
intellectual ability that includes knowing how to produce one's own questions,
refine and improve them, and strategize on how to use the questions to guide
research. This study will expand upon an evidence-based method, the Question
Formulation Technique (QFT) pioneered by the Right Question Institute, to create
a rigorous Question Improvement Model (QIM) that will facilitate a more direct
path to better research and new discoveries. It is anticipated that the QIM will
make an important contribution by providing a key resource for improving
doctoral education. The QIM will have broader impacts in three areas. First, the
ability to efficiently produce and improve one's research questions should serve
as a cornerstone of a strong infrastructure for research and education. In turn,
this is likely to lead to beneficial economic outcomes. Finally, the current
widespread adoption of the Question Formulation Technique in many fields and
diverse communities suggests that the QIM could lead to increased participation
of women, persons with disabilities, and underrepresented minorities in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The QFT involves sequential steps focusing on divergent
thinking, convergent thinking, and metacognitive thinking, and provides a
powerful tool for generating novel questions. The QFT has demonstrated efficacy
in K-12 settings, but has not been deployed in graduate education. In this
study, the QFT will be refined to provide a structured method for generating and
improving questions that is suitable for training graduate students in the
natural sciences. In the quasi-experimental design of the project, participants
in the experimental group will learn to use the Question Improvement Model (QIM)
while the remaining participants (the control group) will not initially receive
QIM training. All participants will be tested before, during, and over the
course of a year for their skill in formulating questions and attitudes about
questions. A crossover design will allow the control group participants to
receive identical QIM training to the experimental group following assessment.
The QIM training may provide a useful complement to existing graduate
engineering pedagogy focusing on identifying solutions to predefined questions.
Furthermore, it is anticipated that the QIM will be highly scalable and useful
in a wide array of disciplines