* 1745254
* EAGER:  Towards Securing Visible Light Communications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Tao Shu, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2020
* USD 120,000.00

Due to its many nice features such as license-free spectrum, abundant bandwidth,
and Gbps-level transmission rate, visible light communication (VLC) has been
considered to be a promising small-cell solution for alleviating the RF spectrum
scarcity problem in the 5G era. While the research on VLC devices has made
significant progress in recent years, the security aspect of VLC has not been
well understood so far. Contrary to the initial common belief that VLC is
intrinsically secure because the propagation of visible light is directive and
can be confined within a closed space, recent studies have revealed that VLC is
vulnerable to eavesdroppers that are outside of the direct beam of the light, or
even outside the closed space and do not have direct line-of-sight (LOS) to the
light source. Moreover, the special optical nature of visible light propagation
also subjects VLC to other unique types of attacks, such as LOS blocking and
spoofing. These attacks will constitute serious threats to VLC systems when they
are deployed in large scale in the near future. This EAGER project aims to
obtain a comprehensive and urgently-needed understanding on the security
vulnerabilities of VLC, and to explore new knowledge on rigid and provably-
secure physical-layer countermeasures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate the capability of visible light Multiple Input-Multiple Output
(MIMO) in combatting VLC-specific attacks. In particular, a friendly-jamming-
assisted visible light MIMO beamforming architecture is proposed to counter
eavesdropping from unknown eavesdroppers, i.e., eavesdroppers of an unknown
number and at unknown locations. This architecture is then extended by using
more photodiodes (PDs) per user and accounting for the change of VLC channel
state information, to effectively detect and mitigate blocking and spoofing
attacks. The investigator will further study the blocking-resilience capacity of
the multi-user VLC MIMO system to provide differential protection for users of
different priorities. Moreover, a MIMO VLC testbed will be developed to evaluate
the performance of the proposed solutions. The project will also carry out an
integrated education plan to broaden its impact to the society, with a special
emphasis on underrepresented and minority groups.