* 1745116
* Antarctic Firn Aquifers: Extent, Characteristics, and Comparison with Greenland Occurrences
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2018,02/28/2021
* Ted Scambos, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 02/28/2021
* USD 261,944.00

Snow or firn aquifers are areas of subsurface meltwater storage that form in
glaciated regions experiencing intense summer surface melting and high snowfall.
Aquifers can induce hydrofracturing, and thereby accelerate flow or trigger ice-
shelf instability leading to increased ice-sheet mass loss. Widespread aquifers
have recently been discovered in Greenland. These have been modelled and mapped
using new satellite and airborne remote-sensing techniques. In Antarctica, a
series of catastrophic break-ups at the Wilkins Ice Shelf on the Antarctic
Peninsula that was previously attributed to effects of surface melting and brine
infiltration is now recognized as being consistent with a firn aquifer--possibly
stimulated by long-period ocean swell--that enhanced ice-shelf hydrofracture.
This project will verify inferences (from the same mapping approach used in
Greenland) that such aquifers are indeed present in Antarctica. The team will
survey two high-probability sites: the Wilkins Ice Shelf, and the southern
George VI Ice Shelf.

This two-year study will characterize the firn at the two field sites, drill
shallow (~60 m maximum) ice cores, examine snow pits (~2 m), and install two
AMIGOS (Automated Met-Ice-Geophysics Observing System) stations that include
weather, GPS, and firn temperature sensors that will collect and transmit
measurements for at least a year before retrieval. Ground-penetrating radar
survey in areas surrounding the field sites will track aquifer extent and depth
variations. Ice and microwave model studies will be combined with the field-
observed properties to further explore the range of firn aquifers and related
upper-snow-layer conditions. This study will provide valuable experience for
three early-career scientists. An outreach effort through field blogging, social
media posts, K-12 presentations, and public lectures is planned to engage the
public in the team?s Antarctic scientific exploration and discovery.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.