* 1745661
* STTR Phase I:  Wireless High Temperature Sensor for Real Time Monitoring of Power Generation Turbine Engines
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,09/30/2018
* Chengying Xu, Sensatek Propulsion Technology, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is for the development
of a wireless sensor for continuous and real-time measurement of the high
temperature in gas turbines. The new sensor offers turbine manufacturers and
owners/operators the capability to place small-sized sensors in hard to reach
areas in the turbine, and transmit sensed data wirelessly thereby enabling heat
loads to be quantified. According to gas turbine engineers interviewed during
National Science Foundation I-Corps program, increasing the firing temperature
of a turbine by 100°C, due to accurate real-time temperature measurement, will
result in 1% increase in efficiency. This translates to additional revenue of
$48 million/year for a fleet of 100 turbines. In addition, these sensors can
extend useful life by 10,000 - 25,000 hours per turbine due to enhanced
maintenance planning, translating to an additional revenue of $76.7 Million ?
$192 Million per turbine. In 2009, the United States Environmental Protection
Agency established that emissions from fossil fuel-fired power plants, leads to
negative effects on human health and the environment. The new wireless sensor
will help to design more efficient gas turbines and improve operations of
existing turbines thereby reducing harmful emissions from power turbines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of this project include:
development of high-temperature sensing technology beyond its current stage;
usage of newly developed materials (polymer-derived ceramics -PDC) for sensor
applications; advancement of fundamental knowledge of process-property
relationship of PDCs; improved sensor design and modeling; better understanding
of sensor integration challenges and techniques for advanced sensing in gas
turbine environment. The new wireless sensor is made of PDC. Advantages of PDC
include high-temperature survivability, excellent oxidation/corrosion
resistance, flexible manufacturing, and tunable electrical/mechanical
properties. The sensor consists of a novel microstrip patch antenna for reliable
wireless transmission of sensor data while keeping the overall volume of the
sensor small so as not to distort gas flow profile in the turbine. High gain
patch antenna will enable sensor to be interrogated at longer distances outside
the turbine. The project objectives are: develop a wireless PDC sensor that can
measure over 800°C to demonstrate high-temperature wireless sensing capability;
demonstrate high-temperature wireless sensing beyond 50 cm; study sensor system
implementation strategy in ultra-high temperature environment of a turbine
engine; conduct preliminary investigation into sensor integration into existing
turbine prognostic systems.