* 1745454
* Confer:Earth Stewardship Initiative: A national network of ecologists develop research using designed experiments for Portland's Green Infrastructure Implementation and performance
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Alexander Felson, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2018
* USD 19,960.00

With population growth, rapid urbanization, and climate change threatening human
and natural systems, it is imperative to better understand and shape cities.
Practitioners shaping cities, including architects, landscape architects and
urban designers, are increasingly building ecological landscapes. However,
practitioners work with limited ecological data or precedents, since urban
landscapes have rarely been planned to promote ecosystem functions and
ecologists remain peripheral to the design process. To develop a collaboration
between ecologists and city practitioners, we have developed the Earth
Stewardship Initiative Demonstration Project (ESI). ESI is a dynamic framework
for transdisciplinary collaboration to foster the integration of ecological
research in designing and managing cities. The program serves as a training
forum for ecologists and designers to work on real world projects through a
collaborative framework. ESI illustrates by example how ecologists can shape
urban ecosystems based on a proactive role in the design process using applied
ecology. The program embeds ecologists and their research methods within a
community-based planning project to co-investigate the role of ecology in
shaping cities that work for people and ecosystems. Overall, ESI demonstrates
how land planning projects can serve as models for actionable science in a forum
where ?ecology for the city? is prioritized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
will support the third Earth Stewardship Initiative (ESI) Demonstration Project
at the Ecological Society of America?s 2017 annual meeting (August 6th ?11th) in
Portland, Oregon. ESI solicits graduate student fellows from around the country
to collaborate with city officials, practitioners, and ESA senior scientists on
large-scale land planning projects. Participants collaborate in an urban design
process to generate sustainable design strategies and propose ways of improving
these projects through designed experiments and other adaptive management tools.
Portland is a national leader in implementing green infrastructure (GI), and has
established a city-wide green network drawing on considerable experience with GI
design, implementation, monitoring, maintenance, and community engagement.
Working with the City of Portland?s Bureau of Environmental Services, the team
will evaluate Portland?s GI design and implementation practices. At the city
scale, the team will assess a range of variables, including effects of GI on
streamflow and water quality; the value of vegetation ? especially trees and
plant health; and design and maintenance of lined bioretention basins. At a
larger scale, the team will examine watershed health using the Portland
Watershed Health Index, and identify opportunities for adaptive management and
public communication of watershed health. After the meeting, the team will
generate a white paper for future work including designed experiments and
adaptive monitoring and management strategies.