* 1745893
* 2017 North Pacific Arctic Conference: Building Capacity for a Sustainable Arctic in a Changing Global Order
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2017,01/31/2018
* Nancy Lewis, Center For Cultural&Tech Interchg East&West
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 01/31/2018
* USD 6,458.00

This award support travel for four early career scientists to the North Pacific
Arctic Conference (NPAC) as panelists and participants in the 2017 conference
titled "Conference on Building the Capacity for A Sustainable Arctic in a
Changing Global Order." The short-term objectives of the proposed project is 1)
to tie promising next generation scientists from the Arctic region into existing
knowledge and leadership networks; 2) to provide them with the additional
knowledge, experience, inspiration, and opportunity they need to become future
leaders of the region; and 3) to ensure the early career scientists represent
the diversity of the region by including women and Indigenous participants. In
the longer-term, the project aims to develop these early career scientists so
that they will be able to step into future regional leadership roles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The East-West Center will fulfill its objectives by
bringing four high-caliber, pre-selected early career scientists to the two-day
NPAC conference, August 9-11, 2017. They will be included as full participants
in the conference proceedings, first as panelists; second as contributors to the
published NPAC 2017 conference proceedings; and third as participants in high-
level virtual networks associated with the NPAC community. Upon the conclusion
of the conference, they will continue on as participants in these virtual
networks and also be given the opportunity to contribute their written works the
East- West Center's Asia Pacific Bulletin and Asia Pacific Issue publications.