* 1745139
* EAGER:   Reliable Control for Soft Robots through Sensor Placement
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Hadas Kress Gazit, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 07/31/2018
* USD 147,746.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will create
new sensor-based control algorithms to enable soft robots to use a novel soft
optical sensor in order to react in real time to changes in the robot and the
environment. Soft robots -- that is, robots made of soft materials such as
rubber -- have the potential to revolutionize the way robots are designed,
manufactured and deployed. Rapid prototyping techniques can produce new robots
in a matter of hours, not months, robot design can be customized to fit both the
robot's environment and task, and these robots are inherently safe, enabling
close interaction with people. However, there are currently few examples of
reliable, long duration use of soft robots in complex environments. Reasons for
this lack of robust behavior include the difficulty of modeling the robot's
interaction with the environment, for example the way the legs bend when walking
on sand vs. concrete, the higher failure rate of soft actuators versus rigid
actuators, and relative lack of good soft sensors versus traditional rigid
sensors. This project addresses all three of these challenges, because the soft
sensors are physically robust and, together with the new control algorithms,
greatly reduce the need for accurate models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of this EAGER project is to collect preliminary data and assess the feasibility
of co-designing control and sensor placement for foam-based robots embedded with
stretchable optical waveguides which can be used to sense deformations in the
soft robot?s body. The outcomes of this project will advance the vision of soft
robots that can be predictably and reliably controlled in a variety of
environments. The novel soft optical sensors can be embedded throughout the
actuator in a plurality of configurations; therefore, the placement can be
designed with the control objective in mind. Due to the difficulty in exact
modeling of soft actuators, especially those that can be created in different
shapes, in order to create reliable and repeatable control for soft robots,
sensors must be embedded in the body of the soft robot. The information the
sensors provide, together with simplified models of robot motion, should be used
to control the robot. This project will produce (i) a characterization of the
information that can be obtained from a stretchable optical waveguide embedded
in a foam actuator, (ii) physical limits on the quality, spatial resolution, and
type of information that can be collected from multiple embedded sensors due to
manufacturing constraints and the cross-influence of the sensors on the foam
actuator and each other, and (iii) an algorithm that given a fixed multi-legged
robot returns the required sensor placements and the feedback controller that
will create predictable motions over a specific terrain. The real breakthrough
that will enable reliable and robust control of soft robots will require a
radical new approach to combining sensing, actuation and control, where the
control objective, together with physical limitations, determines sensor
placement and feedback control.