* 1745597
* I-Corps: Automatic Tuning for Prosthesis Based on Physiological Feedback
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Ou Bai, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 08/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide
automatic prosthetic tuning technology that will enable the optimization of
metabolic energy expenditure in impaired gait of amputee users. This product
will simplify the process of tuning and will increase the performance of powered
prosthetic legs to better assist users and provide more balance while
maintaining a lower energy expenditure on residual muscles. Due to the product's
user-friendly structure, it could easily be used in less-equipped environments,
which will make the technology more accessible and eliminate the discomfort of
long commutes to the prosthetic laboratory or clinics. This is a cost-effective
solution for not only broader use of powered prosthetic legs, but also better
efficiency of prosthetic laboratory and clinics to serve more prosthetic users.
This will reduce the cost of maintaining powered prosthetic legs and, broaden
the facilities that would offer these types of services. Also, since the system
is automated a clinician will replace some of the tasks typically done by
prosthetic experts, which is expected to reduce overall costs.

This I-Corps project will explore the commercial potential of the core
technology. Lower limb amputees use prosthetics for daily walking; however,
walking with prosthesis typically requires much more metabolic energy
expenditure than people with normal gait. Current state-of-the-art technology
provides powered prosthetic legs to better assist amputees. To have the best
assistance and to increase balance, these legs require a meticulous tuning
procedure. It is currently conducted using an observation-based approach by
prosthetic experts; however, this approach is not accurate and lacks
objectivity. The developed technology is able to wirelessly collect body area
sensor signals and provide computational algorithms to automatically setup
powered prosthetic legs, which provides a novel and efficient technique for
optimizing the metabolic energy expenditure in impaired gait of amputees. This
technology will enable an accurate and objective tuning for the users, which is
cost effective because it may reduce the need for frequent prosthetic clinics
for prosthesis adaptation. In addition, the objective and accurate tuning will
maximize the use of powered prosthetic legs.