* 1745197
* EAGER:  Resolving the Evolutionary History of the Sunflower Family in the Face of Rampant Gene and Genome Duplications
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Jennifer Mandel, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Schneider
* 07/31/2022
* USD 177,192.00

Despite the widespread occurrence and cultivation of members of the sunflower
family, evolutionary relationships within the group are poorly understood. The
lack of knowledge has hampered biological research in the family. This project
advances the understanding of the genealogical relationships among sunflowers,
while also investigating the reasons that have led to its great success. The
sunflower family contains more than 25,000 species, representing 10% of all
flowering plants on Earth today. Species within the sunflower family are
important agricultural crops including sunflower, lettuce, safflower, artichoke,
and chicory. The family also includes some of the world's most noxious weeds
(e.g., knapweeds, thistles). Many other species in the group occur in areas of
the world that are threatened with high extinction rates. This project will
generate genomic data to help explain the role of genome duplication in the
evolutionary success of the family. The project will train students in plant
systematics and modern methods of data collection and analysis. Additionally,
the project will produce educational tools for use by middle and high school
teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use a phylogenomics approach
to investigate the role that large-scale gene and genome duplications have
played in the diversification of the sunflower family (Compositae) and what
confounding role this may play in resulting discordance among phylogenies
produced from genome-scale data. The proposed research will generate genomic and
transcriptomic data to examine how large-scale gene duplications influence
phylogeny reconstruction. This research will provide transformative information
that may be applicable to other large, diverse lineages of organisms especially
when strong discordance amongst gene tree and species tree methods is reported
and where large-scale or whole genome duplications are found. The data will shed
light on the influence of duplications on both lineage diversity and potential
causes of discordance and provide a first step toward understanding evolutionary
relationships in the face of large amounts of gene duplication.