* 1745262
* Workshop: Northeast Graduate Student Water Symposium (NEGSWS), Amherst, MA; September 8-10, 2017
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2018
* David Reckhow, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2018
* USD 14,745.00

1745262 Reckhow

Clean, adequate, and accessible water is a fundamental human need and is also
critical to the healthy ecosystems. Furthermore, water affects key sectors of
society (e.g., agriculture, energy production, and industry) as well as home
life, especially in developing countries. To address this need specifically in
the Northeast United States, the Northeast Graduate Student Water Symposium was
first organized in 2014 by graduate students in the Environmental & Water
Resources Engineering program within the Civil and Environmental Engineering
department of the University of Massachusetts Amherst (UMass). The purpose of
Northeast Graduate Student Water Symposium is to provide an affordable
conference opportunity in the greater Northeast region for graduate students in
water-related disciplines, to be held at the University of Massachusetts,
Amherst, September 8-10, 2017.

The symposium centers on the theme of research advances in water engineering,
resources, science, and policy. Organized and hosted primarily by graduate
students, it is an opportunity for graduate student researchers to present
current research, exchange ideas, network, and interact with industry and
government professionals in the water sector. This symposium will build upon the
momentum generated from previous events to offer an improved event that will
bring together graduate students who study water from a variety of institutions
to gain valuable experience presenting their research and networking with their
peers. The purpose of the Northeast Graduate Student Water Symposium is to
stimulate research and cross disciplinary exchange among the Northeast
Universities with water programs. In its first 3 years, the Northeast Graduate
Student Water Symposium has set very high standard for scholarship and research
quality. The student presenters represent the top research groups across the
region. This workshop is large enough to have many students for the New England
Region attend, yet small enough to stimulate active discussion and the potential
for student-research collaborations to result. The Commonwealth of Massachusetts
has been looking to the UMass Amherst campus for leadership in support of the
New England business sector involved in water technologies. In 2011 and 2012,
the PI participated in trade missions to Israel and Singapore that explored
successful models in those countries for accelerating innovation and bringing
the innovations to market. As a result of the trade missions and other statewide
activities, the non-profit New England Water Innovation Network was created.
This Network is giving water industry stakeholders; entrepreneurs, venture
capitalists, start-up CEOs, government officials, and select university
researchers--a stronger voice in advocacy and policy development. New England
Water Innovation Network?s research indicates that Massachusetts has more water
innovation patents per capita (in drinking, wastewater, coastal, storm and
industrial sectors) than any other state. By developing a unified business and
research cluster, the state stands to generate substantial revenue, create jobs,
and gain greater exposure for our leading-edge technologies. Most relevant to
this proposal is the engagement of New England Water Innovation Network and the
entrepreneurial community in the Northeast. The Northeast Graduate Student Water
Symposium provides a unique opportunity to bring the young researchers across
the region together with professionals in an intensive 2-day forum.