* 1745074
* Collaborative Research:  Investigating Ice Sheet - Solid Earth Feedbacks in West Antarctica: Implications for Ice Sheet Evolution and Stability
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Michael Bevis, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 3,091,222.00

The earth's surface in West Antarctica is rising at extremely high rates in
response to unloading of ice sheet mass. This research (1) improves the spatial
coverage and accuracy of measurements of surface uplift using the Global
Positioning System (GPS) and (2) probes the structure of the deep earth using
seismology. These observations will be integrated into a state-of-the-art, 3-D
ice sheet model to simulate the past and future behavior of the West Antarctic
Ice Sheet and assess its vulnerability. Project results will allow assessment of
the West Antarctic Ice Sheet's rate of change and the time frame for its
accelerating contribution to global sea-level rise, which is predicted to have
an amplified impact for U.S. coastlines. This research program builds on and
leverages prior investments in autonomous observational infrastructure through
technological advances and international partnerships. Archived open-access data
from the project will facilitate a range of studies that will advance basic
knowledge of the Antarctic continent and its ice sheet cover. The project will
train and mentor an interdisciplinary cohort of polar scientists through field
work, workshops, and a summer school leveraged by an online resource library.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The POLENET-ANET autonomous GPS and seismic network will
be reconfigured to acquire higher-resolution in situ data focused around the
Amundsen Embayment to capture spatially varying crustal motions and Earth
structure in a region where the ice sheet is rapidly changing. The pattern and
scale of lateral variations in mantle temperature, viscosity, and lithospheric
elastic thickness at the resolution necessary to characterize this system will
be established from seismological studies incorporating the new instrumentation
footprint. Absolute mantle viscosity values will be independently determined
using crustal motion data from high-precision GPS time series together with West
Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) surface mass balance and ice history information.
Where mantle viscosity varies over short spatial scales and bedrock topography
below the ice sheet is complex, as is hypothesized for West Antarctica, both
positive and negative feedbacks between the ice sheet and the solid earth may
occur, acting to stabilize or destabilize ice dynamics by raising or lowering
the grounding line and reducing or increasing retrograde bed slopes below major
outlet glaciers. New constraints on 3-D Earth structure will be built into
innovative 3-D glacial isostatic adjustment (GIA) models and coupled models of
climate-cryosphere-solid Earth systems. These advanced models, constrained by
the new observations obtained in this project, will simulate the past and future
evolution of the WAIS to improve estimates of changing ice mass in West
Antarctica, establish where the WAIS may be stabilized by ongoing Earth
deformation, and reduce uncertainties in projections of future sea level
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.