* 1745621
* EAGER:   Vertical-carrier-transport two-dimensional photo-harvesting devices with nanocavity enhancement
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Qiaoqiang Gan, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2018
* USD 86,077.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical: Photodetector and photovoltaic devices are key
components for converting light energy to electricity. To evaluate the
performance of these devices, power conversion efficiency is one of the most
important parameters, describing how much light energy is converted to
electricity. Due to the advances of two-dimensional materials in recent years,
it is believed that revolutionary ultra-thin optoelectronic devices are
possible. However, because of the weak light absorption within these atomically
thin layers, the power conversion efficiency of two-dimensional-material-based
photodetector and photovoltaic devices is low. Therefore, it is essential to
design and develop new strategies to improve the power conversion efficiency of
these two-dimensional energy harvesting devices. This project will combine
electrical (i.e. vertical carrier transport) and optical (i.e. Nano-cavity)
architectures to overcome this grand challenge. (1) Since the transport distance
of electrons and holes is only a few nanometers, the carrier transport
efficiency is superior compared with their bulk counterparts. (2) The Nano-
cavity structure significantly enhances the optical absorption within these two-
dimensional layers due to strong optical interference resonances. Therefore, the
power conversion efficiency can be increased drastically. This EAGER program
will perform a combined fundamental and experimental investigation to validate
this scientific hypothesis, which will pave the way towards the development of
practically high-efficiency two-dimensional photo-harvesting devices.
&lt;br/&gt;Technical: In most thin-film energy harvesting/conversion
applications, there is a long-existing trade-off between optical absorption and
thickness of semiconductor materials. It is particularly true in recently
emerging two-dimensional-material-based optoelectronic photodetector and
photovoltaic devices. Due to the atomically thin layers, their light-matter
interactions (e.g., optical absorption and energy conversion enfficiency) are
weak. Consequently, absorption enhancement strategies will introduce
revolutionary advances to these two-dimensional-based light-harvesting devices.
On the other hand, it is generally believed that minimizing the volume of active
material can suppress the noise and thermal excess carriers in the diffusion-
limited operating mode for photodetectors. It can also minimize the
recombination of carriers in photovoltaic devices. However, this advantage is
only viable in the vertical device architecture where carriers flow along the
vertical direction and dominated by out-of-plane quantum tunneling. In this
project, we will develop a fundemantal strategy to enhance the light-matter
interaction of two-dimensional-materials based on strong interference effect in
planar nanocavities, and overcome the limitation between the optical absorption
and film thickness for energy harvesting devices. This principle is quite
general and will be applied to explore the spectrally tunable absorption
enhancement of various absorptive two-dimensional materials and will create new
regimes of optical physics and energy applications. Combined with more efficient
carrier transport properties along the vertical direction, the untapped
potential of this mechanism for enhanced light-matter interaction will be
demonstrated in Nano-cavity enhanced two-dimensional photodetector and
photovoltaic devices with significantly improved power conversion efficiency.