* 1745364
* EAGER:  Monolithic Integration of 1000-ch Neural Interface System on a Single Silicon Die
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2020
* Brian Kim, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* John Zhang
* 06/30/2020
* USD 79,532.00

The parallel recordings from large neuron populations in the sensory cortex and
primary motor cortex reveal the rich information encoded into neural signals,
and guide research in restoring cognitive and motor behaviors. In such devices,
the quality of information relies on the density of neural signals being
recorded. The recording density in the current brain-machine interface remains
insufficient to be clinically relevant and significant improvements are required
to help severely disabled patients to fully regain mobility or other impaired
functions. However, the lack of technology to accommodate the massive wire
counts between electrode-amplifier pairs and the complexity in the hermetic
packaging in implant devices present large challenges in moving forward beyond
1000 channels to be clinically relevant. This Early-concept Grant for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will investigate a transformative approach
to design a wireless neural interface system by integrating the entire wireless
neural system into a thin silicon substrate, and, thus, introduce an avenue for
developing a scalable neural interface system for future brain-machine interface
research and clinical use. The success of this exploratory study will transform
the design approach taken by brain-machine interface developers, which involves
the use of external wires for interconnections and thus complicates the
packaging, and will have an immediate impact in research studies focused on
cognitive and motor behaviors that demands the extraction of high density neural
recordings directly from the cortex to guide the neural prosthetics. It will
also significantly lower the manufacturing cost by fabricating the device using
common semiconductor fabrication methods, which may result in more affordable
neural prosthetics for patients in need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fully-implantable
neural interface systems are designed with a complex integration of many
components including: electrode arrays, amplifiers, processors, wireless
transmitters, and a battery. Every existing system uses wire feedthroughs to
establish electrical connections between the components, and the connections are
insulated with casing/packaging to prevent leakage during implant. This method
presents many limitations: the scalability is severely limited by the number of
feedthroughs available, the runtime is limited to the battery capacity, the
metal casing can impede wireless transmissions, the long-term durability is
questionable with non-metallic packaging, and the bulky implant device
complicates the surgical procedure and introduces discomfort/risks to patients.
Thus, the development of a new brain-machine interface with large-scale
recording capability are needed to advance basic brain research, large-scale
brain mapping and clinical translations of brain-machine interface. This project
aims to monolithically integrate a 1000-ch neural interface system in a silicon
substrate. The monolithic integration of every component into a single silicon
die enables high-density recordings by eliminating external wires and linking
all the electronic interconnections using sub-micron interconnects in integrated
circuits. This approach yields unprecedented advantages, compared to the
conventional approach, including the design simplicity and the elimination of
complex packaging. The study is composed of the following efforts: (1) On-chip
integration of the pillar electrode array, (2) Backplane integration of RF
planar coils and capacitors, and (3) Design of low-power small footprint
amplifier array and peripheral circuitries for high-throughput neural
recordings.