* 1745385
* EAGER:   SSDIM:   Synthetic and Simulated Data for American Multi-Modal Energy Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Amro Farid, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 01/31/2023
* USD 460,757.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project seeks to
develop and make available simulated and synthetic data on four distinct but
highly interdependent critical infrastructures (ICIs) in the United States: the
electric power grid, the natural gas supply chain, the oil supply chain, and the
coal supply chain. When viewed together as a single system, these four
infrastructures define the American Multi-Modal Energy System (AMES). All data
and software from this project will be made freely and publicly available in
order to facilitate academic, industry, and government research on the AMES, as
well as reuse and refinement of software code. Methods developed through this
research will be integrated into the Dartmouth engineering systems curriculum at
the undergraduate and graduate levels and communicated more broadly online
through the Irving Institute for Energy &amp; Society and the edX platform.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of simulated and synthetic data on
mechanistic and human aspects of AMES will fundamentally improve understanding
of the structure and behavior of these systems. This objective will be achieved
by addressing how can raw data be algorithmically converted into a simulated
dataset of the AMES, and by enriching the simulated dataset through advanced
mathematical modeling of AMES system behavior. This work will lead to a
structural hetero-functional graph model of the AMES, as well as to a dynamic,
spatially-distributed simulation that corresponds to the best available data on
the AMES.