* 1745328
* US-Brazil Workshop on Biosensors:   Bioanalytics to Device Integration; November 8-10, 2017; Federal University of ABC, Santo Andre, Sao Paulo, Brazil
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Suchismita Guha, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2019
* USD 47,858.00

The US-Brazil workshop on biosensors will bring together leading US and
Brazilian scientists and researchers from multidisciplinary areas of
engineering, physics, chemistry, and biology. The workshop, co-funded by the
Office of International Science and Engineering, will take place November 8-10,
2017, at the Federal University of ABC, Santo Andre, which is located in the
outskirts of Sao Paulo, Brazil. The workshop will bring together roughly 100
participants including 25 speakers (from US and Brazil) and approximately 70
graduate students and scientists from Brazil. Infectious diseases such as
visceral Leishmaniasis, malaria, and tuberculosis are endemic to several parts
of South America, Africa, and Asia. Although there have been major breakthroughs
in micro/nanotechnology based diagnosis for several infectious diseases, many
pathogens lack vaccines or drugs. In such cases, early detection is imperative
to prevent patient mortality. The goal of the workshop is to provide a roadmap
for the development of low-cost sensitive detectors for vector-borne diseases by
integrating biomaterials research and semiconductor technology. The proposed
workshop enables a holistic approach towards the development and integration of
low-cost diagnostic tools that will have a great impact on global health by
involving researchers with complementary skill sets with Brazilian scientists
working in areas of bioanalytics, biocompatible protein-based and other nano-
materials, and US scientists specializing in semiconductor technology, optical,
magnetic and electrical detection, and processes involving scalable integration
of circuits. New collaborative efforts between scientists from the US and Brazil
are envisaged, paving the way for training students in bioelectronics, sensing,
and diagnostics. Such collaborative efforts will open up opportunities for
student exchange programs between the two countries, and the development of new
curricula for graduate and undergraduate education both in the US and Brazil
targeting low-cost biosensors in a cross-disciplinary
fashion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop will provide a unique
platform for researchers to discuss the recent innovations, trends, and
multitude of challenges encountered in the areas of new materials for
biosensors, analytical tools, and integration of biosensing circuits using
complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor and other scalable technology. Although
polymerase chain reaction and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay have become
common tools for clinical diagnosis, they are not ideal for mass screening in
endemic areas of a particular disease. The integration of semiconductor
technology with biology is essential for the development of fast low-cost
sensors. There are several challenges in integrating semiconductor technology
with bio-interfaces. The workshop will address these challenges by focusing on
new materials development, integrating electrolytic gated transistors, and
seamless integration of microfluidic arrays incorporating different transducing
mechanisms including electrical, magnetic and optical integrability. The
multidisciplinary approach of the workshop not only advances basic science and
technology in terms of materials development and providing new insights into
physical phenomena; it promises to have a huge impact in the development of low-
cost portable sensors which will be a game-changer for fast detection, and could
revolutionize the mechanism of detection, clinical diagnosis, and improvement of
therapeutic handling of several vector-borne diseases.