* 1745580
* EAGER: SSDIM: Superimposed Simulations: Fast Generation of Synthetic Data of Interdependent Critical Infrastructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Richard Fujimoto, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 08/31/2019
* USD 180,000.00

To guide the design, construction, operation and improved understanding of
modern interdependent critical infrastructure (ICI) systems, decision-makers
require data that capture the interactions among them their actors (i.e.,
citizens, firms, developers, and governments). Detailed computer simulations are
essential to generating such data, particularly when physical implementations of
ICI designs do not yet exist. However, generation of data derived from
simulations is time consuming due to the complexity of the systems that must be
modeled and the large number of computational experiments that are required. To
address this challenge new computer algorithms exploiting modern high
performance computing technologies will be developed. In this EArly-concept
Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project, algorithms will be applied to
create data sets for test cases including the interaction of water, energy,
transportation infrastructures and people in the city of Atlanta. The new
algorithms will provide insights into how to evaluate threats and opportunities
within and across ICIs, to analyze strengths and weaknesses, and to design
solutions, products, and services that meet societal needs and goals.

Current computational methods to assess options, various technology
combinations, and human interactions within ICIs are time-consuming and
computationally intensive. A new approach, termed superimposed simulations, will
be developed to rapidly create synthetic data that captures the
interdependencies and dynamics of critical infrastructures and people. By
exploiting similarities among the many simulation runs in conjunction with
parallel computing techniques, the new algorithms aim to accelerate simulations
involving multiple interacting and interdependent critical infrastructure
systems and human actors by one or two orders of magnitude. These newly
developed algorithms will allow the quick generation of large data sets that can
be used to determine the effects of ICI combinations, human behaviors, and
policy tools on energy, water, carbon emissions, and human health.