* 1745404
* EAGER: Determining the role of priority effects within dominant species to govern intra-specific variation and diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Lara Souza, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2021
* USD 181,657.00

This research will extend an important area of current research that has
explored how ecological communities re-assemble after disturbance events like
fires, floods or droughts. Recent studies have shown that the order in which
different species arrive to an area often has a big influence on the makeup and
function of the resulting ecological community, with early arrivers having an
advantage over late arrivers. This is referred to as a priority effect. This
research will use plant populations in the Southern Great Plains to extend this
idea beyond interactions among species, looking at whether priority effects in
the interactions among individuals of the same species shape populations in
terms of the diversity and their functions in the ecosystem. Researchers will
study six different grass species, allowing comparison of species that are
native to the Great Plains to some that are invading non-natives. This
comparison will strengthen our understanding of how diversity within species
comes about and influences the rest of the community, and may help us manage
this important habitat. In addition, findings from this study will be a major
step forward into broader implications including novel approaches to ecological
intensification efforts in sustainable agriculture. The project also will
provide research training for high school, undergraduate and graduate students,
including women and students from underrepresented minority
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the significance of intra-specific
diversity for the functioning and services of ecosystems, including the cycling
of water and carbon, is novel. The research project will investigate the
generalization of priority effects driven by resource competition during
community assembly to the context of intra-specific interactions, in order to
determine intra-specific biodiversity and ecosystem function in three native and
three exotic plant species commonly found in the Southern Great Plains. Cutting-
edge plant genotyping will be linked with plant phenotyping via quantification
of above- and belowground functional and physiological traits, to describe the
patterns of association of genetic and phenotypic diversity within and across
sites. These data will inform the construction of greenhouse mesocosm
experiments which will be used to test hypotheses regarding the relative
importance of priority effects among types of sites and between native and non-
native species. The latter experiments will shed light on how the outcomes of
plant genotype arrival order during population organization ultimately shapes
the functioning of ecosystems.