* 1745638
* RTG:  Combinatorics and Algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Pavlo Pylyavskyy, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,999,937.00

This RTG at the University of Minnesota is a collaborative effort between three
PIs in Combinatorics and two in Algebra. The many undergraduates, PhD students
and postdocs supervised by these PIs require broad training in modern areas of
mathematics in common to the PIs' research programs, such as representation
theory, algebraic geometry, topology, and mathematical physics. In addition to
continuing the most successful features of the previous RTG in Combinatorics,
such as the strong and growing summer REU program, the current grant will fund
exciting new initiatives, such as a high-profile Open Problems conference in
Combinatorics, a first-time hosting of the EDGE summer program for enhancing
graduate education of underrepresented groups, plus more joint seminars between
the combinatorics and algebra groups. It will also continue the outreach to
Minnesota's regional neighboring institutions, and will serve our high school
students by providing enrichment courses to the University of Minnesota Talented
Youth Math Program (UMTYMP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RTG will take advantage of
the cross-fertilization between the algebra and combinatorics groups at
Minnesota to provide a richer mentoring experience for our undergraduates,
graduate students and postdocs. The PIs have by now learned to make their summer
REU program not only an exciting and immersive research experience for the
undergraduates, but also a laboratory for training our grad students and
postdocs in the art of mentorship. The PIs' topics courses (e.g., in
representation theory of Hecke algebras, reflection groups, quivers, invariant
theory, free resolutions, integrable systems, cluster algebras, total positivity
and electrical networks) are designed to introduce a large cross-section of the
graduate and postdoc population, along with talented undergraduates, to many of
the hottest topics in modern mathematics and physics. Postdocs will be given
unique opportunities to teach talented high school students, and graduate
students will learn valuable organizational skills in hosting the annual
Graduate Student Combinatorics Conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.