* 1745673
* EAGER:  Supporting GUI-Based Text Analytics on Social Media Data by Non-Technical Users
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Chen Li, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2019
* USD 216,000.00

A wealth of information is being created at an increasingly fast rate from
social media sources such as Twitter. Many researchers need text analytics on
social media data to obtain domain-specific insights, by doing various
computational tasks such as keyword search, regular expression, natural language
processing, and sentiment analysis. A main challenge is their lack of IT
background, making it hard for them to conduct research efficiently. In
addition, very often they need to use machine learning models to do deep
analysis, and the data-preparation process for generating labeled instances for
training models can be time consuming and labor intensive.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies how to support text analytics on
social media data by users who do not have a strong IT background. It develops
an open-source system with the following goals: (1) modularizing common text
computation as basic operators; (2) providing a graphic user interface (GUI) for
users to form a workflow plan declaratively without writing code; (3) supporting
text analytics as a Web-based service; and (4) supporting indexing whenever
possible to improve performance. The system has been under development on Github
for more than 15 months with more than 30 committers and 21 thousand lines of
high-quality source code. An initial prototype is setup and used by Public
Health researchers at UC Irvine to analyze Twitter data. The techniques are
general-purpose, systems-oriented, and can benefit many other domains as well.