* 1745365
* EAGER: Top-down processes to extract meaning from images
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Gabriel Kreiman, Children's Hospital Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 09/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Humans rapidly process images and scenes so they can understand what is
occurring in the world around them. Humans do this so well that they outperform
existing computational models' ability to understand what elements exist in the
scene, their location, or the actions they are involved in. One limitation of
computational models is that they do not provide a detailed interpretation of a
scene's individual components the way that humans do. For example, the
computational model may successfully label an image as containing a horse, but
humans will also naturally identify smaller components of the horse, such as the
eyes, ears, mouth, mane, legs, tail, and so on. Identifying these individual
components and their relationships is an essential part of human visual
processing. Such differences in visual understanding create a challenge for
constructing artificial computational systems that see and interpret the world
similarly to humans. These fundamental limitations are related to the fact that
existing computational systems rely primarily on what is called 'bottom-up
processing', the sequential processing of visual features from simple to complex
ones, which does not account for how human cognition influences meaningful
recognition of the image. Our main goal is to investigate the computational
principles and neurobiological systems that allow for integration of cognitive
experience within visual processing. We combine psychological studies in humans,
neurophysiological recordings of brain tissue, and computational work to build
an integrative model capable of extracting complex meaning from images, in a way
that more closely resembles human capabilities. The research will have broad
implications in understanding how the brain processes images and the neural
circuits that are involved. Additionally, the insights obtained from this
project could have applications in a broad range of domains including robot
vision, automatic navigation, surveillance, and automatic clinical image
understanding. As part of the project we will establish a summer course based on
the research products in which we will train the next generation of scholars at
the interface of brains, minds, and machines.

In the human brain, information flows both from low to higher visual areas, as
well as in the opposite direction throughout ventral visual cortex. This bi-
directional processing has a fundamental role in cortical computations. Yet, the
functions implemented by the top-down components form an open problem in visual
cognition. Understanding the limitations of feed-forward processing (from lower
to higher visual regions) will shed light on the mechanisms by which prior
knowledge is integrated with bottom-up inputs, and guide development of new
algorithms for extracting useful meaning from sensory input. Applications of
deep network models now play a significant role in machine learning across
multiple domains, but these fail to capture fundamental aspects of visual
processing. Our research program examines the possibility that existing feed-
forward recognition models constitute a first stage leading to the initial
activation of category candidates, which is incomplete and often inaccurate. The
first stage then triggers the application of class-specific processes, which
recover a richer and more accurate interpretation of the visible scene, and
reject initial false candidates. The proposal involves three main components:
(i) Psychophysics experiments to evaluate the accuracy and speed of how humans
extract meaning from images; (ii) Invasive neurophysiological recordings along
the human ventral visual cortex to understand the neural circuits involved in
extracting meaning from a novel data set of minimal images; (iii) A
computational model that integrates bottom-up computations with top-down signals
to extract meaning from images. The research efforts will be combined with
educational and outreach activities aimed at disseminating the scientific
insights and incorporating cutting-edge research into training opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students.