* 1745555
* I-Corps: Probiotic with a Unique Mode of Action and Delivery Method
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Charles Hinton, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 09/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact of this I-Corps project involves a novel probiotic, which
potentially treats gut problems including irritable bowel syndrome (IBS),
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), weight gain, and small intestinal bacterial
overgrowth (SIBO). Many key mechanisms of the human body are in part control by
the microbes that live in our gut. The way that we currently view, diagnose, and
treat many diseases is fundamentally changing with this knowledge. While dozens
of diseases are now intrinsically tied with dysbiosis in the gut, of which 1000s
of species of microbes reside, we currently have few probiotics as treatment
despite the fact that the number of human clinical trials on probiotics in the
past 10 years has increased 20-fold. When developed, this technology can
potentially be applied to supplements and drugs to help counter noncompliance,
and therefore have a significant commercial impact in other fields as well. This
is, in addition, to the broad reaching impact on helping individuals with gut
problems, which is estimated to be over 50 million. This product also provides
an irritant free alternative for those desiring a regular
probiotic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project surrounds the bacteria,
Paenibacillus 79-R4 (Pb 79-R4), which has been isolated and characterized. In
vitro trials show very encouraging results that indicated that this strain
drastically reduces enteric methane and hydrogen production, which could be
transferred to a commercial product. Pb 79-R4 eliminates the gases that are
positively correlated with gut problems in humans- in animal models the
supplemental-Pb strain decreased methane-producing activity by over 50%. This
technology will also include a prebiotic and a novel beverage-based interactive
mode of delivery, which will work in synergy with the bacteria and lets the user
know it is working allowing the effects of the probiotic to work faster and
decrease the abandonment period in first-time users. In addition, results from
in vitro simulations have resulted in significant reductions in certain
pathogens.