* 1745813
* EAGER: Improving Reproducibility of Computing Research using Proxy Workloads
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Lizy John, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 09/30/2021
* USD 214,000.00

Computing research is very minimally reproduced, debunked, or deconstructed.
This project explores the use of miniaturized proxy workloads in improving the
reproducibility of computing research. Past research has shown the usefulness of
miniaturized proxy workloads in pre-silicon design explorations. By creating
improved proxies and by disseminating the proxies and the proxy generator, this
project aims to explore usage of proxies from the reproducibility angle. The
proxies can enable reproducing studies with reduced effort, conducting studies
with a broad range of benchmarks, improving ruggedness/robustness of the study
by covering a large workload space, and by offering more opportunities for
simulator calibration and validation. A repository with fine-grain proxies,
proxies that cover a broad workload space, and directed proxies that validate
specific architectural aspects, is likely to lead to adoption of proxies which
will make a big stride towards reproducibility.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed explorations will likely transform how computing research is conducted
and validated. Currently there is minimal effort on reproducibility of computing
research, although ACM has recently instituted a reproducibility initiative. The
proposed project can make a broad impact in improving the reproducibility of
computing research by the use of proxy workloads. Researchers in the community
will be enabled to better validate their own work, and reproduce others' work
without an overwhelming amount of time/effort. Other barriers towards
reproducibility such as lack of accessibility to proprietary benchmarks, lack of
benchmarks in many regions of the workload space, etc. can be addressed using
miniaturized proxy workloads. The repository created in the project will enable
computing researchers to enhance repeatability, robustness, reliability and
generalizability of their research findings. Along with the research activities,
an educational and dissemination program will be designed to communicate the
results of this work to students, researchers, as well as a more general
audience, and to include students from underrepresented communities. The
research results will be published at the PI's website.