* 1745707
* International Conference on Textures of Materials (ICOTOM) 2017; St. George, Utah; November 5-10, 2017
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2018
* David Fullwood, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 07/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

In Materials Science and Engineering, "texture" refers to the arrangement of
crystals at the microstructure scale within a wide range of materials, including
metals, minerals and even various plastics. The study of texture has led to
improved design of materials, the discovery of new superconducting materials,
and the uncovering of many exciting insights into the geological history of the
earth. The International Conference on Texture of Materials (ICOTOM) has
provided a venue for international cross-pollination of scientific ideas in this
field since 1968. This year?s conference, which returns to USA every nine years,
will be held in St George, Utah. The conference celebrates 25 years since the
invention of automated Electron Backscatter Diffraction - "EBSD" - originally
funded by the National Science Foundation, and fundamental to accelerated
scientific study in a myriad of sub-disciplines. Furthermore, it is held in a
geologically significant region that will provide added meaning for many
participants. This conference support award will allow broad student
participation in the conference. This support will allow students from all
backgrounds to attend this important scientific gathering. Students will be
encouraged to present oral or poster presentations, and thus interact directly
with top scientists in the field. This effort will help prepare and diversify
the next generation of texture scientists for tackling some of society's most
fundamental engineering issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Texture analysis lies at
the heart of the study of crystalline materials. At the 2017 International
Conference on Textures of Materials, sessions will address the growing diversity
of topics, including texture of interfaces, deformation and transformation
textures, microstructure characterization, and the relationships between
microstructure and behavior of a wide range of geological and engineering
materials. The conference provides a unique venue for the cross pollination of
ideas across the two primary texture disciplines: geoscience and materials
science. The exchange of cutting-edge knowledge from the two communities will
facilitate research developments in both.