* 1745508
* Convergence NNA: ANCHOR - Arctic Network for Coastal Community Hazards, Observations, and Integrated Research
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Thomas Ravens, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 06/30/2024
* USD 497,169.00

This Research Coordination Network (ANCHOR) will integrate social science,
natural science and engineering to address the imminent challenges that coastal
communities in the Alaskan Arctic face due to rapid permafrost thaw and coastal
erosion. These processes are causing buildings, roads and areas of cultural
significance to be undermined as coastlines subside and collapse into the sea.
These communities are considering a range of options, which include abandoning
their homelands for higher ground or building seawalls to limit erosion. At the
same time, opportunities are now being realized for communities to participate
in monitoring of the environmental processes that are occurring. Through the
activities of ANCHOR, local communities will participate in monitoring that will
help inform their decision-making processes. Overall, ANCHOR will help to
develop scientifically robust approaches for coastal communities to respond to
coastal erosion. Further, some activities will be focused in one local coastal
community in Alaska in order to evaluate approaches developed through ANCHOR.
This project promotes convergence by integrating understanding of the social
processes of community decision-making under duress and uncertainty with
advances in relevant natural science disciplines (coastal geophysics, soil
physics, climate modelling, and atmospheric science) and disciplines in civil
and environmental engineering (geotechnical engineering, risk assessment, water
and wastewater treatment).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ANCHOR project will
integrate social science, natural science and engineering by employing a testbed
approach focused on a specific community to address the imminent challenges that
coastal communities in the Arctic face due to rapid permafrost thaw and coastal
erosion. These communities are now considering the drastic options of abandoning
their homelands for higher ground or armoring in place, as buildings, roads and
culturally significant areas collapse into the sea. At the same time,
opportunities are now being realized for communities to participate in local
scale monitoring and research. To provide a scientific foundation for addressing
these imminent decisions, this ANCHOR project will bring together leading
natural and social scientists and engineers with local community leaders, state
and federal managers and NGO's to integrate local knowledge with state of the
art natural science and engineering. For example, ANCHOR will develop a
monitoring network with community involvement in one Alaskan coastal
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.