* 1745714
* Design and Analysis of Optimization Experiments with Internal Noise to Maximize Alignment of Carbon Nanotubes
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Tirthankar Dasgupta, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2019
* USD 129,844.00

Over the past several decades, carbon nanotubes (CNT) have risen to the
forefront of scientific research due to their unique electrical, mechanical and
optical properties. However, transferring these properties from nanoscale
materials to industrial-scale products often requires alignment (orientation in
the same direction) of CNT. One of the important consequences of alignment is
improved conductivity, a highly desirable property in electro-chemical water
treatment and closely associated with research endeavors to improve quality of
drinking water. Therefore, identification of scalable and cost-effective
experimental conditions that maximize alignment of CNT is an important research
problem. This is addressed in the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research aims to establish statistical methodologies for designing and analyzing
efficient experiments that determine conditions for maximizing alignment of CNT,
when one or more input factors are prone to internal noise. The proposed
research consists of three tasks, with particular focus on addressing the
challenges arising from presence of factors with internal noise and complexity
of the response surface. (i) Developing a Bayesian approach to response-surface
optimization with noisy inputs. Such an approach allows the experimenter to
combine data on output, controllable input, and uncontrollable input from
different sources; is a natural way of incorporating expert knowledge into the
analysis; and provides a natural framework for optimal design of experiments
with noisy inputs. (ii) Efficient design of optimization experiments with noisy
inputs. The research will focus on developing a comprehensive design strategy,
which is a combination of model-free and Bayesian model-based optimal designs.
The model-free design will address the challenges arising from internal noise
and complex response surface. (iii) Demonstration and validation of the
developed methodologies in the co-PI's lab. A series of experiments will be
planned to apply the developed statistical methodology in an attempt to identify
factors that trigger alignment of CNT and also to identify their optimum levels
to maximize alignment. The proposed framework will allow an experimenter to
effectively capture the transmission of uncertainty from input variables to
output variables by combining data from different sources, and by utilizing a
combination of model-free and model-based experimental designs for efficient
exploration of complex response surfaces. From a material scientist's
perspective, the proposed method will provide a much more accurate
quantification of uncertainty, resulting in more reliable predictions about
optimal process conditions as determined from laboratory experiments.