* 1745219
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Effect of Population Aggregation on Food Acquisition Behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2017,10/31/2019
* Sunday Eiselt, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2019
* USD 13,189.00

Food security, the available of and access to safe and healthy food, is a key
question in global social theory and a primary concern for developing nations.
As the world's population increases, longitudinal data is necessary to
understand how best to measure food insecurity in modern communities and to
predict, prepare for, and respond to future trends in food availability and
access as the environment changes. Archaeology is perfectly poised to examine
how communities in the past collectively managed crucial animal protein
resources and how such practices can lead to food sovereignty (the democratic
production and distribution of food) and enduring traditions over time. Under
the guidance of Dr. B. Sunday Eiselt, Rachel Burger will investigate how
Ancestral Pueblo animal management practices ensured food security during a
period of rapid population growth in the northern Rio Grande region of New
Mexico starting in the early AD 1300s. This research has far-reaching
implications for understanding human responses to food scarcity in prehistoric
and contemporary societies during periods of environmental and social change and
can inform present-day animal conservation efforts. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
northern Rio Grande prior to Spanish contact was the site of rapid population
growth in a very concentrated area. Large populations living in aggregated
villages appeared in the region suddenly and grew from just under 300 to
approximately 11,500 people from A.D. 1300 to 1400. Many scholars view this
abrupt demographic rise as one outcome of community coalescence, or the coming
together of disparate populations in such a way that creates a new and cohesive
community identity. The assumption has been that coalescence increases economic,
political, and community well-being, but past research has shown that increased
population density results in a decreased availability to wild animal
populations. How coalescent communities managed the challenges presented by this
resource depression is understudied. When and under what conditions did animal
management practices and institutions emerge among Ancestral Pueblo communities
and what was their role in the acquisition and management of animal resources?
What role did they play in the maintenance of large aggregated villages? To
address these questions project activities will focus on the analysis of a large
animal bone assemblage from the site of Sapa'owingeh in the Rio Chama watershed.
These analyses will examine changes in animal protein abundance and use, which
will then be compared to existing datasets for population growth and
dendroclimatic reconstructions to evaluate the conditions under which the social
institutions that regulated access to game originated and operated. The data
generated will be used to address a novel approach to understand how complex
socio-religious developments emerged and to evaluate certain expectations
regarding models of Pueblo aggregation. In a region dominated by studies of
prehistoric agriculture, this research has the potential to transform our
understanding of coalescent communities and the role of managerial institutions
in regulating access to animal products and coping with stress under different
natural and social environmental and demographic conditions.