* 1745730
* STTR Phase I:  Development of low-cost optical sensor for nitrate detection in agricultural soils and environmental waters
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Yves Chabal, Max-IR Labs, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 03/31/2019
* USD 224,967.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to help control
nutrient contaminants in soil and water for the benefit of the world?s
population, by providing sustainable access to safe drinking water. The
estimated national economic cost of nitrogen pollution in drinking water is $19
billion annually, while the cost to freshwater ecosystems is $78 billion per
year. Traditional water-quality monitoring practices are based on "grab-samples"
that are sent for laboratory analyses that may take days to weeks to be
completed. Similar traditional approaches are found in agriculture where
excessive application of nitrate-based fertilizers may result in agricultural
runoff that carries pollution to ground and surface water sources. The proposed
high-performance, low-cost optical sensor technology will enable deployment of a
dense real-time monitoring network in freshwater sources, water treatment
facilities, and farms, and will gain a significant foothold in the $6.8B global
water quality monitoring equipment market. In the event of natural disasters,
integration of the proposed nitrate sensor will be useful in assessment of water
quality in local water resources, providing communities with real-time
information on water safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project focuses on the development of a non-dispersive
infrared (NDIR) detector for real-time monitoring of nitrate concentration in
water. This effort will combine nitrate-selective ion-exchange membrane
technology with today's low-cost infrared (IR) components for the design of a
new type of sensor targeting applications in aqueous environment. The proposed
technology relies on infrared optical fibers for signal transmission. Currently,
the use of commercial real-time optical nitrate sensors, based on ultra-violet
(UV) absorption, is limited due to the optical interferences in the UV spectra
related to the inorganic and organic substances, and reduced UV transmission
caused by turbidity. The proposed proprietary IR technology is designed to
overcome these shortcomings through implementation of smart membrane filtering.
The instrument will provide high frequency data collection in dynamic aqueous
environments with a wide sensitivity range (1 to 100 ppm). This technology can
be further expanded for measurement of additional nutrients and contaminants,
making it a robust tool for water quality assessment.