* 1745640
* RTG: Advancing Machine Learning - Causality and Interpretability
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Bin Yu, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,908,227.00

Faculty in the Statistics Department at the University of California, Berkeley
develop an integrated program of research and education to support undergraduate
research experiences, graduate research traineeships, and postdoctoral
fellowships. The common research theme of the training activities is how to
leverage the predictive power of statistical machine learning to address
questions of causality and interpretability. The project aims to prepare the
next generation of statisticians and data scientists to tackle new, important
problems that arise from the analysis of massive data. Intuitively it seems that
more reliable and precise inferences can be drawn from larger data sets.
However, decisions and interventions must be interpretable and justified by
statistical measures of uncertainty, which are challenging in this setting. This
program will infuse ideas, energy, and resources in an integrated way at all
levels of the educational program, from the undergraduate major to the
postdoctoral experience, recruiting students and preparing them to participate
in the extraordinary range of opportunities in this exciting new
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this project will pursue theory to
bridge the gap between causal inference and machine learning research, including
high-dimensional inference, multiple testing, causal inference with
interference, and causality and gene expression. The project is at the frontiers
of statistics and data science, bridging the divide between machine learning and
causal inference with potential impact far beyond the discipline of statistics.
Plans are to redesign and expand the engagement of undergraduates in research
through a graduate student mentorship program; to design new courses at the
graduate and undergraduate levels, including an introductory course that builds
on connections between data science, social sciences, and ethics; and to enhance
graduate research training via a research symposium. The program will include a
graduate professional development training series that addresses topics in
technology, presentation and writing skills, and building an inclusive science
community. The project will also provide significant training in teaching for
graduate students and postdoctoral associates. Through a combination of
channels, the innovations in training will spread to other institutions and
disciplines, e.g., demonstrating the power of machine learning in policy and
education settings where causal inference is central. The program also includes
the development of educational materials with plans to disseminate them widely
throughout the broader community. The project will emphasize recruitment and
retention efforts targeted to increase the diversity of domestic
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.