* 1745341
* Evolution of Oxygenic Photosynthesis as Preserved in Melainabacterial Genomes from Lake Vanda, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2018,05/31/2022
* Dawn Sumner, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Maria Vernet
* 05/31/2022
* USD 323,861.00

Atmospheric oxygen rose suddenly approximately 2.4 billion years ago after
Cyanobacteria evolved the ability to produce oxygen through photosynthesis
(oxygenic photosynthesis). This change permanently altered the future of life on
Earth, yet little is known about the evolutionary processes leading to it. The
Melainabacteria were first discovered in 2013 and are closely related non-
photosynthetic relatives of the first group of organisms capable of oxygenic
photosynthesis. This project will utilize existing data on metagenomes from
microbial mats in Lake Vanda, an ice-covered lake in Antarctica where many
sequences of Melainabacteria have been previously identified. From this genetic
information, the project aims to assess the metabolic capabilities of these
Melainabacteria and identify their potential ecological roles. The project will
additionally evaluate the evolutionary relationships among the Cyanobacteria and
Melainabacteria and closely related organisms that will allow an advancement in
understanding of the evolutionary path that lead to oxygenic photosynthesis on
Earth.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on extracting
evolutionary information from the genomic data of Melainabacteria and
Sericytochromatia, recently-described groups closely related to but basal to the
Cyanobacteria. The characterization of novel members of these groups in samples
from Lake Vanda, Antarctica, will provide insights into the path and processes
involved in the evolution of oxygenic photosynthesis. The research will focus on
assessing the metabolic capabilities of Melainabacteri, deriving the
evolutionary relationships among Melainabacteria and Cyanobacteria and
reconstructing potential evolutionary pathways leading to oxygenic
photosynthesis. The project will focus on 12 metagenomes where the researchers
expect to obtain genomes for at least the eight most abundant Melainabacteria in
the dataset. Melainabacteria bins will be annotated and preliminary metabolic
pathways will be constructed. The project will utilize full-length sequences of
marker genes from across the bacterial domain with a particular focus on taxa
that are oxygenic or anoxygenic phototrophs and use the marker genes, to build a
rooted "backbone" tree. Incomplete or short sequences from the metagenomes will
be added to the tree using the Evolutionary Placement Algorithm. The researchers
will also build a corresponding phylogenetic tree using a Bayesian framework and
compare their topologies. By doing so, the project aims to improve the
understanding of the evolution of oxygenic photosynthesis, which caused the most
significant change in Earth's surface chemistry. Specifically, they will
document a significantly broader metabolic diversity within the Melainabacteria
than has been previously identified, gain significant insights into their
metabolic evolution, their evolutionary relationships with the Cyanobacteria,
and the evolutionary steps leading to the origin of oxygenic photosynthesis.
This research will have the overall effect of constraining key evolutionary
processes in the origin of oxygenic photosynthesis. It will provide the
foundation for future studies by indicating where a genomic record of the
evolution of oxygenic photosynthesis may be preserved. Results will also be
shared with middle school children through the development of scientific lesson
plans in collaboration with teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.