* 1745573
* Workshop: Addressing the Technical Security Challenges of Emerging Digital Financial Services
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Patrick Traynor, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Indrajit Ray
* 07/31/2020
* USD 49,975.00

While wealthier individuals throughout the world have access to cashless payment
systems (e.g., credit and debit cards) that are managed by a secured and insured
financial infrastructure (e.g., banks and other financial institutions), many of
the world's poor lack banking or credit accounts. Emerging digital financial
services are now offered as "mobile money apps" by companies operating in
various countries and are widely used. Unfortunately, the researchers have found
that the cybersecurity protections provided by many of these apps are far weaker
than those provided by the traditional financial institutions. Thus, many of the
world's poorest people unknowingly risk their money by using badly protected
mobile money apps. This workshop brings together cybersecurity experts from
academia and industry, as well as government policy makers and representatives
from non-governmental organizations. The participants will develop and document
specific technical recommendations for mobile money app security properties.

Cybersecurity researchers, students and engineers have expressed their interest
in working to improve cybersecurity for emerging digital financial services. By
developing and documenting specific technical recommendations for mobile money
app security, this workshop will provide guidance on concrete actions that can
be taken by the research and development communities. While identifying
technology approaches to improving cybersecurity in mobile money apps, the
workshop will encourage new cross-disciplinary collaboration among participants,
as they work together to address this challenging problem.