* 1745234
* Travel Awards for Students from Underrepresented Groups for the 2017 Cognitive Development Society (CDS) Meeting
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Marianella Casasola, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Chalandra Bryant
* 07/31/2018
* USD 19,925.00

The Cognitive Development Society (CDS) seeks to promote the attendance, at its
2017 meeting, of young scholars from groups traditionally underrepresented in
the Developmental Sciences. This award will support travel awards to graduate
students, post-docs, and young investigators from these groups, broadly defined.
Travel awards increase the likelihood that young scholars will have the means to
attend and present their work at CDS, and will support them through their
participation in a mentoring program, designed to ensure that young scholars
will have a productive experience at the conference. A broader impact of the
present award is to increase the likelihood that the conference experience
endures beyond the conference itself by strengthening the professional networks
of young scholars from traditionally underrepresented groups.

The present award will increase the diversity of the CDS membership through
several mechanisms. Supporting travel to the CDS conference increases the number
of young scholars from underrepresented groups who are able to attend the
conference. To promote the awardees' networking, professional socialization, and
retention in the Society, funds will be used for a mentoring program that will
match each young scholar with a more experienced scholar in the field, one with
similar research interests. Through an organized meeting at the start of the
conference with their mentors, mentees will have the opportunity to forge new
professional relationships and broaden their academic network. Mentors will
support their mentees by attending the young scholars' presentations. In
addition, the young scholars will meet with each other and with the recipients
of the 2015 travel awards to foster a community of young scholars from
underrepresented groups. Finally, CDS will highlight the recipients of the 2017
travel awards at the conference by acknowledging them during an awards ceremony.
Anonymous feedback from the young scholars and their mentors following the 2017
meeting will help ensure that CDS can improve upon the effectiveness of its
travel awards in achieving its goal of increasing the involvement of scholars
traditionally under-represented in the field.