* 1745530
* EAGER:  Novel family of cellulose acetate fluorescent nanoparticles for bio imaging applications
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Igor Sokolov, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 81,211.00

Cellulose is one of the most abundant biocompatible materials on earth.
Cellulose acetate, viscose, or artificial silk are the most technologically
developed and well-characterized derivatives of cellulose, which is completely
benign to humans. While various optical materials have been developed from
cellulose acetate (CA), optical nanomaterials made of this cellulose derivative
are nonexistent. This proposal deals with the development of the first
fluorescent nanoparticles and nanofibers made of cellulose acetate (CA), that
would make them potentially transformative for biomedical applications.

The project will study CA nano-optical properties then evaluate their potential
as labels and sensors for biophotonic applications. Initial work demonstrated
the presence of donor-acceptor coupling between encapsulated dyes. Encapsulating
hydrophobic fluorescent dyes have many advantages such as exceptional
photostability. These features suggest the potential of a new platform for
developing a whole family of fluorescent nanoparticles and nanosensors for
biomedical applications. There is a clear need to address key exploratory
questions to reduce the high risk of this transformative approach. For example,
photonic properties of encapsulated dyes inside of CA nanoparticles has not been
studied. The role of fluorescent and functional molecules in the particle
synthesis is unclear. These questions and others will be addressed in the
project.