* 1745882
* SBIR Phase I:  Post-Quantum Cryptography in Resource-Constrained Devices
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Brandon Langenberg, PQSecure Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 04/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to deliver state of the art cryptography and
cybersecurity solutions to Internet of Things (IoTs) and embedded device
designers, enterprise hardware and software vendors, and government contractors
against the attack of classical and quantum computers. It has been widely
accepted that quantum computer attacks on today's security are expected to
become a reality within the next decade. Some progress towards constructing
quantum computers has been made, although no quantum computers with serious
computing power have yet been built. Nevertheless, we believe it is prudent to
plan ahead for future needs as it normally takes many years to change
cryptosystem deployments due to network effects. This project plans to implement
quantum-safe solutions which will require the integration of quantum-safe
software and/or hardware cryptographic solutions on resource-constrained devices
used in embedded systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will design, develop, and implement
cryptographic algorithms that are suitable for small and resource-constrained
devices employing hard and complex mathematical assumptions known to be
classical- and quantum-safe. All post-quantum cryptography candidates need to be
evaluated in terms of performance while the target applications are resource-
constrained devices. Long-term and lightweight security are two main parameters
that need to be considered while deploying quantum-safe cryptographic algorithms
in these devices. We plan to employ a special class of quantum-safe algorithms
based on maps on elliptic curves to achieve the required performance and
security. Cryptosystems based on these maps on the elliptic curves are known to
provide the smallest possible key sizes and their security level is determined
by a simple choice of a single parameter in comparison to the other quantum-safe
candidates. The hardware designs are taken through VLSI design flow to realize
the integrated circuits that are evaluated for energy/power, area/performance,
and security. The project will generate new insights and results about how to be
safe and secure in the quantum era. This project will also contribute to the
ongoing standardization effort by the US government and other international
organizations.