* 1745825
* EAGER: Administrative Burden in University Research Administration
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Barry Bozeman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 02/29/2020
* USD 170,975.00

The productivity and efficiency of government-sponsored academic research
depends not only upon the training, creativity, and hard work of researchers but
also the administrative systems within which researchers are embedded. However,
increases in the research policy-based administrative burdens experienced by
academic researchers suggests there is a worrisome reduction in the percentage
of work time available for core research activities. The project explores the
relation of universities? diverse research administration policies and
organizational structures on researchers' administrative experiences. The
broader impacts of the study include providing evidence of most effective
strategies for efficient research administration and suggesting possible
administrative reforms, with the objective of enhancing the efficiency and
effectiveness of research administration and, thereby, the productivity of
academic research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research surveys academic principal
investigators about their experiences with research administration, including
perceptions of administration burden, the amount of time spent on grants-related
administration and the strategies employed for effective and efficient research
administration. The project assesses research administration activity in terms
of the time and resources required but also the extent to which a policy
objective. This approach implies that some administrative burden is more harmful
than others; if no significant policy objective is advanced then the efforts at
administrative compliance does little more than promote red tape. By contrast,
activities requiring considerable administrative burden may be redeemed by
serving an important policy goal or social impact. The project is based on (1)
semi-structured interviews with academic researchers, as well as interviews with
university research administrators who are support staff, and (2) administrative
diaries provided by the PIs participating in the project.