* 1745588
* I-Corps: Acoustical and Electronic Musical Instruments and Educational Materials
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Jay Brockman, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 12/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to explore
the commercial potential of an educational innovation that can transform aspects
of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and arts education
in both formal and informal settings through the construction, analysis, and
performance upon a set of custom musical instruments. By coupling rigorous STEM
learning with musical concepts, the technology can engage a diverse group of
students in STEM who may otherwise not express an interest. The technology may
be commercialized in a variety of ways, ranging from kits for the home market to
complete curricula for school programs. Commercialization of the technology has
significant potential to improve educational outcomes in these important STEM
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project builds upon a technology base
of custom acoustical and electronic musical instruments that was initially
developed for an educational program that has been attended by over 2,000 people
in 10 states at schools, museums, and performing arts centers. The intellectual
merit of the work derives from the close coupling between musical content and
state K-12 standards in mathematics, science, and engineering. A pilot 6-week
after school program for third grade students used the technology to draw
connections between music and fractions, geometry, the physics of sound,
engineering materials, and engineering design, which are all topics in the
educational standards for that grade level. Prototype instruments for higher
grade levels illustrate concepts in algebra, pre-calculus, electronics, and
computer programming.