* 1745835
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Consortium at the 2017 International Conference of Mobile Brain ­Body Imaging (MoBI) and the Neuroscience of Art, Innovation and Creativity
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Jose Contreras-Vidal, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2019
* USD 20,000.00

This is funding to provide partial support for the 2017 International Conference
of Mobile Brain-Body Imaging (MoBI) and the Neuroscience of Art, Innovation and
Creativity. The conference's goal is to identify the challenges and
opportunities for engaging the creative arts to promote novel and innovative
approaches for solving complex problems in science, engineering, education and
medicine. The meeting, to be held at Hotel Arenas, Valencia, Spain on September
10-13, 2017, is being jointly co-organized by the PI (University of Houston) and
Prof. Jose Azorin (University Miguel Hernandez de Elche, Spain). The agenda is
designed to promote audience-driven critical discussions on the state of the
art, and to facilitate art-science collaborations. To these ends, the conference
will adhere to a single track format with thematic sessions that are jointly
chaired by a scientist/engineer and an artist, with no more than 4 speakers per
session. Interactive demonstrations, a brain-computer interface hackathon, and
Art-Sci performances that address grand challenges will add to the conference's
broad impact. A special issue of the journal Brain-Computer Interfaces will
promote wide dissemination of findings from the conference presentations and
hackathon designs. The Doctoral Consortium will consist of several intertwined
activities that will provide an opportunity for the trainees to network while
exploring and developing their research interests within the context of an
interdisciplinary conference, under the guidance of a distinguished group of
international researchers, artists and innovators. To assure diversity, the
organizers will actively recruit student participants from under-represented
groups, including women and minorities, with a maximum of two students per
institution (and if two then one must be a
female).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Doctoral consortium trainees will be divided into
multidisciplinary teams to serve as scribes (one team/conference session) that
will report back to the participants at the end of the conference, thus
promoting both written and oral skills. Each team, in collaboration with two
faculty mentors, will draft a manuscript to be published in an edited book on
Artistic BCI Systems, and they will also compete in the BCI Hackathon which is
sponsored by the IEEE Brain Initiative with the goal of fostering innovation in
the field. Additionally, trainees will each prepare a poster about their
graduate/postdoctoral research, to obtain feedback from faculty and peers.