* 1745591
* I-Corps: Modular throwable robot for inspection and characterization
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Herbert Tanner, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 12/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project lies in offering
modular and reconfigurable mobile robotics solutions for deployment in
environments that maybe unsafe for humans. Modularity offers a unique
opportunity to address needs in multiple markets with a single solution when
coupled with a suite of specific attachment modules. It is envisioned that the
platform will first be adopted by law enforcement. Other market that will be
explored include defense applications, where there seems to be interest in
throwable robots. Robotic assistance for environmental management is another
potential market area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on
developments in small mobile robots for applications in search, rescue and
reconnaissance. This modular platform is designed to support efforts in the
context of "robotics science of safety." Novel aspects in design provide more
advanced mobility characteristics than currently available platforms. The
locomotion designs spawns new questions and opportunities for basic research in
legged locomotion. A modular form-factor makes this robot accessible to a larger
audience, with an inexpensive baseline model that can be upgraded with sensor
and hardware packages as needed by the customers. Throwable, and miniature sized
robots are currently an asset to operations involving reconnaissance, inspection
and characterization in dangerous environments. Driven by customer feedback, the
features of this robot can carefully evolve to meet the needs of each customer
segment.