* 1745199
* Using a Researcher-Practitioner Partnership Approach to Develop a Shared Evaluation and Research Agenda for Computer Science for All
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Alan Peterfreund, SageFox Consulting Group, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,465,165.00

This project will adapt the Researcher-Practitioner Partnership (RPP) approach
to build the capacity of evaluators and researchers to study, understand, and
report on their project efforts and to establish a participant-driven, multi-
site research agenda for the Computer Science for All: Researcher-Practitioner
Partnerships (CS for All: RPP) program. This project will engage the community
of funded partnerships to collectively work to develop a shared research agenda
to facilitate the understanding of the efficacy of the RPP model and the impact
on computer science (CS) and computational thinking (CT) education. The
connected community will bring together the RPP research and evaluation teams
and connect them to the larger CS for All education community through the
CSforAll Consortium. This connection to the larger community will ensure a
bidirectional dissemination - with the intellectual merit of the projects
reaching the largest possible audience of researchers and practitioners, as well
as ongoing connection to initiatives outside the funded RPPs helping to share
learnings and best practices as well. The project will develop a community
consensus on a research agenda for the RPP programs which may provide a solid
foundation for future research, program evaluation and assessment. This project
has the potential to affect the relative success of the CS for All: RPP projects
and the program overall. By creating a connected community, it will promote a
robust culture of sharing knowledge from experts (both within and external to
the community), lessons learned in near-real time associated with
implementation, having sharing common metrics that are both supportive of the
projects and the program overall, and shared means of dissemination to broader
communities of researchers and practitioners. This project has the broader
potential of serving as a model for NSF programs for proactively developing the
methods for shared learning and common metrics that have more commonly been
developed and implemented at much later stages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To both
support the projects and maintain awareness of the larger initiatives, we
propose a Connected Community of Practice (CCOP). A Researcher-Evaluator Working
Group (R-EWG) will form to provide a process for pursuing the shared research
agenda developed through the CCOP. This structure will facilitate data
collection, analysis, interpretation and dissemination at a program level. The
approach will also generate a mechanism for those outside of the immediate RPP
community to benefit from this investment by engaging in learning from the
participants that will add value to the initial investment by supporting those
undertaking the RPP work and scaling to a broader audience. Recognizing that the
funded partnerships will likely be highly diverse in terms of size, context,
research area and strength of working relationships, the project will deeply
engage evaluators and researchers at the onset of the program to collaboratively
develop a shared data set to capture participation data across projects, co-
define an RPP research agenda to advance the field of CT/CS educational
knowledge, and use the CS for All infrastructure for collaboration, learning and
dissemination. This approach will lay the foundation for program-wide assessment
and learning. The project will facilitate the community in developing a
framework for answering: 1. What are the RPP-specific activities that are high-
leverage/highly effective in affecting quality computer science education? 2.
What common indicators are appropriate to collect across CS for All: RPP
projects to demonstrate the relative and overall effectiveness of the RPP
projects? 3. Using these indicators, what are the outcomes and impact of the CS
for All: RPP projects for districts, teachers and students?