* 1745018
* Collaborative Research: Physical Mechanisms Driving Food Web Focusing in Antarctic Biological Hotspots
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* William Fraser, Polar Oceans Research Group
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 08/31/2023
* USD 291,446.00

Undersea canyons play disproportionately important roles as oceanic biological
hotspots and are critical for our understanding of many coastal ecosystems.
Canyon-associated biological hotspots have persisted for thousands of years
Along the Western Antarctic Peninsula, despite significant climate variability.
Observations of currents over Palmer Deep canyon, a representative hotspot along
the Western Antarctic Peninsula, indicate that surface phytoplankton blooms
enter and exit the local hotspot on scales of ~1-2 days. This time of residence
is in conflict with the prevailing idea that canyon associated hotspots are
primarily maintained by phytoplankton that are locally grown in association with
these features by the upwelling of deep waters rich with nutrients that fuel the
phytoplankton growth. Instead, the implication is that horizontal ocean
circulation is likely more important to maintaining these biological hotspots
than local upwelling through its physical concentrating effects. This project
seeks to better resolve the factors that create and maintain focused areas of
biological activity at canyons along the Western Antarctic Peninsula and create
local foraging areas for marine mammals and birds. The project focus is in the
analysis of the ocean transport and concentration mechanisms that sustain these
biological hotspots, connecting oceanography to phytoplankton and krill, up
through the food web to one of the resident predators, penguins. In addition,
the research will engage with teachers from school districts serving
underrepresented and underserved students by integrating the instructors and
their students completely with the science team. Students will conduct their own
research with the same data over the same time as researchers on the project.
Revealing the fundamental mechanisms that sustain these known hotspots will
significantly advance our understanding of the observed connection between
submarine canyons and persistent penguin population hotspots over ecological
time, and provide a new model for how Antarctic hotspots function.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To understand the physical mechanisms that support
persistent hotspots along the Western Antarctic Peninsula (WAP), this project
will integrate a modeling and field program that will target the processes
responsible for transporting and concentrating phytoplankton and krill biomass
to known penguin foraging locations. Within the Palmer Deep canyon, a
representative hotspot, the team will deploy a High Frequency Radar (HFR)
coastal surface current mapping network, uniquely equipped to identify the
eddies and frontal regions that concentrate phytoplankton and krill. The field
program, centered on surface features identified by the HFR, will include (i) a
coordinated fleet of gliders to survey hydrography, chlorophyll fluorescence,
optical backscatter, and active acoustics at the scale of the targeted
convergent features; (ii) precise penguin tracking with GPS-linked satellite
telemetry and time-depth recorders (TDRs); (iii) and weekly small boat surveys
that adaptively target and track convergent features to measure phytoplankton,
krill, and hydrography. A high resolution physical model will generalize our
field measurements to other known hotspots along the WAP through simulation and
determine which physical mechanisms lead to the maintenance of these hotspots.
The project will also engage educators, students, and members of the general
public in Antarctic research and data analysis with an education program that
will advance teaching and learning as well as broadening participation of under-
represented groups. This engagement includes professional development workshops,
live connections to the public and classrooms, student research symposia, and
program evaluation. Together the integrated research and engagement will advance
our understanding of the role regional transport pathways and local depth
dependent concentrating physical mechanisms play in sustaining these biological
hotspots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.