* 1746309
* SBIR Phase I:  A user-friendly point-of-care device for simultaneous G6PDH and hemoglobin determination
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Robert Harper, Analytical Diagnostic Solutions
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project seeks to transform treatment regimens for individuals
suffering from malaria infections. Malaria, particularly caused by Plasmodium
vivax (P. vivax) and Plasmodium ovale (P. ovale) remain a potential cause of
morbidity and mortality amongst the 2.85 billion people living at risk of
infection. The only drug currently available for treatment therapy for P. vivax
and P. ovale is primaquine, which can cause life-threatening anemia in
individuals with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency. Clinicians
often do not prescribe primaquine due to the high prevalence (8%) of individuals
who are born with G6PD deficiency. The World Health Organization (WHO) and the
Program for Appropriate Technology in Health (PATH) are urgently searching for a
reliable assay for the diagnosis of G6PD deficiency to effectively treat
patients and aid in the eradication of P. vivax and P. ovale malaria. This novel
assay proposed will quantify G6PD and hemoglobin (Hgb) concentration
simultaneously from a finger stick sample. This system comprises a single test
strip coupled with a reflectance-based meter and cell phone application with
Blue Tooth connectivity to incorporate a patient?s I.D., test results, global
tracking, and history of treatment. It is projected that this point-of-care
assay will be used to screen &gt;23 million people for G6PD within 5 years of
launch and generate over $27.5 million in compounded revenue. In the long term,
the novel assay will create a universal point-of-care platform that can be
utilized for other diseases or conditions that affect patients in the Unites
States for which point-of-care assays are not currently
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed novel platform will quantify both
Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase (G6PD) and hemoglobin (Hgb) concentrations
simultaneously from a single finger stick sample using a point-of-care (POC)
reflectance-based meter. There is currently no such device on the market, which
is urgently needed to screen patients being treated for P. vivax and P. ovale
malaria. A significant portion (8%) of the world population is G6PD deficient,
which places these individuals at risk for life-threatening anemia after
treatment with current therapeutics such as primaquine against malaria. The POC
assay utilizes a novel lysis and reagent layer membrane platform to enable a
reflectance-based meter to measure non-over lapping wavelengths to quantify G6PD
and Hgb concentrations. In this proposal, a functional prototype reflectance-
based meter and data collection software will be constructed and compared to
readings obtained using the current ?gold standard? Konica Minolta
spectrophotometer. Secondly, the POC assay will be validated through performance
testing using a G6PD-deficient whole blood specimen bank provided by the Program
for Appropriate Technology in Health (PATH). Concordance of the data obtained
from 20 samples for the proposed assay will be compared to the World Health
Organization?s (WHO) approved spectrophotometric method for measuring G6PD and
an FDA approved method for measuring Hgb. Success will be indicated by an R2
&gt; 0.95, which demonstrates linear equivalency, as well as a demonstration
that 90% of the data points fall within 2 sigma of each value. A POC assay that
can simultaneously screen patients for both G6PD deficiency and Hgb levels will
allow clinicians to treat patients with P. vivax and P. ovale malaria infections
effectively and aid in the eradication of malaria.&lt;br/&gt;