* 1746106
* Workshop:   Integrating the natural and social sciences and the arts to foster public engagement with issues of community sustainability
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Marda Kirn, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 07/31/2020
* USD 49,997.00

The Institute of Arctic and Alpine Research (INSTAAR) at the University of
Colorado, Boulder, in collaboration with EcoArts Connections and the National
Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR), is conducting an initial planning
workshop and related activities which will be the first of three stepwise
convenings over the next two or three years to gather experts from the fields of
natural and social sciences, arts, energy/water conservation, and related
disciplines. The initiative will work to establish an operational strategy for
knowledge sharing across collaborating entities, networks, and associations. The
major goal is to strengthen collaboration of professionals nationally to better
conceive, conduct, and evaluate projects for the public that work at the
intersection of science, arts, and sustainability (environmental, social and
economic). Many communities around the country have been seeking to address
increasingly pressing problems about their ability to sustain the vitality,
health and resilience of their regions and the lives of their residents.
Bringing inter-disciplinary knowledge and skills to bear on these issues is
considered to be critical. Between 24 - 32 professionals will be involved. The
workshop will be conducted simultaneously in Boulder, CO and at Princeton
University, with communication between the two sites. This project is funded by
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.

Intended outcomes from this first workshop include: 1) identification and
preliminary mapping of successful evidence-based best practices in science-arts-
sustainability collaborations 2) a strategic vision for interdisciplinary
collaboration across networks; and 3) an initial framework for the dissemination
of findings that can reach across disciplines. Outputs include 1) preparation of
a pre-workshop briefing booklet based in part on interviews of professionals in
the various disciplines; 2) a post-workshop white paper; 3) a network of experts
from the participating disciplinary fields; and 4) an agenda for the second
(larger) convening. The trans-disciplinary strategy promises to more efficiently
and effectively bring STEM disciplines to a wider public in collaboration with
the arts through sustainability topics that are place-based, targeted to, and
meaningful for specific audiences.