* 1746430
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel platform for the preparation of nanomaterial samples for cryo-TEM imaging: capturing nanostructures at unparalleled time scales without artifacts
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Michael Godfrin, NanoSoft, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/28/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is aimed at developing a
superior platform for the preparation of samples for cryogenic Transmission
Electron Microscopy (cryo-TEM). Cryo-TEM provides images of morphologies and
structures of liquid-based samples with nanometer resolution, which provides
crucial insight for the development of materials in the pharmaceutical,
chemicals and consumer goods industries, amongst others. Cryo-TEM sample
preparation requires a sample thinning step, which results in a ~10-100 nm thick
film that is appropriate for both sample vitrification and imaging. Commercial
platforms provide thin samples with a blotting process, which has many
drawbacks. Blotting leads to a variety of significant sample artifacts due to
shear induced on sample structures. Furthermore, time required for blotting
limits temporal resolution for studies of dynamic processes. A proprietary
blotless sample thinning strategy reduces shear induced on the sample, and
improves temporal resolution of sample preparation, by orders of magnitude. The
integration of an innovative process with these advantages into a commercial
platform would capture a large portion of the cryo-TEM sample preparation
market, and even expand the cryo-TEM market due to improved and expanded
characterization capabilities crucial to many industries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project involves the
development of an innovative blotless sample preparation process that overcomes
the aforesaid drawbacks of the commercial state of the art, while providing
extensive areas of thin sample film for imaging. Experiments and simulations
will build a rigorous understanding of the critical properties of these
processes, namely fluid flow induced by the process, and corresponding shear in
the sample, the time required for removal of excess sample volume and the
resulting yield of sample film area for imaging. This research will provide
control of a superior sample thinning process that will be integrated into a
disruptive cryo-TEM sample preparation platform. This platform will provide
unparalleled insight into materials and processes that will reduce risk and
accelerate development timelines for many industries utilizing nanomaterials.