* 1746147
* EAGER:  External Magnetic Field Assisted Laser Metal Deposition of Highly Oriented Crystalline Ni-Based Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Jing Shi, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2019
* USD 75,000.00

Directionally solidified nickel-based alloys are widely used as structural
materials under extreme environments, where high-temperature strength, thermal
creep resistance, and anti-oxidation properties are required. Although additive
manufacturing (AM) has become more competitive in manufacturing metal components
in recent years, the existing AM methods are still inadequate to fabricate
directionally solidified alloys because of the obstacles in controlling crystal
nucleation and growth orientations. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) project investigates fundamental research enabling laser metal
deposition to produce highly oriented crystal metals with the help of magnetic
fields. It effectively pushes the limit of AM methods to manufacturing high-end
structural parts for a number of industries including aerospace, power
generation, and automotive, with shorter product development times and enhanced
performance, and at affordable costs.

The research objective is to investigate the fundamental science of magnetic
field effects on crystal orientation of Ni-based alloys in a laser metal
deposition process. With the proper design and process parameters, this
project's AM method is expected to mitigate or even eliminate the columnar to
equiaxed transition phenomenon, and thus it can produce highly oriented
crystalline Ni-based alloys with controllable orientation and improved
mechanical properties. Crystal orientation control is realized by applying a
strong static magnetic field in laser metal deposition, so that the angle
between the easy magnetization axis and the preferred growth direction in in
line with that between magnetic field and thermal flux. Comprehensive mechanical
property measurements and microstructure characterization will be carried out to
validate the effectiveness of the method. The crystal orientation control
mechanism will provide unprecedented insight on developing a new generation of
high performance alloys with controllable microstructure.