* 1746858
* STTR Phase I:  Intelligent Planning and Control Software for EV Charging Infrastructure
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Scott Moura, Microgrid Labs Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 04/30/2019
* USD 224,475.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to develop smart
software to plan and control Electric Vehicle (EV) charging infrastructure in
commercial facilities, such as workplaces, hotels, car rental centers, parking
garages, etc. The EV planning software finds the optimal design balancing design
tradeoffs such as EV customer satisfaction, grid stability limits and financial
constraints. This software will help facility operators to optimize their EV
charging infrastructure by minimizing their operating costs and maximizing their
revenue by utilizing intelligent scheduling and pricing strategies. The software
leverages the latest developments in stochastic optimization for designing an
optimal configuration of EV infrastructure that is robust to variations in
mobility behavior of the users. This will enable public utilities to save
billions of dollars by deferring expensive upgrades to their existing
infrastructure. It will also empower small consulting businesses, facility
managers and electrical contractors to design and build EV infrastructure
without any specialized knowledge of optimization or
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase I project addresses the problem of planning and controlling EV charging
infrastructure to meet the rapidly growing energy demands of EV owners. EVs are
expected to comprise 30% of all cars globally by 2030. This forecasted increase
over the next 10 years is of major concern for utilities, and commercial real
estate owners. Given the long commute distances, driving habits, time taken to
charge using home-based chargers and range anxiety, there is a need for charging
locations at workplaces, hotels, and car rental centers. Chargers at these
locations will generally be medium power Level 2 chargers, which are 5 to 10
times the size of typical home chargers. Simultaneous uncontrolled charging of
several EVs at these locations will easily overload the local electrical
infrastructure. The software mitigates this problem by designing an optimal EV
infrastructure together with optimally sized onsite generation and storage. The
controlling solution ensures that the grid impacts are minimized by scheduling
the installed EV chargers together with onsite generation and storage with
optimal set points in real time.