* 1746089
* International Travel Grant: Connected Audiences
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2018
* Sasha Palmquist, Institute for Learning Innovation
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 12/31/2018
* USD 29,931.00

Informal science educators, researchers, and evaluators are interested in
directly engaging with the challenges and opportunities of increasing diversity
and meaningful intersectionality. The annual meetings of organizations like the
American Alliance of Museums (AAM), the Association of Science and Technology
Centers (ASTC), and the Visitors Studies Association (VSA) have consistently
featured sessions relevant to these topics. NSF's goal of broadening
participation means there are also project specific efforts currently underway
to directly address methods and strategies for increasing diversity and
inclusion in STEM. The Connected Audience Conference will provide an opportunity
to engage in an international conversation that directly leverages this momentum
and has the potential to motivate focused collective action among participants
producing a greater impact on the field. This travel award supports an enhanced
U.S. presence at the Connected Audience International Conference to be held in
Vienna, Austria September 14-16, 2017. The premise of the meeting is that the
role of museums and other cultural institutions in society is rapidly changing
as these institutions strive to become more vital resources and partners in
initiatives designed to support science learning, social development and growth
in an increasingly science and technology-driven world. The goal for U.S.
participation is to support established researchers in this area as well as mid-
career professionals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting is comprised of: thought
leaders, case study presenters, poster presenters and general participants.
Thought leaders will highlight theoretical and practical approaches to
broadening participation designed to be provocative and stimulate discussion in
the breakout sessions. Case study presenters will be paired to illustrate
similarities and/or differences in project design, implementation, or outcomes.
Structuring the case studies in this way supports conversations focused on
cross-country and cross-institution synergies. The poster session presenters
were selected and grouped to encourage productive and comparisons specifically
exploring the potential for cross-cutting methods to more effectively engage
with audiences. U.S. attendees supported under this travel grant represent those
who are engaged in this work actively and positioned to continue making
important contributions to the field. International participants represent a
range of cultural institutions with the largest proportion attending from
science centers and children's museums; however, all participants come because
of their interest, concerns and expertise in issues related to equity and
greater participation. The structure of the meeting will provide participants
with significant time for iterative reflection and active discussion to make
each session personally relevant and meaningful. This intentionally allows lots
of room for pushback and even outright disagreement with any of the ideas
proposed by the thought leaders, case study presenters, and poster session
presenters. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award is funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to,
and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning
in informal environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for
broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences. The Connected
Audience conference is designed to significantly contribute to an international
conversation about the future of informal science education institutions in the
learning ecologies of 21st century citizens. Through exploration of new findings
and international cross-pollination of best practices, conference participants
will be able to develop improved strategies for increasing and diversifying who
participates in informal science education experiences as well as how they
participate. A white paper written by the U.S. participants will be used to
share findings and insights with the broader informal education field.