* 1746816
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Women Legislators and Partisan Bridging
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2019
* Bailey Sanders, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2019
* USD 12,700.00

The negative consequences of political polarization have been discussed at
length by scholars, politicians, and political commentators alike as evidence of
a desperate need for a renewal of bipartisanship. Yet scholarship on
bipartisanship --why it occurs, how it occurs, and when it occurs-- remains
quite limited. This project develops a theory of "partisan bridging" that
predicts when and why certain legislators might be willing to cross the partisan
aisle in search of compromise. While this theory is generalizable across a wide
array of groups and contexts, the focus here is on female legislators because
women have been at the forefront of what bipartisanship can be found in
legislatures. Preliminary results suggest that female legislators' policy
preferences encourage bipartisan behavior and that they are not punished as much
for bipartisan behavior as are male legislators. Thus, although the distance
between the parties seems to be insurmountable, this research suggests that
bipartisan behavior can still occur and that it may be female legislators who
will lead the charge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to two
distinct literatures: that on Congress and its polarization and that concerning
female legislators and their impact on political institutions. By placing
legislators' personal policy preferences at the forefront, this theoretical work
on partisan bridging builds on the work of Fenno (1973) and Burden (1994) and
reminds scholars that Mayhew's (1974) portrait of legislators as "single-minded
seekers of reelection" might not capture the full complexity of legislative
behavior. By addressing the puzzle of women's continued bipartisan behavior,
this work sheds light on the constraints and opportunities female legislators
face when making policy decisions. This research also furthers our understanding
of the role of partisanship as a mediating factor in women's representation of
women. More generally, this work suggests that polarization's consequences might
be conditioned upon the level of gender diversity in our
legislatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.