* 1746302
* SBIR Phase I:  In Situ Three-dimensional Surface Roughness Gauge
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2018
* Brad Kimbrough, 4 D Technology Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate
feasibility of the first metrology system capable of quantifying surface
roughness in three dimensions in situ in production environments. Current shop
floor systems are almost entirely two-dimensional stylus-based systems that are
fragile, incapable of measuring complex geometries and have high cost of
ownership. A shop-floor, 3D roughness system will enable greater sampling,
faster process feedback and improved time-to-results which will enhance
competitiveness across a wide range of U.S. industries including medical
devices, aerospace, transportation, and defense. All precision machined
components call out surface roughness or texture, yet achieving consistent
results with existing contact gauges is difficult and time consuming. It is
believed that a shop floor, non-contact roughness measurement device could gain
significant market share, with sales upwards of $50M/year upon proving
correlation with existing trusted laboratory techniques. Also, trusted, readily
available roughness information on almost any machined surface will enable
enhanced quality, lifetime, and aesthetics for precision manufacturers,
improving competitiveness and reducing waste across a variety of industries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is due to its
leveraging of recent advances in a variety of fields including additive
manufacturing, precision optics, microprocessing, image sensors and
interferometric algorithms to achieve nm-scale vertical resolution in a
vibration-immune device deployable in manufacturing environments. The closest
similar product has vertical resolution more than 100X worse than is proposed
here and the proposed performance goals present significant challenges to
achieve both high resolution and hand-held capability. A successful Phase 1 will
prove that significant synergies between advances in various fields can be
combined to significantly advance performance over prior generation products.
Also, if successful, manufacturers will have access to a far greater range of
process control parameters on more types of surfaces and will be able to improve
quality and yield significantly via faster and more accurate feedback into their
production cycle. The output of this Phase 1 program will be a first article
device that can be brought to customers for demonstration in a shop floor
environment. The device will correlate with existing techniques while solving
many key issues, such as alignment difficulty, scratching surfaces via a contact
measurement, and lack of three-dimensional surface information.