* 1746660
* SBIR Phase I:  Enabling Cuffless Blood Pressure Monitoring with a Novel, Wearable RF-Based Sensor.
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Lillian Dai, Blumio, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to achieve non-contact continuous blood
pressure monitoring and address a critical need for personalized medicine for
hypertension. For the first time, hypertensive individuals will have access to a
comfortable, non-contact, continuous blood pressure monitoring device that
allows for seamless blood pressure measurement without disturbing the user in
any way. With 1 out of every 3 adults in the United States living with
hypertension, The proposed innovation will meet an important need to monitor
blood pressure continuously and noninvasively, thereby providing new insight
into how one's blood pressure responds to medication, exercise, diet, and their
actions. Longer term, the data collected by the team will yield unprecedented
insight into short and long-term blood pressure rhythms and has the potential to
revolutionize personalized medicine for hypertension. This technology is
expected to empower people with the feedback that they need to understand what
works for them as an individual to maintain their
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will lay the ground
work for the development of a continuous-wear blood pressure monitoring device
suitable for everyday use. Through an RF sensor that can detect arterial
movement, the proposed technology can measure cardiovascular parameters for
every heartbeat. To date, a prototype sensor has shown significant promise at
providing accurate blood pressure measurements in a small sample. Beyond blood
pressure information, the fundamental capability of the proposed technology is
to measure arterial stiffness, a critical indicator of cardiovascular health.
With the support of this NSF grant, the team is expected to develop its
technology and ready it for commercialization. The goal for this project is to:
(1) eliminate first-surface reflections and micro-motion artifacts related to RF
sensing; (2) refine blood pressure algorithms and compare measurements against
gold standard BP measurements in healthy, hypotensive, and hypertensive
populations. The proposed technology could become an important scientific tool
to aid the advancement of cardiovascular research, enabling researchers and
clinicians alike to gain further understanding of cardiovascular-related health
parameter.