* 1746111
* EAGER: Improving the Length and Consistency of a Biomimetic Silk Fiber for Industrial Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* AMANDA BROOKS, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2019
* USD 145,000.00

Despite its promise, the full benefits of spider silk have yet to be harnessed
as all previous spinning techniques have resulted in inferior synthetic fibers.
While the natural underlying chemical structure and fiber production of spider
silks have co-evolved over millions of years, synthetic silk fiber production
devices do not mimic the biological process and are plagued by inconsistency
because of (1) a simplified spinning process, and (2) shorter and incomplete
protein/polymers used in spinning. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) award will support the generation of data to demonstrate the
feasibility of mimicking the natural silk spinning process using additive
manufacturing to produce consistent, high-performance, silk-based fibers of
length. This award will enable fundamental research to provide needed knowledge
for the commercial development of spider silk and other high performance micron-
scale fibers. The new process will enable predictable diameter silk fibers for
use in automotive, military, biomedical, and other commercial endeavors to be
produced via shear thinning. Therefore, results from this research will benefit
the U.S. economy and society. This research involves several disciplines
including mechanical engineering, cell and molecular biology, control theory,
and materials science and will help broaden participation of underrepresented
groups, integrating multiple students in research and positively impacting
engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although major ampullate spider silk
has been sought after for its characteristic strength and toughness for decades,
production of the fiber has been hampered by inconsistency. Recently, new
knowledge about the spider's black box silk production has been obtained,
providing important insight into high-performance fiber production. A
combination of chemical environment and mechanical forces are necessary to
produce high-performance, micron-scale fibers. Previous efforts have not
provided this combination and have produced fibers with inferior mechanical
properties. The advent of additive manufacturing and microfluidics will allow
both the shear forces as well as the chemical environment (i.e., pH or ionic
gradient) of the spider's biological silk spinning system to be mimicked,
representing a significant departure from the current dogma of the field. This
research will establish a predictable correlation between the genetic sequence
of the protein, the chemical environment of the spin dope, and the mechanical
shear necessary for protein polymerization and silk production. The research
team will produce (1) an immortalized spider silk gland cell line as a steady
source of silk proteins, (2) micron-sized silk fibers with consistent diameter,
(3) mechanically-tailored and predictable fibers based on alterations of
mechanical shear.