* 1746003
* SBIR Phase I:  Gripper-integrated proximity, contact and force sensing for collaborative robots
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,07/31/2018
* Nicolaus Correll, Robotic Materials Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2018
* USD 224,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to greatly
advance the application of robots and improve robots safety when working
together with humans. Integration of embedded proximity sensors into robotic
end-effectors with an advanced user-interface control system provides a
significant leap from current sensory and control systems available. The
advances of this project in sensing and control will expand the current
boundaries which limit human interaction with the power of robots. The
improvements to both control and sensing in collaborative robots will advance
the use of robots in industrial, medical and household applications. Improved
accuracy will expand robot use and significantly lower manufacturing costs in
many advanced industries. Vast increases in robot safety with this project?s
system will allow expanded human interaction including robot care for the needs
of the growing senior population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will advance our understanding of the
role tactile sensation plays in robust manipulation and lead to novel means for
in-gripper 3D sensing, complementing and in some cases replacing external 3D
perception systems. Specifically, this project will demonstrate the role that
proximity sensing and zero-force contact sensing play in grasp planning, object
registration, and object recognition. A key challenge will be to merge
information from two different sensor technologies that both excel in different
range regimes, but have poor accuracy otherwise. The proposed covariance-based
sensor fusion algorithms will be benchmarked by comparison with 3D models
obtained from high-fidelity laser and 3D-scanning systems. A second challenge
will be to abstract the resulting capability into easy-to-use programming
environments for robotic grasp and manipulation planning, which will be tested
with customers in the field.