* 1746869
* SBIR Phase I:  Digital Media Synchronization, Performance and Urban Education Enhancement
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Charles Spencer, ThinkLive! INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2019
* USD 224,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop a disk
jockey (DJ) musician's instrument for synchronizing digital media data to a
specific location on a device and using this technology for inspiring and
educating middle and high school students in Science, Technology, Engineering,
Art, and Mathematics (STEAM). Global expanding markets for DJ gear, a $1.587B
dollar growth industry, over the past 3 years grew in sales by 21%. As
technology and entertainment converge, DJs represent the new "Superstar" for
today's youth. Thus, this research represents an incentivizing gateway for
students to learn how math, engineering and science intellectual assets can
contribute to musical and artistic innovation. Additionally, middle and/or
junior high school students' analysis of the data derived from a performance and
entertainment-related technology can be an incentivizing and engaging entrance
into STEM academic subjects such as systems design, acoustics, and computer
coding. Given the DJ tool's relation to these topics as well as music's inherent
link with physics and math, its integration into the curriculum of after-school
programming options are expected to foster more interdisciplinary STEM learning.
Afterschool turntable academies as thematic contexts for STEM learning function
as supportive and assistive educational venues. Collectively, the broader impact
of this project should produce economic competitiveness in the music/technology
industry for the U.S. overall and, specifically for youth, enhanced engagement
in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project
stems from the necessity for individuals to seamlessly interface with the
digital world without losing creativity, artistry or individuality. The
technical innovation emerges from determining the coordinate location of an
analog audio occurrence, tracking the change in occurrences, and matching it to
a digital counterpart to follow the changes created. The sensor data points are
utilized to metamorphose the turntable, the musical instrument of the DJ, into a
complete analog/digital educational tool. This technology can offer critical
insights to STEM learning and educational opportunities to students who may feel
that STEM concepts or careers are separate from their personal interests and
cultural context. Anticipated outcomes include advancements in the arts,
sciences and education by contributing to entertainment's most recent and
broadly recognized musical instrument and making it more available in middle and
high school STEM educational curricula and after school activities. The proposed
research intends to investigate, identify and resolve current liabilities
connected with the transient acoustic degradation, deleterious latency
introduction, and physical performance loss by systems intended to mimic the
analog turntable. The research objective will be to create novel interface
models to analyze the elements captured from the DJ musician and translate these
into a commercially and educationally viable platform.