* 1746212
* SBIR Phase I:  Robotic Gripper for Fragile Produce
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Stephen Jens, Harvest Moon Automation
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is that it will enable
the automated harvesting of fragile produce such as strawberries to help offset
a shrinking workforce and increased labor costs. The world population is
expected to grow from 7.3 billion to 11.2 billion by 2100, this population
growth and a rising middle class will place more demand on the agricultural
industry. Presently, the agricultural industry relies solely on manual labor to
harvest its fragile produce. There is no mechanized option that can reliably and
cost effectively harvest these crops. Consequently, the industry is struggling
to harvest its crop, maintain quality and control its costs. High quality and
lower costs can only be maintained if robotic harvesters are utilized that can
pick fragile produce without damage. One of the key elements on the automated
harvester is a gripper that can grab and pick the produce without damage. There
is a market for a reliable and low cost robotic gripper that can gently pick and
handle strawberries and other fragile produce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project involves the development of
a robotic end effector that can be used to harvest and handle fragile produce.
Advances in machine vision and robotics has made it possible to commercially
harvest fragile produce such as strawberries, however, the key component that
still needs to be developed is an end effector that can pick the fruit without
damage and be reliable and cost effective. Design and development of this end
effector will use a new and novel method for grabbing the strawberry with
advances in design, materials and actuation. The proposed R&amp;D plan will
involve repeated testing of the interaction between the fruit and the end
effector. Analytical studies using a series of thin film load sensors mounted on
the end effector will provide real time load profiles that can be used to
optimize the design and performance of the end effector. Shelf life testing of
the fruit will be used to assess the success of the end effector in properly
picking and handling the fruit without damage.