* 1746381
* SBIR Phase I:  Quantum Diamond Sensors with Rapid Sample Transfer for High-Throughput Magnetic Bioassays
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Colin Connolly, Quantum Diamond Technologies Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable the high sample testing throughput
necessary for quantum magnetic bioassay technology to be used for medical
diagnostics, precision health and point of care patient care. Ultrasensitive
detection of low-concentration biomarkers, many of which are currently
undetectable by existing technology, offers new diagnostic capability for
improved clinical decisions and better patient health. Existing high-sensitivity
diagnostic instruments are very complex to use, expensive and require lengthy
sample processing steps - all of which increase health care costs. A new class
of magnetic-based assays combining high sensitivity and low sample processing
using NV diamond quantum sensors has been developed. Magnetic assay platforms
can deliver equivalent results to current biomarker assays faster and at
significantly lower cost. A dramatic reduction in sample processing, combined
with direct detection of magnetic tags, will provide rapid test results, a
critical component for point of care diagnostics. A remaining challenge for this
approach is delivering bioassay samples to the sensor quickly and repeatedly - a
challenge to be addressed in this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a rapid sample
transfer mechanism to enhance the sample throughput of bioassays using a quantum
magnetic sensor. Quantum sensing enables revolutionary magnetic sensitivity and
spatial resolution in a modality compatible with biological samples. However,
the sample must be delivered close to the diamond sensor for analysis, and
transfer between samples must occur in seconds, all while maintaining sensing
performance. Prototype sample transfer systems designed and fabricated in this
project will implement an innovative new process to rapidly transition between
assay samples. The hardware will be compact, require little power, and be
manufacturable at low cost. Prototype sample transfer hardware developed in
Phase I will form the basis for subsequent engineering of quantum sensor based
bioassay devices, with initial applications to the research use only (RUO)
sector, and later to clinical in vitro diagnostics. This advance will bridge the
gap between the capabilities of quantum magnetic sensing and the sample
throughput needs of clinical applications.