* 1746121
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effects of Race and Gender on Evaluations of Black Women
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Antoine Banks, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2019
* USD 22,800.00

This study investigates how stereotypes about race and gender affect support for
black women political candidates. The vast majority of political science
research on race and gender examines these two identities separately.
Consequently, little is known about how race and gender stereotypes interact
when a minority female candidate runs for office. This project examines how
black women candidates face distinct stereotypes based on the intersection of
their race and gender, which make it more difficult for them to win votes in
political campaigns. This study advances our knowledge of the ways stereotypes
affect black women differently than other underrepresented groups, such as white
women and black men. This research also has the potential to help black women
candidates understand the types of campaign messages that exacerbate negative
stereotypes the public holds about black women and which strategies could help
mitigate the influence of these stereotypes. As a result, black women candidates
may be better able to counteract negative stereotypes through their campaigns
and increase their representation in elected office.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scholars of intersectionality theory emphasize that race
and gender are mutually constructed identities, such that their combined
influence is not necessarily equal to sum of its parts. Yet, most research in
political science still examines race and gender in isolation from one another.
This project investigates how stereotypes based on the intersection of race and
gender affect support for black women candidates. Research in social psychology
demonstrates that whites stereotype black women as being tough, assertive, and
domineering. It is unclear, however, how these agentic stereotypes impact
support for black women political candidates. In addition, there is little
empirical research on whether African Americans also stereotype women of their
own racial group in this manner. This project examines a theory of
intersectional stereotyping, which argues that black women candidates are
negatively impacted by unique stereotypes based on the intersection of race and
gender. Specifically, we argue that stereotypes associating black women with
agentic traits lead black women candidates to be evaluated more negatively among
voters outside of their own race and gender group. In other words, we expect
that the agentic stereotype not only reduces support for black women candidates
among white voters, but also reduces support among black men. This theory will
be tested using a national survey experiment, with an over-sample of African
Americans. This research demonstrates the importance of using an intersectional
framework to study the political campaigns of candidates from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.