* 1746160
* Zonal Asymmetries in the Low-Latitude Hydrological Cycle over a Broad Range of Climates
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* William Boos, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2020
* USD 316,829.00

Broadly defined, the subtropics extend from the poleward side of the rainy
equatorial belt to the midlatitude region of the westerly winds, and are
generally characterized by subsidence and dry conditions. Yet the subtropics are
also home to the world's monsoon systems, including the Asian, West African, and
North and South American monsoons, and are thus characterized during the monsoon
seasons by strong east-west contrasts between regions of heavy rainfall and
neighboring drylands. Given the substantial portion of the world's population
inhabiting the subtropics, it is of interest to understand how the strong
hydrologic contrast between monsoon regions and drylands will change in response
to changes in global mean temperature. Climate model projections of 21st century
climate change generally suggest that such contrasts will intensify, but there
is little quantitative agreement from one model to another on the magnitude of
the intensification. And while several mechanisms have been proposed to account
for the intensification, a generally accepted theory for the behavior is still
lacking.

This project examines changes in the subtropical hydrological contrasts by
considering changes in the zonally asymmetric component of the subtropical
atmospheric circulation, including the asymmetric vertical mass flux which is
upward over monsoon regions and downward over the drylands. This approach
differs from previously work which emphasizes the zonal-mean circulation (e.g.
the widening of the Hadley cell and the subtropical belts) and explanations in
terms of energetics, atmospheric stability, and increased moisture content. It
is based on preliminary work using a simpled idealized climate model in which
ocean heat flux covergence is imposed over a patch of the subtropics to induce
locally warmer sea surface temperatures and enhanced precipitation, which
further induces subsidence and dry conditions to the west. Based on the results
of these experiments, three hypotheses are posed: 1) The increase in tropopause
height that occurs as global mean climate warms enhances the vertical mass flux
in stationary circulations, thereby increasing zoanl asymmetries in
precipiation; 2) zonal sea surface temperature gradients decreases as global
mean climate warms, weakening stationary circulations and the hydrological
contrasts they induce; and 3) the mechanism in hypothesis 2 applies over land,
only with surface air equivalent potential temperature playing the role of sea
surface temperature, so that the land surface water budget plays a role. The
research agenda consists of an examination of the seasonal cycle and interannual
variability of subtropical asymmetric circulations in present-day climate from
observations and simulations, followed by an examination of future climate
simulations from an archive of climate models, all guided by the results of the
simple idealized model.

The broader impacts of the work come from the substantial portion of the world's
population inhabiting the subtropics and the potential impacts of hydrological
cycle change on agriculture, water resources, and other necessities of life. The
development of a robust theoretical and conceptual understanding of hydrological
cycle change would have significant benefit for improving confidence in model
projections of future climate change and for guiding future model development.
The project also supports and trains a postdoctoral research associate and a
graduate student, thereby providing for the future workforce in this research
area. The project also supports education and outreach to local high school
students.