* 1746719
* STTR Phase I:  Rational design of highly sensitive and selective chemical sensors using structural color
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Joanna Aizenberg, DrinkSavvy Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project will be the development of sensor-embedded "smart"
drinkware (i.e., stirrers, straws and cups) to actively alert consumers prior to
consumption of a "spiked" beverage, and thus provide a proactive way to prevent
drug-facilitated sexual assault. This sensor technology is based on "smart"
molecularly imprinted color-changing nanomaterials that eliminate the need to
run tedious sample preparation and analysis procedures using conventional
laboratory instrument. The use of a colorimetric sensor as a cost-effective
consumer sensor has far broader applications than just date rape drug detection,
including applications where on-the-spot detection could help protect consumers
from other harmful chemicals, pathogens, drugs, explosives, nerve agents,
allergens, etc. In addition, this project will advance colorimetric sensing
technology using structural color into a robust and rapid sensing platform for
drug monitoring with high sensitivity, response time, and
accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes to
develop a platform technology based on a highly accurate, color-changing sensor
that will initially be used to continuously monitor a beverage for date rape
drugs, and instantaneously detect these adulterants if they are present. Drug-
facilitated sexual assault has become a significant issue, but there is
currently no drug-sensing drinkware available on the market. This drug sensor
will be implemented using highly selective molecular imprinted polymers as
target drug receptors and non-toxic color-changing nanomaterials as signaling
reporters. The scope of the research includes the rational design of the color-
changing nanomaterial used as a signaling reporter for the target drug binding
event, the development of a highly selective molecularly imprinted polymer and
its integration with reporters, and the testing of the color-changing sensor
under different matrices and conditions to verify its sensitivity and
specificity.