* 1746671
* SBIR Phase I:  Wearable Haptic Navigation Device for the Blind and Visually Impaired
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2018
* Keith Kirkland, WearWorks
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is improved navigation
outcomes for blind and visually impaired (BVI) persons, approximately 285
million people worldwide according to World Health Organization (WHO) estimates.
Orientation and Mobility (O&amp;M) is very challenging for the BVI persons, and
is rated as one of their two most significant stressors. The company aims to
commercialize a promising new assistive technology that utilizes advanced
haptics (communication via touch) to enable new powers of navigation for BVI
persons. The technology will be a noninvasive and wearable device that combines
high-definition haptics with GPS and embedded, Bluetooth-enabled orientation
hardware to aid BVI users to navigate to both familiar and new destinations. The
technology strategy overcomes the deficiencies of other BVI waypoint assistive
technologies by more fully exploiting the skin?s sensory capacity and by
utilizing embedded orientation hardware to provide continuous navigation
feedback between GPS signals. The company?s goal is to provide a robust, haptic
navigation solution with a form factor and price point that makes the technology
accessible to the widest possible number of BVI persons, including congenitally
and late blind users, the visually impaired and legally
blind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
I project will research the feasibility of leveraging new insights into haptics
to improve Orientation and Mobility (O&amp;M) outcomes for the millions of
people who suffer from blindness and visual impairment. The company?s
proprietary technology is a novel and innovative strategy that combines
intuitive, high-definition haptics, customized GPS, and embedded orientation
hardware to deliver a superior and practicable solution for BVI navigation. In
contrast to other, currently available haptic navigation technologies, which
utilize unintuitive and/or unsophisticated haptic feedback, this new technology
incorporates refined and varied feedback that provides the user with intuitive
and accurate navigation information. By coupling GPS with Bluetooth-enabled,
embedded orientation hardware, the strategy delivers a continuous stream of
navigation feedback without any gaps in coverage. The project?s key technical
challenges are increasing navigation accuracy, optimizing haptic language
algorithms, and reducing the technology form-factor/scale. The project team
plans to mitigate or eliminate GPS false-reads by investigating the use of
sensor fusion and dew point collection to improve the fidelity of BVI user
location. Haptic algorithms will need to be reworked and optimized for use in a
cost-effective, multi-actuator device with a form/factor that presses firmly yet
comfortably on the wrist.