* 1746198
* SBIR Phase I:  A New Class of Immobilized Metal Affinity Chromatography Resins
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2019
* NVS DINESH K BHUPATHIRAJU, Bionanotech LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be to develop protein purification nanotechnology
and materials for biopharmaceutical applications. Over 150 different protein or
small peptide-based drugs have received FDA approval to treat an array of
diseases (e.g., biologics, monoclonal antibodies, and blood clotting factors).
Protein purification remains a challenge as the number of synthetic peptides
entering clinical trials continues to grow. The global protein and peptide drug
market is projected to exceed $140 billion in 2017 with an annual growth rate of
~5%. Demonstration of the feasibility of the proposed new protein purification
resins is expected to provide a transformational tool for drug research and
development, enhance research in protein/peptide structure and function, and
enable the discovery of new proteins/peptides.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop and commercialize new protein
purification resins based on nanomaterials that will afford capacity independent
of protein size, minimal metal leaching, and better stability with respect to
existing immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) resins for protein
purification. The new resins will ensure greater purity and activity of isolated
proteins with control of epitope-tag specificity, and minimize non-specific
interactions. The new resins will be compatible with current manufacturing
processes and applicable in batch, microplate, sensor chip, and column formats.
The goal is to demonstrate that the proposed technology is superior to existing
commercial resins, as suggested by theoretical predictions and preliminary
results. The new IMAC resins will be synthesized and characterized in terms of
metal content and leaching, protein loading capacity, purity and activity of
proteins isolated, and stability. These resins will be optimized for each mode
of operation. The goal is to establish a new platform technology for analytic
and preparative drug protein isolation.