* 1746077
* EAGER:   A Categorical Approach to Systems Modeling for Systems Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Eswaran Subrahmanian, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Stone
* 02/28/2019
* USD 186,160.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) grant supports
fundamental research into the use of Category Theory (CT) to create a
mathematical framework for systems performance modeling in development of large
engineered systems. Accurate and effective modeling of system performance is
critical to inform decision making in systems engineering projects. A variety of
incommensurable models (physical, logical and human) of system components and
subsystems are relevant to understanding the system as a whole. A major
shortfall of current practice is an inability to compose models to simulate and
study system behavior seamlessly at different levels of abstraction using
different formalisms including differential equations, logic and stochastic
models. This project will investigate a new approach based on CT that promises
to address this shortcoming and transform the practice of systems engineering.
Better predictions of system performance will lead to better-performing
engineered systems in areas that include, but are not limited to, aerospace,
healthcare, defense, and energy. The technical advances of this project will be
demonstrated specifically in the design of stable smart power distribution
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current systems engineering practice relies on
information models such as SysML, BPML and other languages to organize the
numerous models involved in systems engineering and the data they generate. The
objective of this project is to demonstrate CT as a bridging meta-formalism
across the variety of mathematical formalisms used in the modeling of systems.
This research will contribute fundamental results in CT-based systems modeling
that will enable new tools and approaches for systems engineering. The formal
language afforded by CT can transcend the individual modeling formalisms and
offer systems engineers the ability to create a compositional model of the
system for inferencing across scales. The smart power distribution system
problem exhibits many challenging aspects, including stochasticity (in power
loading and generation) and operation that must consider multiple time scales
(milliseconds, minutes, and hours). Success on this testbed problem will provide
compelling evidence that further study of CT-based systems modeling is
warranted.