* 1746475
* Collaborative Research: Increasing Understanding of 30-60 Sec Resolution Satellite Observations with Respect to Convective Initiation and Improving Microphysical Parameterizations
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Jason Otkin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 02/28/2023
* USD 278,796.00

The United States launched a new observational satellite in 2016 called the
Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite, commonly referred to as
GEOS-16. This satellite contains a package of instruments that greatly improves
the remote sensing of clouds and lightning. In this award, researchers will make
use of the rapid scan features of GOES-16 to study physical processes occurring
in cumulus clouds. The research has the potential to improve short time-frame
convective forecasts, which are of economic and public safety interest. The
project will also train the next generation of scientists, ensuring an educated
and prepared workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will use new
super rapid scan (SRS) observations from the GOES-16 Advanced Baseline Imager
(ABI) to examine physical processes occurring in growing and mature convective
clouds. SRS observations will be combined with radar, lightning, and model data
to address the two main questions of the research project: 1) How do we maximize
the value of high-time frequency SRS cloud-sensitive IR observations for
understanding physical processes occurring in cumulus clouds? and 2) How do we
extend the use of SRS datasets in combination with radar and NWP data to obtain
longer predictive lead times for convective storms? The specific basic science
research goals are to gain understanding about in-cloud processes, especially
updraft magnitude, evolution and size, factors influencing parcel buoyancy, and
hydrometeor fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.