* 1746779
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Role of Material Culture in The Establishment of Centralized Authority
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Anne Underhill, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2019
* USD 25,099.00

Through this Doctoral Dissertation Improvement award Ms. Lingyi Zeng under the
direction of Dr. Anne Underhill of Yale University will collect data for her PhD
thesis. Thus the project, in addition to the knowledge it will produce, will
further the intellectual development and career path of a promising and highly
competent young scientist. The central question which this research addresses
is: how do large, geographically extensive social entities, which include
multiple ethnic groups speaking many languages, become integrated into
effectively functioning units for extended periods of time? Ms. Zeng choses as
her example the Mongul empire which was established in the beginning of the 13th
century and at its height extended from Eastern Europe to the Pacific coast of
China. She focuses on the production of centrally produced symbols of power
which, she believes were carefully distributed to reinforce the authority of
delegated officials and confer status on them. The archaeological approach
adopted permits development and modification of this system to be studied over a
time period measured in centuries and provide insight not attainable though a
brief snapshot of time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ms. Zeng will examine the
production, consumption, and distribution of two kinds of porcelains in the
Mongol Empire (13th-14th centuries). She hypothesizes that at the beginning of
the Mongol Empire, the rulers deliberately created these two types of porcelains
as new kinds of prestige goods, and they controlled the production and
distribution of their new products. Later in time, these two types of porcelains
became more common and available to intermediate elites of the empire who were
pursuing higher social status. She will employ a variety of approaches including
not only fieldwork in the well-known porcelain production center in Jingdezhen,
China, but also SEM-EDS analysis of excavated ceramics and collections from
other areas of the Mongol Empire, including Inner Mongolia and Mongolia. She
will investigate different strategies of production and distribution used by
both the central government and local agents, and how they changed over time.
The organization of production and the reasons for technological choices will
also be considered.