* 1746545
* SBIR Phase I:  Chlorine-resistant block polymer nanofiltration membranes with added capacity for heavy-metal capture
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Jaime Mateus, Anfiro
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 03/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is in the development of novel water treatment
technologies that can improve access to clean water and reduce the cost of water
treatment. The innovation is a drop-in-replacement nanofiltration membrane that
is chlorine-resistant, highly permeable, and uniquely customizable. The chlorine
resistance allows for the continuous chlorination of the membrane, which can
reduce bio-fouling and thereby increase the lifespan of a membrane; this has
been a chief innovation target for more than 30 years. The customizability
aspect also facilitates capture of lead and other heavy-metals, broadening the
reach of nanofiltration membranes to sectors that generate significant amounts
of wastewater, such as semiconductor, mining, pulp-and-paper, and colorant
industries. These improvements to nanofiltration technology have clear and
direct societal and economic impact by facilitating water reuse and offering
clean and affordable water solutions. SBIR project funding is enabling the
transition of this promising membrane technology from the laboratory setting
into the early commercialization stages of a valuable new product.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to improve the commercial viability of novel
nanofiltration membranes through the development of more-scalable and tunable
synthesis and manufacturing protocols. The technology is based on self-
assembling block copolymers with customizable chemical functionalities. Previous
methods for the synthesis and casting of the polymers are not ideal, so new
protocols are being developed. The changes to polymer and membrane manufacturing
methods will be conducted systematically to develop new structure-property-
performance relationships that will contribute new knowledge for broader
membrane optimization efforts. A more thorough understanding of how polymer
chemistry dictates membrane performance will also be cultivated by investing in
the customization aspects of the technology. Finally, the performance
characteristics of resulting nanofiltration membranes will be rigorously tested
with respect to permeability, chlorine-resistance, separations, and heavy metal
capture. The overall results will help advance nanofiltration membrane
technology into a platform that is highly modular and can address a wider range
of separations challenges than is currently possible.