* 1746021
* Workshop on coupling of tectonic and surface processes across spatio-temporal scales
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Luc Lavier, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Steven Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2018
* USD 95,152.00

The discovery of feedbacks between geomorphic and tectonic processes has
revolutionized the understanding of the mechanics of mountain building and of
the interactions between landscapes and climate. While the basics are
established, the details of coupling remain debated. Separating the effects of
climate and erosion from the effect of tectonics in the geological record
remains a challenge. One approach to study these interactions are computer
models that couple surface and tectonic processes in order to quantify the
effects of a wide range of geologic and geomorphic parameters. This allows
testing hypotheses derived from field observations and to develop new surface
process-tectonics hypotheses. This project supports a workshop that gathers
leading U.S. and international geoscientists who use and develop long-term
tectonic and landscape evolution models to discuss numerical techniques that
have the potential of revolutionizing the understanding of the interactions
between surface processes and tectonics, as well as solve some of the most
difficult technical challenges for developing models that require coupling over
highly disparate spatial and temporal scales. The workshop advances desired
societal outcomes by participation of women and underrepresented minorities and
development of a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce through engagement
of early career scientists, post-doctoral scholars, and students in the
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports the participation of U.S.
and international scientists in a workshop, which will be held in 2018 at the
University of Texas at Austin. The first goal of the workshop is to work to
develop the next generation of coupled surface processes and long-term tectonic
models to explore key questions linking tectonics, climate, and landscape
evolution. This will require defining the numerical techniques used by the two
communities and identifying the challenges in coupling across different temporal
and spatial scales. The second goal is to strengthen the U.S. long-term
tectonics modeling community and build new links/collaborations between the
long-term tectonics community at NSF-supported Computational Infrastructure for
Geodynamics and the surface processes community at NSF-supported Community
Surface Dynamics Modeling System. Bringing together the two communities will do
more than just facilitate code development; each community can help the other
with the science by bringing new perspective to existing questions and ideas.
The workshop participants will discuss specific, immediate questions for surface
process and lithospheric deformation codes, including: (1) the role of
topography and topographic stresses; (2) physically based erosion laws rather
than diffusion based; (3) Inclusion of the seismic cycle in tectonic models; (4)
inclusion of the seismic cycle in landscape evolution models; (5) the importance
of 3D heterogeneity in material properties in both geodynamic and geomorphologic
modelling; and (6) incorporation of atmosphere as a third component to models.