* 1746669
* SBIR Phase I:  Hats &amp; Ladders: A Mobile Platform to Foster Career Self-Efficacy in Middle and High School Learners
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2018
* Juliette Adams, Hats & Ladders, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project serves a national need for stronger career readiness
by connecting youth to project- and work-based learning experiences that will
help them to apply and extend classroom learning. These experiences will
increase their career self-efficacy and skills, and help them to develop a
critical understanding of careers and the work environment, at an age when it
matters the most?before they become disengaged and potentially disconnected from
school and work. This investment in career readiness also reduces the societal
costs associated with millions of youth that are currently disengaged and
marginalized. The cost of this disconnection in the United States is
staggeringly high; one study estimates the annual cost to taxpayers for
addressing its direct negative effects to be $26.8 billion. Successful and
widespread adoption of this project will increase the pool of qualified
applicants for employers in industries across the U.S., especially in STEM
fields for which there are two to three million unfilled positions due to a
shortfall in qualified candidates. By helping youth to engage in meaningful
career-related learning experiences this project will have the broader economic
impact of increasing their likelihood to stay in school, find good employment,
and contribute to the country's vitality over the long-
term.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project combines compelling youth-centered visual
and interactive design with analysis of open labor data, personal user data from
individual and aggregate usage, and empirically-tested career development
inventories. Users explore a range of career pathways and career readiness
competencies, as well as recommendations for both proprietary and third party
career education content and programs. The project consists of a cross-platform
app that allows users to build a profile, explore STEM and other industries of
interest, and gain understanding of the relevancy of key career readiness
practices. Through data generated by usage, simple assessments and self-
reflections, the user profile is strengthened and more specific careers can be
explored through leveled online and real-world activities. The project also
includes a web-based reporting dashboard that tracks usage and performance data.
The project will address the technical hurdles for both the young user to
identify meaningful project and work-based activities, and for public and
private providers of such activities to reach more youth and improve the impact
of their programs. The research team will design surveys, conduct usability
tests and analyze usage data to gather evidence against impact criteria. These
data will inform an iterative design process for improved user-experience,
algorithm adjustments and feature improvements.