* 1746353
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Vision Screening Digital Platform for Preverbal Children
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Beth DeSouza, Vifant LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to enable early mass vision screening of
preverbal children by primary care physicians as a result of the development of
a reliable, rapid, mobile and affordable vision screening tool. That tool will
allow the integration of early vision screening during the well baby care
visits. Early childhood vision problems are a major public health issue,
affecting 3-5% of infants in the US alone. The vision screening tools currently
available for young children are only indirect measures of vision, have limited
sensitivity, are not quantitative, too complex and, time-consuming to allow all
children to benefit. Early detection and treatment of vision impairments improve
vision treatment outcomes and prevents early learning development deficits. This
SBIR project will increase access to vision screening at an earlier age,
resulting in improved treatment and visual outcomes, allow screening in more
situations and locations, and result in a commercially viable, clinically
reliable measure of visual function in young children.

The proposed project will enhance the vision screening digital platform for
preverbal children and validate testing performance and reliability against the
current clinical standard (Teller Acuity Card procedure). That digital platform
functionality includes user interface, scalable testing patterns, and video
output. That platform leverages the innate optokinetic response (OKN), the
mobility of a tablet computer and the access and computational capability of the
cloud. Cost and complexity of existing vision screening solutions and, lack of
cooperation from those young patients have limited access and use of many
current testing methods for young children. Two thirds of all preschool children
in the US have never had an eye examination or vision screening before starting
school. The proposed solution will increase the access of preverbal children to
early mass vision screening in the primary care practices during the well baby
care visits.