* 1746402
* SBIR Phase I:  Democratizing Data Science Through Conversation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Aaron Redlich, DataChat Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 03/31/2019
* USD 224,928.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to dramatically improve the human
productivity in gathering insights from data, and to democratize data analytics
by making it available to a broad class of users within an enterprise. With
DataChat, complex analyses can be carried out by simply conversing with a
trained chatbot. The proposed approach has the potential to open a new vertical
in the analytics market in which chatbots aid humans in carrying out the task of
creating, deploying and running complex data science pipelines. This project
could lead to the creation of a sub-market in the existing analytic software
market, and it could also help improve the productivity of the (non-technology)
sectors of the economy that increasingly require high-quality and fast insights
from both their archival and real-time datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will take on a number of
technical challenges including designing and developing a method to allow
programming the underlying program that powers chatbots. Another technical
challenge that will be tackled is making it easy to load external data that may
not have well-defined schemas. A type inferencing mechanism, and associated set
of methods to learn over historical data, will be developed to address this
research aspect. Another technical challenge is building good machine learning
models, for which a set of mechanisms is proposed that will allow automatic
exploration and ranking of machine learning models, aiding the user in picking
the right model for the specific task at hand. Overall these technical
components will collectively contribute to the different facets of data analysis
that are needed to gather insights from data, and will power the overall chatbot
approach.