* 1746731
* SBIR Phase I:  Genomics Accelerator
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Reetuparna Das, Sequal Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to revolutionize the healthcare industry by
developing computing solutions for precision medicine. Next-Generation
Sequencing (NGS) now produces a large amount of genome data at an affordable
cost. Analyzing large volumes of genome data from diverse populations will lead
to a better understanding of the causes of various diseases ranging from cancer
to rare genetic disorders, and develop better cures. By sequencing a patient's
genome, it is possible to more specifically determine his/her condition and
devise an individualized treatment plan. And, if every newborn's genome was
sequenced, it would allow for proactive identification of disease risks, and
early intervention. Understanding viruses and bacteria will help us gain a
better understanding of infectious diseases, and thereby enable us to develop
better immunization and disease control methods. In addition to health-care,
genomics also may help engineer better food crops and attain food security. This
project will develop novel computing hardware solutions that are customized for
genomics sequencing software. These computing solutions can help realize an
exponential growth in the digital genomics market and bring affordable
personalized medicine to all.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to accelerate Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS)
by building a customized processor for genomics automata. Over the last decade,
the production cost of sequencing has plummeted from ten million dollars to a
thousand dollars, and is soon expected to go below a hundred dollars per genome.
Advancements in processor performance, however, have not kept pace. It can take
several days on a computing cluster to sequence a genome. For genome sequencing
to become as affordable as a routine medical test, computing solutions are
required that can sequence a genome in minutes, and cost only a few dollars per
genome. This project is developing a novel ASIC hardware accelerator for
computing finite state automata, which supports approximate string matching, a
computational kernel widely used in genomics applications such as sequencing.
The design is based on a novel in-memory hardware technology for efficiently
implementing state transitions. The goal is the improve efficiency of genomics
automata by two orders of magnitude compared to modern processors.