* 1746640
* SBIR Phase I:  An Internet of Things Education System Designed to Increase the Participation of Women in STEM Careers
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Fayette Shaw, Joulez Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to ultimately increase the number of women in
STEM careers, thus allowing women to secure higher paying jobs and to expand
global innovation by increasing the number of women who are inventing future
technologies. Research demonstrates a direct connection between play and
academic pursuits, yet few STEM products appeal to the 10MM+ pre-adolescent U.S.
girls. Our hypothesis is that by designing an Internet of Things (IoT) platform
of interactive decor building kits with motion and lighting features, we can
engage girls in hands-on STEM learning during a formative time in their
emotional and intellectual development. The kits will offer educational and
exploratory opportunities including spatial and sequential thinking, mechanical
engineering, electrical engineering, and programming. The user guides and on-
line learning modules will be authored and designed to create and build a STEM
identity in girls. Our theory is that this hands-on experience will create
attitudinal and identity shifts in girls to motivate them to pursue additional
STEM academic opportunities and further their exploration with other STEM
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is a method to provide an
entrance to STEM experiences for a population typically not recognizing their
strengths and abilities in the STEM areas. This is accomplished by leading them
through an IoT modular product platform to build personalizable decor
accessories as they pursue their interest in decorating and the arts. The
proposed project?s objectives are: (1) design and build a hardware prototype;
(2) design and build an app prototype; (3) design and conduct research to
determine that interaction with the proposed IoT modular platform results in an
attitudinal shift toward STEM. The project will employ research methods
including a large scale learning styles survey (400 users); moderated and
recorded user feedback sessions, and in-person studies (15 users) using
questionnaires adapted from published research and academic assessments. Our
success parameters are: (1) 50% of users can build and program the IoT product;
(2) 20% of girls experience an increase in STEM areas; (3) 15% improvement in
short-term recall of STEM skills and vocabulary; (4) 25% of users report an
interest in trying another STEM experience; (5) 50% of users report they would
display completed product in their room.