* 1746974
* SBIR Phase I:  Shower Stream: An IoT Smart Shower for Hotels
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Gregory Floyd, ABSTRACT ENGINEERING, INC
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 03/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to prevent over $50 billion in wasted
building utility costs annually across the US by increasing domestic shower
efficiency.  Commercial adoption of this technology at scale will save 200
billion gallons of water and at least 1 trillion kWh of energy in the U.S. every
year.  Reducing waste water and energy use decreases the strain on municipal
water and energy infrastructure.  Lower energy use will also have a significant
impact on carbon emissions associated with electric generation. The innovation
will enhance scientific and technological understanding by developing a highly-
accurate novel sensing technology that works in hot and humid conditions.
Moreover, the occupancy detection technology can be used for other applications
where difficult ambient conditions prevent the use of conventional sensors. The
IoT device will generate valuable end-user utility use behavior data which
public institutions and private industry will use to design better policies and
best practices. In addition to the economic, technological and environmental
benefits, this research also promotes jobs by providing enough utility savings
to commercial buildings for them to increase their
staff.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will eliminate behavioral water
waste which occurs when a bather leaves a shower unoccupied even after the water
has warmed-up.  Developing the technology requires: (1) a device that can
accurately sense shower occupancy, (2) a compact enclosure resilient to a
shower?s hot and humid environment and, (3) low energy circuitry and algorithms
for long battery life.  Methods to achieve the project objectives include
acoustic signal analysis for sensor accuracy, in-situ pilot testing, CAD design
and prototyping to achieve device size constraints, and accelerated aging tests
to ensure reliability and durability.  The overarching goal of this phase I
feasibility effort is to validate the novel utility savings methodology,
occupancy sensor accuracy and calibration over at least 5 years, and a device
battery life of at least 2 years.  This project will be deemed successful if the
following key technical objectives are met: (1) The sensor performs within at
least a 1% error margin after relevant nondestructive, accelerated aging tests,
(2) The amount of water and energy saved is at least 20% when compared to
baseline during live hotel pilot tests, and (3) The device?s battery life is at
least 2 years.