* 1746123
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: SCIENCE: Systemic Cultivation of Inclusive Equitable Nurturing Classroom Ecology
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Shiri Azenkot, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2020
* USD 211,001.00

In this collaborative proposal, a team of human-computer interaction and
learning science researchers will collaborate with science education
practitioners to develop and study a novel learning genre that aims to promote
equity in science education for 4th-9th graders. The research program targets
students with visual impairments (VIs), who face many challenges in the
education system, especially in science courses. Unlike subjects in the
humanities and social sciences, science education relies heavily on
visualizations using charts, diagrams, and images, in addition to print
materials. Consequently, students with VIs cannot readily access those
visualizations and are burdened with misconceptions of science-related
constructs. The proposed learning genre addresses this critical need for
equitable access by including innovative multimodal artifacts and a new
pedagogical methodology for science education for both sighted and visually
impaired students. These multimodal artifacts called Sensables, the innovation
at the center of the learning genre, leverage burgeoning technologies and
movements such as maker technology and culture, computer vision, and mobile
devices. Sensables are 3D printed models that have "hotspots" that respond to a
user's touch by playing a media file on a nearby device. These media files can
be audio descriptions of the model component, related sounds or images, or even
braille annotations. The investigators will study how students learn with these
artifacts, and create a web-based sharing and discussion portal, software tools,
and instructional resources for teachers to promote broad adoption of the
learning genre in the classroom.

Through iterative design and engineering, evaluation, and data analysis, this
interdisciplinary design-based research program will contribute to both the
human-computer interaction and learning science fields. The investigators will
conduct a single case design study to evaluate and refine the design of
Sensables. The project's output includes new curricular materials and a
pedagogical methodology for using Sensables in science education. The study will
answer the following research questions: (1) What aspects of the Sensables
artifacts and pedagogical methodology afford learning? (2) To what extent do
Sensables help students learn material compared to current standards? (3) What
type of science content are Sensables best suited for? Similarly, what type of
content is not appropriate for learning with Sensables? The investigators will
develop and disseminate their research outcome to the academic community as well
as education and disability professionals to pave the way for broad use and
adoption of this learning technology.