* 1746007
* SBIR Phase I:  eLearning system that enables patient-centered, team-based care and reduces physician shortages in medically underserved areas
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Maria Levis, Impactivo LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 03/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to significantly reduce primary care
physician shortages and improve quality of care for low income patients in the
United States by developing a tool that analyzes clinical care team performance
data at federally qualified health centers (FQHCs) to automatically deploy
individually tailored eLearning support for staff members that enables patient
centered team based care. FQHCs are funded by the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services to serve 22 million low income patients living in more than
10,000 of the poorest communities across the Nation. Well-implemented patient
centered team-based care has the potential to significantly reduce physician
shortages and burden of chronic disease which disproportionately affects low
income communities. However, efforts to move and sustain FQHCs participation in
this model have had limited success with only 66% attaining patient centered
medical home (PCMH) recognition in 2016. Various public initiatives, including
the Health Resources and Service Administration Quality Improvement Award and
Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act (MACRA), are providing additional
financial incentives to move primary care practices towards PCMH Recognition.
However, current approaches to practice transformation are cumbersome and
difficult to sustain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to disrupt
continued health professional education at FQHCs by assessing the feasibility of
developing a tool that leverages electronic health record data to identify gaps
in patient centered team based care for diabetic patients and deploys tailored
asynchronous individualized e-learning nudge type support to each member of the
care team based on their performance. The research objectives of this SBIR Phase
1 are to establish the feasibility of using EHR data through an API to trigger
individual user and team level flags for variation from a specific set of PCMH
standards and diabetes clinical protocols; to develop algorithms that generate
an individualized learner user profile and teams level reports; to generate data
to design algorithms that learn from user preferences, impacts on flags and
patient outcomes; to design user interphase for reward and recognition and to
evaluate end user acceptance of eLearning tools. The research will be approached
using user centric design, behavioral economics and adult learning principles to
gather specific requirements and develop a minimum viable product focused on a
subset of between five to 10 indicators.