* 1746176
* SBIR Phase I:  Online Game to Assess and Improve Behavioral Readiness and Social Emotional Skills  for Students in Kindergarten and First Grades
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,09/30/2018
* James Thomas, Personalized Learning Games, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2018
* USD 224,959.00

This SBIR Phase I project will advance understanding of how game-based methods
can be effectively used to help schools bring social emotional learning (SEL)
instruction to all students. The end goal of this SBIR project is to create and
test a game-based intelligent social tutoring system (ISTS) that both assesses
and improves the behavioral readiness and social emotional (SE) skills of
Kindergarten and 1st grade (K1) students. SEL is a critically important
component of early education for all students, and efforts to bring SEL to the
nation?s vulnerable early learners would be particularly impactful, especially
in helping to foster equity in academic achievement. The proposed system will
guide early learners to learn, and then practice SEL skills in controlled,
engaging social simulations. This will provide schools with an easily
administered, scalable tool to fill a niche for which there is considerable
market pull. In addition to addressing significant societal and market needs,
research findings from this SBIR will be used to more broadly inform the efforts
of the game development community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a first step in this
R&amp;D effort, this SBIR Phase I project will (a) develop a game prototype
consisting of six game-based scenes designed to assess essential SE skills
linked in the literature to school readiness and positive behavioral functioning
for young students (e.g., Emotion Regulation, Empathy, Impulse Control); (b)
conduct game prototype test groups with K1 students to assess the usability and
acceptability of the game as well as gather independent parent ratings and
behavioral observations of children's SE skills; (c) develop prototype educator
dashboard materials for administration of the SEL game with students, including
resources to reinforce and extend SEL beyond the game; and (d) conduct a test of
the game and dashboard prototypes with teachers and other educators who
represent likely purchasers and/or users of the product with students to assess
the feasibility and potential value of the proposed product.