* 1746267
* SBIR Phase I:  Plant Control - A water engineering simulation and web-accessible water treatment plant for engineering, controls, automation, and data visualization STEM education
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Benjamin Rainwater, Brown Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project includes education of water engineering
processes and training for success in the advanced technology economy and
workforce. Plant Control will teach students the system that supplies safe
drinking water to their schools and homes while applying chemistry and
engineering concepts in an engaging format. Student exposure to engineering in
high school is correlated to choice of STEM majors in college. The product will
introduce students to a wide range of disciplines including civil, electrical,
mechanical, biological, and materials to promote student choice of engineering
majors. The disruption of clean drinking water in Flint, MI highlights the
critical importance of safe drinking water and technical hurdles that an aging
utility infrastructure presents. Water quality STEM concepts presented in this
product are essential for a voting population to make local and federal
decisions related to population growth and aging utility infrastructure. High
School STEM classrooms are centers of innovation for students. This product will
provide the students a sand-box tool to develop their own control and data
acquisition as well as train them in software that is widely used in the
controls and data acquisition industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will develop a simulation and remote plant model intended to engage
students in a new context and compliment STEM engineering curriculum in K-12
environments. The goals of the research are to understand the effect of
simulation learning tools on STEM education, to develop a simulator for
educational and workforce training purposes, and to develop a programming tool
to enable student and maker applications of control and data acquisition systems
that is currently lacking in that market. Simulation development technical
hurdles include flow modeling in a wide-range of student defined configurations,
equipment and filtration media. The simulation developed in this project will be
further applied in the water and wastewater market to train plant operators for
standard and emergency plant operation conditions. The web-accessible remote
plant model component of the project requires connectivity of nationwide users
to the remote plant and protection of the physical plant equipment. The
development platform used for control of the plant will be available to the
students for modification and use in their own projects. The student-version
will require a limited and simplified version of the professional platform
currently available. Development of the student version will require platform
reconfiguration and user capability modification.