* 1746342
* SBIR Phase I:  Subcutaneous vascular access device that allows hydraulically controlled on demand access to blood flow for hemodialysis
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Catherine Unruh, Pharmateck LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve the lives of over 500,000 patients
with end stage renal disease receiving thrice-weekly hemodialysis treatments in
the US each year. Hemodialysis requires the blood of a patient to be removed and
passed through a filter for cleaning prior to returning it to the patient.
Oftentimes patients receive insufficient dialysis treatments because the
traditional blood pathways cannot be effectively sustained. This leads to
increased infections, hospitalization rates and deaths. In addition to the
unnecessary suffering of patients, the cost of maintaining these blood pathways
is over $2B annually. This implantable device will improve our technical and
scientific understanding of hemodialysis shortcomings and may lead to advancing
the knowledge in medical fields related to arterial and venous access. This
innovation will allow enhanced hemodialysis treatments for this vulnerable
patient population by maintaining blood pathways and lowering infection rates.

The proposed project is to create a vascular access device which ensures that
end stage renal disease (ESRD) patients have reliable vascular access without
the need for an arterialized venous system. AV fistulas and AV grafts often fail
to mature and are associated with suboptimal long-term patency rates resulting
in a loss of the patient?s life line to dialysis. The objective would be to
create a completely subcutaneous device which can be anastomosed to an artery
and a separate vein such that the arterial device can obtain a blood flow of at
least 400ml/min and the venous device can return the dialyzed blood at a rate of
at least 400 ml/min. The device must allow blood flow through its lumen only
when needed and return the native vasculature to its normal flow state after
each use. The technical difficulty is how to configure the mechanics of the
device and its anastomosis to blood vessels in a manner which allows it to be
opened and closed on demand without causing thromboses to form within the native
vessels or device. We will be using computational fluid dynamic modeling and an
iterative design process to achieve our prototype.