* 1746447
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Coercive Use of Population Displacement in Civil Conflict
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,06/30/2019
* Ron Hassner, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2019
* USD 20,569.00

This project examines how, when, and why armed groups intentionally displace
civilians during civil wars. While forced displacement has become an
increasingly massive feature of modern conflicts, there have been few attempts
to systematically analyze its use as a weapon of war. This is of urgent concern
given that the number of people displaced by violence and persecution worldwide
recently surged to levels not seen since World War II. This project uses new
quantitative and qualitative data collected from human rights records and
reports on displacement in civil wars from 1945-2004, in addition to archival
and interview data gathered through field research in Africa, to investigate
different types of displacement orchestrated by combatants, the distinct
motivations underlying these strategies, and the conditions under which they are
likely to be employed. Identifying the factors that drive armed groups to uproot
civilians will offer crucial insights for practitioners hoping to anticipate and
manage displacement, and to prevent, mitigate, and resolve armed conflicts more
broadly. In light of the widespread and well-documented security and
humanitarian consequences of forced migration, this project has implications for
the national security of the United States.

As the first study to systematically examine population displacement strategies
in wartime, there are several potentially transformative aspects of this
research. It will broaden and deepen the literatures on forced migration, civil
war, and political violence by (a) unpacking the black box of conflict induced
displacement and showing that it can take different forms and serve different
strategic and tactical functions, and (b) collecting, analyzing, and
disseminating original data on coercive displacement in civil wars, including a
first-ever cross-national data set. In addition, this study will speak to
enduring questions in the conflict literature by highlighting unexplored ways in
which armed actors overcome limited information about civilians' loyalties and
affiliations, and by offering a plausible mechanism for explaining the
indiscriminate use of violence against noncombatants. Finally, this research
will contribute to theorizing non-lethal violence, which conflict scholars have
tended to neglect even though it affects far more people than homicides.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.