* 1746391
* Conference on Documenting Indigenous Languages to Enhance Phonological and Phonetic Theories and to Improve Broader Impacts
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* John Kingston, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2019
* USD 26,248.00

An important dimension of language is the sound system and patterns of a given
language. In fact, languages like English and Spanish include only a subset of
the possible sounds of consonants, vowels, and the different ways they can
combine. A greater understanding of what humans can produce and perceive in
terms of sounds (phonetics) and how these sounds are organized and patterned
(phonology) relies on investigation, documentation, and analysis of languages
with different sounds and patterns than English and Spanish. This project will
enable a conference to increase scientific understanding of how humans produce,
perceive, and organize the phonetics and phonology of these diverse languages,
focusing on a geographic region well-known for both its diversity and the urgent
need to document this linguistic diversity in the face of language endangerment.

The goal of this project is to bring together indigenous and non-indigenous
experts who study the linguistic diversity of the languages of Mexico and
Central America. This workshop, the third iteration of "Sound Systems of Mexico
and Central America (SSMCA 3)" will be held in October, 2018 at the University
of Massachusetts, Amherst. Speakers will present scientific findings of the
under-described and under-analyzed sound systems of the diverse languages of
this part of the world. Besides plenary presentations from invited speakers,
contributed presentations, and posters, the conference will include two
roundtables. The first roundtable is devoted to discussing effective means of
fostering collaboration between indigenous and non-indigenous scholars. The
language sciences have seen tremendous intellectual advancement with the
training of speakers of indigenous languages as linguists; this will seek to
continue that advancement with a focus on phonetics and phonology. The second
roundtable is focused on a broader impact of many language documentation
projects, and will present effective means of translating language documentation
into pedagogical materials that can be used in the schools to develop and
promote literacy in indigenous languages and to maintain their use in indigenous
communities. Additionally, SSMCA 3 will have four broader impacts: (1) promoting
scholarly interaction and collaboration between indigenous and non-indigenous
linguists in the task of documenting indigenous languages, (2) advancing the
documentation of the un-described and under-described languages of Mexico and
Central America, (3) publicizing the value of maintaining the indigenous
languages of Mexico and Central America and the necessity of incorporating their
use into public education, and (4) providing open access to all the
presentations and materials from the conference online to any interested person.