* 1746866
* SBIR Phase I  :Point-of-Care Test for Identifying Gram-Negative Urinary Tract Infections in Companion Animals
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Edgar Goluch, QSM Diagnostics INC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will develop a hand-held, point-of-care, sensing strip
and instrument for immediate identification of which bacterial species are
causing a urinary tract infection (UTI) in a companion animal. &lt;br/&gt;This
technology will allow veterinarians to judiciously prescribe antibiotics for an
animal during the initial examination. In the United States alone, there are
nearly 1.5 million veterinary visits annually for UTIs in dogs and cats. The
average time to initial UTI test results is 48 hours, during which time the
animal is generally consuming antibiotics. Less than half of urine cultures show
any bacterial growth, indicating that the majority of antibiotic prescriptions
were unnecessary. Further, it is important to identify which bacterial species
are causing the UTI, so that the proper antibiotic can be administered. Prudent
use of antibiotics will control the spread of infection and the emergence of
antibiotic resistance, thus resulting in healthier animals and reducing the need
for new antibiotic drug development. This project will help translate the
initial research and discoveries that were funded previously by the National
Science Foundation. The underlying principle for this technology is that each
bacterial species produces and excretes its own unique set of chemicals that are
used to coordinate intercellular activities, analogous to pheromones produced by
animals. It is possible to identify what bacterial cells are present in a sample
by detecting these chemicals. There are much greater quantities of the chemicals
in the sample than bacterial cells, making this approach more sensitive and
easier to implement than other technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will result in the creation of a label-free, aptamer-based,
electrochemical sensing platform for the detection and identification of the
four most common Gram-negative bacterial pathogens causing UTIs in companion
animals, within two minutes of sample collection. The novelty of the approach is
to measure unique quorum sensing molecules (QSMs) that are secreted by the
bacteria. These QSMs are produced by all bacterial cells continuously at a rate
of approximately 10,000 molecules per hour, thereby improving the limit of
detection by four orders of magnitude. An array of electrodes, modified with
novel aptamers and functionalized with electro-active molecules, will be used to
detect the QSMs, acting as biomarkers, produced by each bacterial species.
Combining optimized aptamer molecules with electrochemical sensing and a
proprietary signal processing algorithm allows for unprecedented limits of
detection, sensitivity, and specificity. The technology will work directly in
complex fluids without any reagent addition or separation steps.