* 1746081
* Collaborative Research: Workshop on "Health in Buildings for Today and Tomorrow"
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Ming Hu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 11/30/2018
* USD 24,471.00

1745941 (Phelan)/1746081 (Hu). This workshop will address the science and
engineering research questions motivated by designing and operating buildings
for both energy efficiency as well as for the health of the occupants. A
diversity of researchers from both the buildings and the public health R&amp;D
communities will be brought together to determine optimal approaches for
integrating health and energy efficiency to promote the development of new
human-centered design paradigms and building technologies. Other participating
federal agencies include the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC), the National Institutes of Health (NIH), and the US Department of Energy
(DOE). The industry partners include the U.S. Green Building Council (USGBC) and
the American Institute of Architects (AIA). The workshop will leverage a two-
year DOE project that created a vision for buildings in 100 years, and the
ongoing "Health in Buildings Roundtable" organized by NIH and CDC. The workshop
will be hosted by NIH at the Natcher Conference Center in Bethesda, MD, in July,
2018. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. population spends perhaps 87% of their time
inside buildings, and consequently it is reasonable to assume that building
environments have a correspondingly large impact on occupant health. At the same
time, the construction and operation of buildings has a large environmental
impact: globally, buildings are responsible for approximately one third of
primary energy consumption, and one third of greenhouse gas emissions. In the
USA, building energy costs in 2016 were ~$408B annually, while annual healthcare
costs were ~$3.2T in 2015. Additionally, potential worker productivity gains
from improved indoor environments have been estimated at up to ~$230B (in 2016
dollars). Clearly, improving building sustainability while at the same time
improving health outcomes would have significant economic impacts. Furthermore,
by bringing together researchers from the typically separate fields of
sustainable buildings and public health, the organizers are targeting to
influence the education of future researchers by broadening their perspectives
to consider these diverse but interrelated fields.