* 1746540
* SBIR Phase I:  Magnetic Quantum Dots for Cell Separation and Characterization
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Qirui Fan, Core Quantum Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR phase I project will develop new reagents to enable cell separation
and analysis. Cell separation is a $3.9 billion/yr market with applications in
medicine, pharmaceutical, and biological research industries. However, many
current schemes perform cell separation and analysis in separate steps. A single
reagent that could perform both functions would save time and money, enhancing
these industries. The nanoparticle reagent developed by this research possesses
magnetic properties to enable cell separation, and fluorescent properties that
allow properties of separated cells to be quantified. This research will
optimize this product and demonstrate proof-of-concept against the current
standard approaches. The proposed product is the result of basic research
previously funded by the NSF into methods to combine magnetic and fluorescent
reagents, and optimization of this reagent will yield basic knowledge in
manufacture and scale-up of these nanomaterials. Successful completion of these
goals will lead to a new product that will enable cell separation and analysis
with a single reagent, enabling cell separation with high purity and increasing
signal used for quantification. These benefits could translate into reduced
laboratory healthcare costs with increased diagnostic efficiency, improved
pharmaceutical purity, and high tech nanomanufacturing jobs in this burgeoning
industry.

This research will develop magnetic-fluorescent nanoparticle reagents to enable
seamless cell separation and subsequent flow cytometry analysis. Cell separation
is often performed with magnetic reagents that enable high throughput; however,
analysis of the separated product is performed in a separate step, typically via
flow cytometry. The use of large magnetic beads for separation prevents
analysis, as the beads employed are much larger than the protein quantified.
Even if small nanoparticles are used, a separate reagent is required for
analysis, and signal is limited as the same receptors are targeted for both
separation and analysis steps. Thus, a reagent that could perform both
separation and analysis steps would improve performance. This research will
optimize nanoparticle reagents that enable separation and analysis and compare
their performance to the current approach using two separate reagents. Thus,
this research will demonstrate crucial proof-of-concept of these reagents that
are manufactured using a scalable process, enabling rapid transition to beta
testing and follow-on commercialization.