* 1746236
* SBIR Phase I:  Wide Bandgap Semiconductor Betavoltaic Powered Sensor Controller
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,11/30/2018
* Vasil Hlinka, AwareAbility Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 11/30/2018
* USD 223,756.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a breakthrough power source for small
electronic devices that will move the reality of smart cities and smart rural
areas closer to the vision. The center piece of the innovation is the wide
bandgap semiconductor betavoltaic power source, essentially an innovative
nuclear-based micro-battery. The energy storage density of this power source is
estimated to be three orders of magnitude greater than conventional NiMH battery
technology. This power innovation will be combined with the very latest in ultra
low power electronics and energy harvesting circuitry to realize sensors that
are effectively self-powered for the useful life of device. The betavoltaic
power source will enable the realization of the ?Internet-of-Things? vision by
solving the power challenge, supporting the public good through enhanced safety
and security, improved mobility and support for new and disruptive business
ventures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will attempt to solve a
portion of the power challenge that today limits the implementation and scale of
Internet of Things (IoT) solutions. Experts predict billions and possibly
trillions of "things" connected by IoT technologies. This requires
transformative advances in the science, technology, and engineering. The
proposed betavoltaic power source will achieve advancements in all three areas,
focused on the power challenge. Although research papers have been published on
micro nuclear batteries, the power levels of the previous implementations are
insufficient for broad market application. Through the use of novel fabrication
techniques and optimal material selection and placement, the proposed power
source will achieve at least an order of magnitude improvement in power
efficiency over any previous result achieved, with target power efficiency level
in excess of 30%. This surpasses the breakout power level required for mass
adoption of the new power source. Work on this power source will result in new
technology development for enhancing the efficiency of nuclear micro-battery.
New semiconductor material processing and fabrication techniques related to the
incorporation of radioactive materials will be developed as well as greater
understanding of wide band gap semiconductor material behavior under irradiation
as applied to radiation-hardened electronics.