* 1746019
* SBIR Phase I:  Optical Delivery System for In Situ Heating and Excitation in the Transmission Electron Microscope
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Thomas Moore, Waviks, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2018
* USD 224,969.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop an optical
delivery system compatible with a transmission electron microscope (TEM) that
will facilitate atomic-scale imaging and characterization at high-temperatures
and excited states. The most critical and far-reaching broader impact of the
proposed system is the new science/discovery that it will enable. Imaging and
characterization at the nano- and atomic-scale are critical to advancing new
materials and technologies, which are in turn critical to research and industry
laboratories. The instrumentation will enable researchers to uncover high-
temperature and excited-state materials phenomena in unique temperature and
temporal regimes previously inaccessible. The successful development of the
proposed instrumentation will generate revenue and incubate several follow-on
products, which in turn will create jobs. Year 5 will focus on both industry and
research laboratories and market targets for both existing and new TEM sales.
Conveniently, the system can be adapted for other materials characterization
techniques to broaden the impact of the innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project is the design, assembly, and testing of an
optical delivery system specifically suitable for nano-and atomic-scale
characterization in the TEM. The innovation delivers a system with unprecedented
ability to manipulate materials in the TEM via the localized photothermal and
photoexcited modalities. The photothermal modality will enable agile, non-
invasive, and ubiquitous access to TEM specimens and enable unique temperature
and temporal regimes not accessible with standard resistive heating systems. The
excitation modality will enable researchers to image and characterize optical-
excited states of materials at the nanoscale. The proposed instrumentation
consists of dual fiber-coupled optical heating and excitation channels housed on
a specially designed nanomanipulator for accurate x-y-z positioning. In addition
to the hardware development, appropriate software controls will be developed for
the optical sources and the nanomanipulator system. Finally, in-microscope
testing of the in situ heating and excitation will be performed at the
University of Tennessee. Specifically, three tasks are proposed for the in-
microscope testing/validation: (1) in situ high-temperature imaging, (2)
photothermal adventitious carbon decontamination from graphene, and (3) in situ
optical excitation of plasmonic nanoparticles during electron energy loss/gain
spectroscopy.