* 1746087
* Physiological Ecology of "Herbivorous" Antarctic Copepods
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Ann Tarrant, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Maria Vernet
* 08/31/2021
* USD 658,600.00

Animals in the polar oceans have adapted to dramatic seasonal changes in day
length, food availability, and ice cover, as well as to consistently cold
waters. This project focuses on the adaptations of copepods - small animals that
live in the water column and are an important food source to many different
predators. The field studies will take place in the western Antarctic Peninsula,
an environment and ecosystem that is rapidly changing. Antarctic copepods have
developed particular feeding and behavioral strategies to survive in their very
seasonal environment, however it is not known how each of these species will
respond to environmental change. The overall goal of this project is to examine
and compare these adaptations across species and to understand how each species
responds to short-term changes in food availability. The project contains three
main objectives: the first objective is to compare the sets of genes across
species, especially looking at genes related to storage of energy from food. The
second objective is to measure and compare the responses of copepods to changes
in food availability. The third objective is to determine how variation across
the western Antarctic Pensinsula habitat affects the feeding condition of the
copepods. To make the data more useful to the broader research community, a
database will be developed enabling easy comparison of genetic information
between copepod species. This project will provide hands-on training
opportunities to graduate and undergraduate student and will seek to recruit
students from underrepresented groups. Results and scientific concepts will be
shared through outreach activities, including an expedition blog, a series of
interactive animations, and public presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polar
marine organisms have adapted to dramatic seasonal changes in photoperiod, light
intensity, and ice cover, as well as to cold but stable thermal environments.
The western Antarctic Peninsula, the focal region for the field studies, has
experienced rapid warming and ice melt. While it is difficult to predict exactly
how physical conditions in this region will change, effects on species
distributions have already been documented. Large Antarctic copepods in the
families Calanidae and Rhincalanidae are dominant components of the
mesozooplankton that use different metabolic and behavioral strategies to
optimize their use of a highly seasonal food supply. The overall goal of this
project is to leverage molecular approaches to examine the physiological and
metabolic adaptations at the individual and species level. The project focuses
on three main objectives: the first objective is to characterize the gene
complement and stage-specific gene expression patterns in Antarctic copepods
within an evolutionary context. The second objective is to measure and compare
the physiological and molecular responses of juvenile copepods to variable
feeding conditions. The third objective is to characterize metabolic variation
within natural copepod populations. The metabolically diverse Antarctic copepods
also provide an excellent opportunity to compare mechanisms regulating energy
storage and utilization and to test hypotheses regarding the roles of specific
genes. The field studies will aim to utilize information from an ongoing long
term research program (the Palmer Long-Term Ecological Research), which
complements the ongoing program and provides extensive context for this project.
To make the data more useful to the research community, a database will be
developed facilitating comparison of transcriptomes between copepod species.
This project will provide hands-on training opportunities to graduate and
undergraduate students. Efforts will be made to recruit students who are members
of underrepresented minorities. Results and scientific concepts will be broadly
disseminated through an expedition blog, a series of interactive animations, and
public presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.