* 1746287
* SBIR Phase I:  CoagCare: Unified POC Blood Coagulation Diagnostic Platform Using Mechanically Sensitive Test Strips
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,09/30/2018
* Norimasa Yoshimizu, Abram Scientific, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 09/30/2018
* USD 224,895.00

This SBIR Phase I project will develop a new technology for accurate, portable,
and inexpensive measurement of multiple blood clotting tests. Such tests include
prothrombin time / international normalized ratio (PT/INR), activated partial
thromboplastin time (aPTT), activated clotting time (ACT), or
thromboelastography (TEG) and are routinely performed on patients who suffer
from conditions such as atrial fibrillation, deep vein thrombosis, or have had
heart valve replacement. This affects millions of patients in the US alone for a
market worth more than a billion dollars worldwide every year. However, many of
the technologies currently used in the market cannot accurately or conveniently
perform multiple blood clotting tests on the same system, causing clinically
significant problems for patients and raising the cost and inconvenience of
routinely performing these tests. The technology in this project fundamentally
enables these various blood clotting tests to be performed in a single portable,
test-strip system. This will potentially lead to less expensive, more accurate,
and more convenient blood clot testing for medical professionals and millions of
patients; improve medical care by bringing multiple blood clotting tests to a
single portable device; bring much-needed innovation to a market which has
relied on less accurate technologies; and foster small business and job growth
in an emerging technology landscape that has the potential to address a billion
dollar, worldwide market.

The technology developed in this project will enable the first-of-its-kind
implementation of a direct, mechanical test in a strip form, to more closely
replicate the mechanical methods which fundamentally underlie all blood clotting
time tests. As a mechanical measurement, the strip will measure physical
properties of a finger-prick, whole blood sample to account for the confounding
factors affecting point of care blood clotting tests, such as hematocrit for
PT/INR measurement. As a broad-spectrum hemostasis platform technology, other
significant blood coagulation tests, which are based on measurement of fluid
mechanical properties of the blood sample, can be brought to the portable point
of care format including activated partial (aPTT) thromboplastin time (PT/INR),
activated clotting time (ACT), or thromboelastogram (TEG) testing. This Phase I
project will demonstrate the feasibility of a second blood coagulation test
(activated partial thromboplastin time), realizing a mechanical, strip-based,
portable point-of-care (POC) blood coagulation platform system.