* 1746912
* SBIR Phase I:  Alcohol Resistant Enzymes through High-Throughput Combinatorial Protein-Polymer Conjugate Synthesis
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Antonina Simakova, BioHybrid Solutions LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 01/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project includes advancement of the field of white
biotechnology, which utilizes enzymes to create valuable industrial products. As
biological molecules, enzymes are more difficult to work with than conventional
chemicals and often need more extensive development before they can be adapted
to industrial or pharmaceutical manufacturing. This SBIR project will
demonstrate how enzymes performance can be improved using stabilization with
synthetic polymers. Enzymes are characterized by precise, unique structure and
function, which is in turn essential for their role in catalysis of complex
chemical reactions. Synthetic polymers, on the other hand, despite being less
precisely structured, can be rationally designed to withstand or respond to
chemical, thermal or biological conditions. The synergistic fusion of enzymes
and synthetic polymers results in advanced nano-armored enzyme with improved
properties such as solvent and temperature resistance, and modulated activity.
Creating such novel stabilized enzymes will result in more efficient commercial
utilization of enzymatic catalysis which requires less energy, utilizes less
hazardous reagents, and generates less waste while generating valuable products
such as chemicals, biofuels, and pharmaceuticals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR
Phase I project proposes to develop a combinatorial synthesis device that can
feed high-throughput screening of enzyme-polymer conjugates with desired
properties (for instance, temperature, pH- or organic solvent stability). To
date, only low-throughput synthesis and characterization methods have been
applied to the preparation of enzyme-polymer conjugates, limiting development to
only few types of polymer modification per protein and depending on stochastic
guesswork to select the variants tested. Thus, in order to fully benefit from
the diverse set of polymers currently available on the market one has to
consider methods of scaling the identification of optimally performing enzyme-
polymer conjugates. This will be achieved through combination of high-throughput
synthesis of enzyme-polymer conjugates and high-throughput screening of gained
properties. The initial target application of the proposed research is focused
on the industrial biocatalysis. Application of a high-throughput method will not
only result in faster research and development cycles, but also will accelerate
our development of fundamental knowledge of what kind of protein properties can
be gained through polymer modification, thereby establishing this method for
industrial applications.