* 1746583
* STTR Phase I:  A steerable needle to enable precise and minimally invasive delivery of treatments, ablation therapy and tissue biopsies.
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Eza Koch, Greppo Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2019
* USD 224,592.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project include enabling the minimally invasive
treatment of a large variety of conditions. This is expected to be achieved
through the development of a steerable needle that can reach arbitrary positions
in the human body that are not reachable by a straight needle from a simple
needle hole. The long term impact of the proposed technology is in targeted
delivery of medicine, or the removal of tissue such as biopsies, or treatment
mechanisms such as ablation devices. An overarching goal of the proposed project
is the availability of minimally invasive procedures that can replace more
drastic surgery options. The development of this device has the potential to
also save lives, treating what otherwise would be inoperable conditions due to
the location of tumors blocked by sensitive organs or bones.

The proposed project, if successful, will lead to demonstrating the application
of a device that utilizes the buckling behavior of semi-curved beams to
controllably alter the stiffness in a needle for cancer treatment and measure
its efficacy in terms of the advantages over straight needles. The objectives of
this research include: developing a prototype and match to surgeon use cases
(interventional radiologist) and testing and characterizing the steerability
performance while delivering the medical payload. Specifically, it is expected
that the first therapeutic application of this technology will be microwave
ablation of cancer tumors.