* 1746264
* SBIR Phase I:  Smart, sustainable and self-healing anticorrosive pigment additive
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Sumedh Surwade, SAS Nanotechnologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2018
* USD 224,989.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will result in the
development of smart, self-healing nanocapsules as anticorrosive pigment
additive for commercialization of sustainable, economical and metal free
acrylic, epoxy or polyurethane based anticorrosive coatings. The nanocapsule
additive based anticorrosive coating will meet and exceed the performance of
solvent and heavy metals based coatings and disrupt the current technology
paradigms by delivering a sustainable and efficient anticorrosive coating
technology into the market. The cost to fix or replace corroded structures in
the US alone is a staggering $500 Billions/year that is compounded by the toxic
environmental impact on account of the use of heavy metals such as, chromium,
zinc and lead as anticorrosion pigments. This project will directly address
these two important unmet industry needs. For example, the technology will
replace heavy metals and deliver corrosion protection exactly when and where it
is needed. This will increase the life-time of the coatings, decrease
maintenance costs, and reduce the energy and labor costs. This novel technology
is simple, scalable, and will find application across multiple industry sectors
such as construction, oil &amp; gas, architecture, defense, aerospace etc.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is the development
of smart, self-healing, polymer based nanocapsules as pigment additives in
anticorrosive coatings. Corrosion is an electrochemical process and is induced
by corrosive ions in the environment. At the onset of corrosion, the
electrochemical potential at the corroding site changes. Hence, in this project
polymer based nanocapsules will be developed that will inhibit corrosion by
multiple mechanisms. The nanocapsules themselves will prevent corrosion by
acting as ionic barrier between metal and toxic ions as well as by anodic
passivation. If the passivation or the barrier effect fails due to scratch or
mechanical damage and the metal starts to corrode, the change in electrochemical
potential on the corroding metal surface will activate the nanocapsules to
release corrosion inhibitors encapsulated in the capsules at the corroding site.
This phase I project will develop a method to synthesize smart, self-healing
nanocapsules encapsulated with corrosion inhibitor. These nanocapsules will
deliver a next-generation, water-based, acrylic, epoxy or polyurethane based
anticorrosive coatings into the market.