* 1746882
* SBIR Phase I:  Remediation of recalcitrant and emerging environmental organic contaminants of concern using bacterial approaches
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Raymond Sambrotto, ALLIED MICROBIOTA LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2018
* USD 224,996.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project addresses the critical societal need to remediate
widespread problems of toxic organic pollutants in soils, sediments and
groundwater. The technology results in a significantly improved ability to
destroy organic environmental contaminants by reducing treatment time and costs
at commercial scales using novel bacterial strains. These strains have a
demonstrated ability to rapidly degrade a variety of important, recalcitrant
organic pollutants including polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), polyaromatic
hydrocarbons (PaHs) and dioxins. This project will assess the costs and efficacy
of the large-scale implementation of this technology that includes the
incubation of the contaminated material at elevated temperatures (60¢ªC/150¢ªF)
to enhance degradation. This enables environmental goals to be met on many sites
whose cleanup is currently limited by the high costs of remediation. The
commercial impact is significant and makes possible the re-development of many
billions of dollars of real estate in these categories to return these
properties to productive and appropriate use. Additional aspects of the
technology are applicable to emerging pollutants such as 1,4-dioxane in
groundwater and greatly expand the options available to environmental engineers
and landowners for cleaning up long-lived pollutants.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop two novel modes of destroying
organic contaminants of concern that reduce remediation costs and improve
outcomes. The project improves on prior approaches to bioremediation by using
heat-tolerant bacteria for faster rates of chemical destruction for a broad
range of pollutants. Objectives include the evaluation of the efficacy and costs
to treat large amounts (5-10 tons) of material with whole bacteria as basis to
assess the commercial application of the technology. This involves several
components, including the optimization of the large-scale cell production
protocols to produce the bacteria. In conjunction with environmental engineering
firms, the project also will develop cost-effective approaches to maintaining
the appropriate temperature, moisture and oxygen conditions for optimal cell
growth during large-scale treatments. Variations in incubation conditions and
flocculent additions will be used to determine the lowest pollutant levels that
can be attained. Finally, a new approach using cell extracts instead of live
cells will be evaluated for both soils and sediments as well as for soluble
pollutants like 1,4-dioxane. These approaches will provide critical data on
remediation costs at commercial scale and also evaluate new approaches to
emerging groundwater pollutants that are difficult to remediate with current
technology.