* 1746744
* STTR Phase I:  Engineering Alternative Oxidation Activity in A. ferrooxidans For Enhanced Biohydrometallurgy Capabilities
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Sara Blumer-Schuette, Ironic Chemicals LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project will be to develop engineered bacteria with the ability
to oxidize the copper mineral chalcopyrite and gold. The majority of copper
reserves are in chalcopyrite, which currently requires smelting. The US copper
mining industry, due to regulatory restrictions, has a limited smelting capacity
forcing US copper manufacturers to ship copper mineral concentrates overseas for
smelting, which incurs additional transportation and processing costs while
losing up to 30% of the full value of the metal to the smelters. At over 400,000
tons of copper concentrate exported annually, this amounts to over $600M in lost
value. In gold mining, biooxidation is increasingly used before other gold
recovery techniques are utilized, and increased oxidation rates would expand the
use and significantly lower the capital and operating costs of this practice. In
addition, enhanced oxidation would accelerate the development of mining waste
streams as biotechnology feedstocks. This project potentially furthers more
economical and sustainable biohydrometallurgical techniques throughout the
mining industry.

This STTR Phase I project proposes the demonstration and development of new
oxidation activity within bioleaching microbes, expanding the applications of
biohydrometallurgy in metal mining. This would permit the application of
cheaper, low impact biohydrometallurgical methods for important metal minerals.
Currently, biohydrometallurgy is limited by its reliance on ferric iron as the
main oxidant. The Intellectual Merit of this proposal stems from the use of
hydrogen peroxide, which can enable mineral oxidation conversions and rates that
are not obtainable with ferric iron alone. Adding hydrogen peroxide to
biohydrometallurgy operations is not feasible or cost effective, however, the
genetic engineering of biomining microbes, such as A. ferrooxidans, to produce
hydrogen peroxide would be a potentially game changing advance. This innovation
will result in the production of biomining microbial cells with an unprecedented
ability to dissolve sulfide-rich ores leading to the expansion of
biohydrometallurgical approaches in the mining industry.