* 1746480
* SBIR Phase I:  Increasing Maker Manufacturing through 3D Printing with Reclaimed Plastic &amp; Direct Drive Pellet Extrusion
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2018
* Samantha Snabes, RE3D Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 06/30/2018
* USD 220,549.00

This SBIR Phase I Project will evaluate the ability to directly use local
materials, such as plastic recyclables as the consumable input for affordable,
industrial 3D printing. This technology will be developed with intent to scale
to multiple 3D printer platforms. Hardware will be sold commercially after
project completion as a novel 3D printer platform as well as a modular
attachment for other 3D printers and 3D motion systems. To broaden the impact of
the research, all prototyping will be documented in a series of monthly videos
intended for educators, STEM organizations and US makers to witness real-world
application of the hardware design process. Additionally, workshops will be held
once a quarter where progress to date will be showcased and students will be
invited to share feedback. This technology has significant opportunity to expand
US in-house manufacturing capability, foster new job creation through enhancing
industry and educational ties, stimulate US driven innovation and reduced trade
dependence on imports of manufactured
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the Fused Filament Fabrication
(FFF) method of additive manufacturing offers tremendous potential for on-site
fabrication, the technology is limited by access to extruded feedstock
materials. Specifically, the ability to locally source raw material and
introduce it directly into a 3D printer via direct drive pellet extrusion is
necessary as the focus of industrial additive manufacturing shifts from
producing prototypes to manufacturing end-use products. This need is amplified
when 3D printing large-scale (defined as &gt; 6 inches cubed) functional
objects. Producing larger outputs represents a larger investment of time and
material costs with existing FFF systems, which currently constrains the
additive manufacturing market. Secondly, a dependence on extruded thermoform
plastics limits the available library of materials. This project includes
development of novel extrusion feed mechanisms for processing pelletized and
non-uniform reclaimed plastic feedstock. Phase I goals include optimization for
virgin and recycled polyethylene terephthalate (PET/RPET), Acrylonitrile
Butadiene Styrene (ABS), and Polylactic Acid (PLA). This system will be
developed for affordability and user experience to allow for easy switching
between materials and print speeds 20X faster than FFF methods. Hardware will be
sold commercially after project completion as a complete 3D printing system as
well as an attachment for 3D printers and 3D motion platforms.