* 1746311
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Stereo-enriched Libraries as Commercial Complex Building Blocks for Facile Development of Biologically Active Compounds on Large Scale
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Mohammad Noshi, Akanocure Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 09/30/2019
* USD 224,996.00

This SBIR Phase I project develops chemical tools and platforms to produce
valuable chemical building blocks that can be used to produce synthetically
challenging compounds on large scales. These compounds belong to the class of
polypropionates which is known for its diverse and powerful biological
activities across multiple indications within the pharmaceutical, agrochemical,
and veterinary industries. The high impact of the polypropionate class is
hampered by the inefficiencies of current chemical processes to fully tackle
their complex structures. Importantly, the lack of scalability adds another
severe complication to the development process. To fully unlock the potential of
this class, improved chemistries with greater efficiencies are required to
successfully identify high impact candidates for further development. Moreover,
the new tools are excellent substrates for polyketide?{enhanced drug discovery.
This project is a prelude to the development of a novel class of compounds
against rare and unmet needs in cancer in collaboration with the NCI/NIH. Such
cancers pose a huge burden on the healthcare system and the economy in general.
Inspired by the NSF mission, this project describes an innovative chemical
process that can deliver highly valuable compounds. Such an approach will enable
accelerated discoveries across multiple medicinal and agrochemical
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to provide all sixteen possible
stereotetrad building blocks (in the form of chiral lactones) for construction
of polypropionates on practical scales. Those chiral building blocks can serve
as common precursors for synthesis of polypropionates, as tools for rational
design and structure activity relationship (SAR) studies, or as entries for more
diverse and complex library of analogs. The chemistry platform used to produce
those building blocks is referred to as the Chiral Carbon Catalog (CCC). The CCC
platform is a synthetic tool box that allows stereoselective large scale
economic synthesis of various complex polypropionate building blocks from simple
starting materials. The unified process has been carefully designed to employ
highly diastereoselective substrate directed transformations while avoiding
expensive and impractical chiral auxiliary overheads or expensive catalysts. The
high efficiencies of transformations allow the elimination of tedious and
expensive purifications such as column chromatography. The crystalline natures
of key intermediates enable facile production on scale and allow the synthetic
routes used by the platform to be easily adopted by the industry for large scale
production. This ensures adequate supply of those building blocks for
development of complex chiral products within several industries (e.g.
pharmaceutical and agrochemical fields).&lt;br/&gt;