* 1746177
* PRFB Workshop- Research Using Biological Collections; November 7-9, 2017; Harvard University
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Joseph Cook, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2019
* USD 98,172.00

This project funds a workshop for Postdoctoral Research Fellows in Biology,
supported by the Research Using Biological Collections track. This track began
in fiscal year (FY) 2015, and therefore three cohorts of fellows have been
supported thus far. This workshop is designed to serve fellows from the first
two cohorts (individuals in cohort 3 have not yet started or only recently
started their fellowships, and are therefore not a part of this workshop). This
project provides funds for approximately 60 fellows (all of those in cohorts 1
and 2) to attend this workshop. The purpose of the workshop is to provide a
forum and networking opportunities to the fellows; expose fellows to
opportunities at NSF; provide professional development opportunities and
information on career tracks; synthesize information on the breadth of
activities supported by collections-based research; and catalyze interactions
and collaborations among fellows and with established scientists.

Biological collections have historically been an invaluable resource for
research and education. In the past decade, there has been a great resurgence in
the use of collections to ask broad and fundamental questions in biology. Some
of this is driven by the development of new technologies, such as next-
generation sequencing, stable isotopes, and new imaging technologies (e.g., DCT
scans), which allow researchers to obtain novel information from specimens. In
addition, many specimens have been digitized and images made available to
researchers. In addition, the use of collections is now recognized as a very
effective way (sometimes the only way) to address certain emerging biological
questions, e.g., the impact of climate change on species distributions. The
workshop will allow fellows to exchange ideas based on their research findings
using collections and, more generally, to share insights into the wide range of
biological questions that can be addressed using collections.