* 1746535
* SBIR Phase I:  An Algorithm that Predicts the Readmission Risk of a Hospital Patient
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,09/30/2018
* Mary Cott, HOME CARE BUSINESS SERVICES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 09/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be the availability of a patient readiness
formula, an algorithm that will improve outcomes by engaging patients in their
own healthcare from hospital admission through discharge. The societal impact
includes (1) reducing the cost related to readmissions for Congestive Heart
Failure, Acute Myocardial Infarction, and pneumonia, a total of $5.8 billion
annually paid by U.S. taxpayers, (2) decreasing the cost of each hospital stay
by $5-10K per Medicare beneficiary by using proven treatment and discharge
planning models, (3) reducing the burden on post-acute providers (primary care
physician, long-term care, home health, ambulatory care) by achieving optimized
clinical stability prior to discharge, and (4) providing a method for a patient
population (studies show who are eager to participate) to actively engage in
their own treatment decisions.

The proposed project will create a proprietary algorithm that produces a
patient-specific hospital readmission-risk score. The score is based on the
algorithm's dynamic adjustment of all known readmission risk factors determined
by the patient's unique profile that includes clinical and other factors. The
goal of the project is to accurately predict a patient's readmission-risk using
the dynamic algorithm. The results of the algorithm will be verified via the
facility's claims system. Technical challenges to be addressed by Phase I
include the compilation of known risk factors, development of the algorithm, and
creating multi-tract data input methods to obtain live data. The research and
development plan will focus on identifying risks, development of the algorithm,
and determining methods for capturing live data needed to execute the algorithm.