* 1746503
* SBIR Phase I:  A Patient-Centered Wearable System to Enable Data-Driven Decisions in Neuromuscular Disorders
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2018
* Dexter Ang, Pison Technology Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 06/30/2018
* USD 224,996.00

The broad impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will benefit the members of the ALS community as this
wearable technology and data collection enables greater independence for
individual ALS patients allowing them to remotely communicate with caregivers
and clinicians, and control environmental elements within their living spaces as
well as being able to monitor their progression for self-care. Expanding the
communication connection between and among the ALS patient, caregivers and
clinical care team members creates a dynamic, multidisciplinary care
environment, which can thoroughly address the changing needs of an ALS patient.
The proposed technology could bring immediate and ongoing assistance to ALS
patients and will remain functional as physical changes occur due to the
progression of ALS, even when a patient has lost all movement ability. The
immediate target market for this type of technology is individuals with severely
impaired ability to move and speak. Neuromuscular conditions including multiple
sclerosis, cerebral palsy, spinal cord injuries and severe stroke affect 1.5M
people in the US and 30M people globally. This population has very limited
options for effective communication and control and are largely underserved by
existing technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to create
a technological platform to address communication and accessibility issues
within care environments for patients affected by Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis
(ALS). Patients with ALS develop a progressively reduced ability to communicate
and interact with interface technology such as mice and keyboards. Each patient
has dynamic needs due to the differing progression rates of the disease. This
creates an opportunity to provide a personalized human-computer interface with
data collection capabilities. The objectives of the proposal involve testing the
effects of skin-electrode impedance and electromagnetic interference (EMI) from
medical equipment such as ventilators and powered wheelchairs on the quality of
biopotential signals. Furthermore, it involves personalizing signal
classification models based on an individual's physical impairment. Advanced
signal processing techniques, including Morlet wavelet and Hilbert transform,
will be used to filter the data collected from multimodal sensor inputs. This
will ensure a robust system design for multiple care environments, regardless of
life support and technological equipment within that space. In addition, a human
research study will be conducted with ALS participants in order to acquire a
relevant data set.