* 1746528
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Smart Pacifier to help parents and pediatricians track early signs of Autism Spectrum Disorder
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Carly Kiselycznyk, Brainchild Technologies L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 12/31/2018
* USD 224,911.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is the improved identification of young children who may be at risk for
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). Autism is a growing concern as rates continue to
increase, however many experts in child development are hopeful that early
intervention can help reduce many of the challenges of living with autism. As
the brain undergoes important critical periods of development in the first year
of life, it is important to try and identify opportunities for intervention as
early as infancy. However, infants have limited means to express themselves and
it can be difficult for parents and even pediatricians to track the subtle
behavioral cues that can be indicative of autism at this early age. The goal of
this proposal is to improve access to tools that help make infants developing
thinking and social skills more observable to pediatricians and parents. By
creating a consumer version of an old technique used by psychologists to
understand infant development, this work will increase access to tools to track
infants' behaviors related to autism.

The proposed project is novel in its repurposing of an established laboratory
psychology tool, the nonnutritive sucking paradigm. Basically, psychologists
long ago learned that infants will alter their rate of sucking on a pacifier
when they are interested in something. Psychologists recorded from a pacifier to
gauge what an infant was interested in as well as an infant's growing
understanding of language, social interaction, math, and a wide variety of
cognitive and social skills. They also allowed infants to control the
presentation of sounds or images through their sucking patterns. This SBIR
project is creating a more accessible version of this established smart pacifier
technique to allow parents and pediatricians to also better track an infant?s
interest, preferences, and social and cognitive development. This effort will
develop a consumer friendly smart pacifier that can control sounds or images on
software or mobile applications. By designing software that replicates the
social and cognitive assessment paradigms in psychology laboratories, the smart
pacifier system can increase access to objective behavioral assessment tools.
Similar to growing evidence in eye-tracking behavior, this behavioral assessment
tool can be used to better assess behaviors that have been linked to the future
development of autism.