* 1746920
* SBIR Phase I:  Data Mining Tool for Assessing Computer Science Curricula
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2018,09/30/2018
* Carlo Martinez, Steppingblocks, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project provides a tool to allow
for computer science curricula modifications to better prepare computer science
graduates for workforce demands. 69% of working software developers are self-
taught and 43% utilized on-the-job training as their primary learning source.
The United States is becoming increasingly dependent on technology to remain
competitive on the global stage and our education system must evolve to more
effectively train our next generation of technology workers. There were only
59,581 computer science graduates in 2015 compared to 527,169 open computing
jobs. This shortfall is magnified considering the majority of graduates must
teach themselves critical skills to become productive workers in private
industry. This tool not only impacts higher education institutions and their
graduates, but also coding academies, high schools, workforce development
agencies, private companies, recruiters, and government bodies. There are 2,650
institutions offering computer science degrees in the United States and all are
potential users of this tool. The market size for this tool is estimated to be
over $400 million. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project
is the development of a tool that can 1) assess what higher educational
institutions should be teaching within computer science as demanded by private
industry, 2) determine how effectively institutions are currently teaching these
skills, and 3) benchmark these institutions compared to their peers. The
innovation inherent in this project is a real-time measurement of skills
demanded in the private sector, rather than lagging years behind, and a real-
time score of how well institutions are currently performing. The data provided
by this tool will allow institutions to modify curricula at a significantly
faster pace and dramatically increase the productivity of graduates. The tool
proposed will be based upon an aggregation of millions of data points from
disparate sources such as university catalogs, job postings, and resumes. Raw
data is then cleansed and analyzed to produce actionable insights for end users
in a visual presentation layer, tailored to individual institutions.