* 1746677
* SBIR Phase I:  OCT-Compatible Imaging Adaptor for Precision Vascular Access via Hollow-Bore Needles
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,08/31/2018
* Thomas Mowery, WestFace Medical Device
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2018
* USD 224,992.00

This SBIR Phase I project will develop a novel imaging adapter to temporarily
integrate imaging into any needle or probe, enabling clinicians to visualize and
identify anatomical markers in-situ, via real-time visualization, to improve
vascular access without major modification of existing needles and technique.
Venipuncture is the most common invasive procedure in medicine. Despite this,
failure rates are 20-30% in easy access patients and 45-70% in difficult
populations. Initial failed access leads to complications, increased hospital
cost and poor patient outcomes. The proposed adapter represents a distinctive
shift away from the way image guidance is currently used and several elements
make this integrated, forward imaging system a transformative improvement: 1. It
does not fundamentally change the standard procedural technique; 2. it improves
image comprehension by ensuring the clinicians will always know what they are
imaging (i.e. directly in front of the needle) drastically reducing
complications caused by the needle penetrating the anatomy surrounding the
target vessel, and; 3. The adapter will provide 10x better resolution than
current imaging aids such as ultrasound. The proposed adapter will improve care
of patients and significantly reduce healthcare costs by improving first time
access success rates, reducing procedure complications, failures and
escalations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT), is a
recognized transformative imaging aid. Data suggests that integrated tip-sourced
imaging with OCT drastically improves both patient safety and outcomes by
allowing the physician real-time decision-making capabilities for minimally
invasive procedures. However, there has been no commercially successful market
penetration of forward looking needle-based OCT imaging technology. There are a
number of reason for this: 1) the challenge of acquiring clinically relevant
images; 2) the cost and the challenge of developing a system that economically
puts OCT at the tip of a needle; and 3) the challenge of clinical usability. The
project will address these concerns with the development of a disposable OCT-
based imaging adapter. Five significant technical challenges will be addressed:
ensuring correct placement of the probe at the tip of the needle after
connection and advancement; incorporating scanning at the fiber tip in order to
acquire two dimensional clinically relevant, forward facing images; determining
the optimal angle of light projection from the probe; determining the optimal
universal lens tip design for cost and ease of advancement through tissue; and
lastly, integrating key research finding into a final probe design that will
become the basis of the commercialized adapter. Solving these technical
challenges will pave the way for FDA approval and subsequent commercialization
of the device.&lt;br/&gt;