* 1746524
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Why Do Ethnic Parties Flourish or Die?
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Mashail Malik, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 22,373.00

Ethnic political parties - i.e., parties that advocate for the interests of a
particular identity group - are a pervasive and often problematic feature of
democracies around the world. The politicization of ethnicity can deepen
identity-based divisions, cause interethnic conflict, and undermine government
accountability. Given these significant negative consequences, it is important
to ask: Why do some ethnic parties succeed in mobilizing their target co-ethnic
population, whereas others fail? This project tackles this question through
studying the case of Karachi, Pakistan - one of the world's largest and most
diverse megacities, and a site of endemic ethnic conflict. In particular, it
will compare the political behavior of the two largest ethnic groups in Karachi
- the Muhajirs and the Pashtuns - in order to develop and test a theory of
ethnic party success and failure. In contrast to existing approaches, this
approach takes seriously the idea that group-specific beliefs and norms are an
important driver of the politicization of identity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based
upon extensive qualitative data collected through three field trips to Karachi,
this project conceptualizes bloc-voting for an ethnic party as a coordination
problem. This coordination problem is solved when co-ethnics come to share --
often as a result of suffering a common shock - - the belief that (1) their
political fates are 'linked' and (2) their ethnic party is best able to serve
these linked interests. By contrast, existing theories of ethnic politics are
heavily focused on instrumental explanations of ethnic voting that, while
useful, are incomplete for both theoretical and empirical reasons.
Theoretically, dominant accounts of ethnic voting do not take seriously
differences between ethnic groups, in effect disregarding a longstanding social
psychology literature on the development of group norms and social incentive
structures, and a small incipient literature " limited so far to American
Politics " that recognizes the importance of heterogeneity in political
understandings and behaviors across ethnic. Empirically, this work moves
existing debates beyond an almost exclusive focus on Africa and India. The cases
social scientists choose affect the answers they get, which makes extending the
literature beyond the study of particular regions a critical undertaking .
Finally, this project corrects the literature's tendency to focus empirically on
rural areas: as the world rapidly urbanizes, the study of identity politics must
pay special attention to how ethnicity manifests politically in diverse
metropolises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.