* 1746759
* SBIR Phase I:  Improving Indoor Air Quality using a Biosilica Based Functional Paint &amp; Coatings Photocatalyst
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,10/31/2018
* Nicholas Day, Diatomix, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 10/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a material
which when added to commercial paint and coatings can improve indoor air quality
by actively removing and degrading Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs). Indoor air
quality is generally five times worse than outdoor air quality and VOCs are
prevalent in indoor environments, being emitted from typical household items
like electronics, cleaners, and flooring. People spend 90% of their lives in
indoor environments, making poor indoor air quality a more acute health risk.
VOCs are known to cause and worsen allergic diseases such as asthma and eczema,
which combined, costs the United States approximately $56 billion in medical
spending and lost work productivity every year. Alleviating the discomfort and
financial burdens posed by allergic diseases can improve the standard of living
of over 60 million affected Americans in the United States. Low- and zero-VOC
paints ($9 billion market) are the fastest growing segment of architectural
paints ($62 billion market). This technology has the potential to dramatically
improve indoor air quality and make everyday living better for children, the
elderly, and adults suffering from allergic diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project will further the understanding of using
diatoms in conjunction with a photocatalyst to harvest light as an energy source
for the removal of pollutants from environments. Diatoms have been shown to
increase the collection of ultraviolet, blue and red wavelengths of light. As a
substrate for photocatalysts which utilize these wavelengths, diatoms may
provide a superior light collection capability, increasing the effectiveness of
photocatalysts. The proposed aim is to show an increase in the photocatalytic
rate of VOC degradation which could help to make metal oxide photocatalysis a
more viable option for air treatment. The proposed research makes the following
contributions: 1) advancement of efficient visible light photocatalysis with a
diatom-based additive; 2) understanding integration of photocatalytic paint
additives into base paint and coatings mixtures, optimized for minimal paint
substrate degradation and maximal photocatalytic degradation of indoor air-
pollutants; and 3) long-term improvement of indoor air quality. Overall it is
expected that this Phase I will show diatoms, as substrates, can increase the
rate of photocatalysts up to two times under typical irradiation sources. This
project targets cleaner indoor environments through pollutant removal activity
without increased energy usage.