* 1746187
* SBIR Phase I:  Achieving a scalable Earthquake Early Warning System (EEWS) with a sub-second response
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Battalgazi YILDIRIM, Zizmos, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project achieves a widespread earthquake sensor network
in the earthquake-prone regions. With this wide prevalence of the sensor
network, this smart, real-time earthquake detection system can detect an
earthquake within a second near an epicenter and notify the other users away
from the epicenter before the shakings arrive, effectively creating an
earthquake early warning system for society. This same infrastructure of the
smart earthquake monitoring system can be transformed to detect other natural
hazards such as landslides, volcano eruptions, mine explosions, generating
larger social and economic benefits. With this technology, instead of some
sparse seismic recordings that we have currently, we can collect dense
earthquake data from tens of thousands of locations in cities, providing a
block-by-block risk-assessment of earthquake hazards in cities. This dense data
promises several orders of magnitude improvement in the current earthquake
hazard maps and helps the first responders, catastrophic modelers, primary
insurance and reinsurance companies, city planners, and building owners to
better assess the earthquake hazard risks. The granular level of the risk maps
has the potential to increase the awareness of earthquake hazard risk in
society.

The proposed project achieves a dense and hybrid seismic network using
smartphones, tablets, and stationary IoT devices. A potential outcome of this
project is a next-generation Earthquake Early Warning System with a sub-second
response that repurposes smartphones, tablets, and other sensors of a large IoT
ecosystem for the earthquake sensor network. To achieve the performance under a
second, a new earthquake early warning system that scales the massive data
streaming from multiple sources, enables sensor and server communication in the
fraction of a second, finally builds a new push notification framework to alert
hundreds of thousands in less than a second.