* 1746827
* SBIR Phase I:  Intensification of propylene oxide manufacture via solid-catalyst design
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Alexander Okrut, Berkeley Materials Solutions
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop a
delaminated zeolite-based catalyst to facilitate more economical and
environmentally friendly propylene-oxide (PO) production. PO is a commodity
chemical with a $5.6B/year market. The two current pain points for PO producers
are (i) that the currently used industrial catalyst lacks long-term stability
under the harsh conditions at the tail-end of the PO synthesis reactor, and (ii)
as a result of catalyst deficiency, that the process to manufacture PO consumes
an extra $140M of raw materials per year, separate from the problem in (i)
above. Berkeley Materials Solutions developed a catalyst for the tail-end of the
PO synthesis reactor that nearly eliminates both of these problems. The catalyst
allows for nearly 100% conversion of all raw material into PO, which leads to
$145 M/year of additional revenue for PO producers, corresponding to a revenue
increase of 8.6%. This increased revenue comes at no additional cost since it is
a drop-in replacement. In addition, there are significant energy efficiency
improvements associated with recovering the currently lost raw material in the
PO synthesis process, which amounts to a CO2 footprint of ~740 kilo tons of CO2
per year worldwide.

The intellectual merit of this project will be represented by the development of
a generalizable crystalline catalyst platform to replace existing amorphous
catalysts. Technical hurdles that will be addressed in the proposal are (i) the
successful delamination of a layered zeolite precursor using a swelling method
and sonication, (ii) establishing a sonication-free scalable delamination method
for layered zeolite precursors, and (iii) the insertion of catalytically active
heteroatom sites into the delaminates frameworks. If successful, this will
enable the economical production of these zeolite catalysts for application in
the PO synthesis reactor under flow conditions. The targeted scales even during
Phase I activities are large enough to enable testing in collaboration with
industrial partners who manufacture propylene oxide at large scales. These test
results will be used to optimize the prototype catalyst. The results from Phase
I activities will help to uncover other possible opportunities to use
delaminated zeolites as highly efficient catalysts for chemical manufacturing.