* 1746785
* SBIR Phase I:  Sustainable scandium supply from industrial wastes enabled by novel chemistry in solid-phase extraction technologies
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Clinton Noack, Anactisis, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will study novel methods for extracting and recovering
valuable metals from an abundant industrial waste source, namely coal combustion
fly ash. If successful, the technology developed in this project has the
potential to reduce the environmental and societal risks of both newly
generated- and legacy coal combustion wastes, while strengthening the supply
chain security of raw materials critical to advanced technology and green energy
applications. Moreover, by establishing a secure long-term supply of affordable
scandium, this project can catalyze long-lasting improvements in commercial and
personal transportation. Demonstration of this highly-selective, solvent-free
metal separations technology may also influence a paradigm shift in the
metallurgical industry towards more sustainable practices. Validation of
technologies for waste utilization and value creation is an attractive avenue
for transitioning coal-dependent regions towards economies based on advanced
manufacturing and high-tech jobs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous attempts to
extract metals from industrial wastes have suffered from technical limitations
that the technology developed in this project overcomes. Based on commercially-
available engineered polymer supports, our suite of adsorbents exhibits REE-
selective functionality across broad pH regimes, enabling flexible,
complementary deployment and high rates of reagent recycle. The goals of this
project are to translate the laboratory-scale synthesis schemes for our novel
adsorbents to greener, industrially-scalable chemistries and to demonstrate a
holistic system prototype that validates the key unit operations of our process
together. The former will be accomplished by following well-established
protocols of the chemical industry under the supervision of our commercial
partner and the latter through extensive, dynamic subsystem testing and finally
construction and operation of a lab-scale prototype. The project team expects
the final deliverable of this development effort to constitute a high-fidelity
demonstration of the process at a Technology Readiness Level of 5.