* 1746114
* SBIR Phase I:  Wireless Leakage Monitoring System for Electrofusion Joints
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Ruben Mencos, PROPER PIPE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 10/31/2019
* USD 220,688.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a substantial reduction of leakage in high-
density polyethylene (HDPE) pipes. HDPE is a type of plastic commonly used for
water, oil, and gas distribution pipe systems. Billions of gallons of treated
water are lost daily across the US due to leaking pipes, resulting in massive
revenue loss, environmental and property damage, and energy waste. Furthermore,
millions of metric tons of methane, a powerful greenhouse gas, escape every year
into the atmosphere through leaking pipes. Most leaks occur at pipe joints and
by wirelessly monitoring each joint for leaks, as a part of a smart
infrastructure network, major leak reduction can be achieved. The commercial
impact of the project is extensive, as smart infrastructure networks are
increasingly being implemented and expanded, sensor and wireless communication
technology has advanced significantly in recent years, and the rate of piping
infrastructure installations, replacements, and repairs are accelerating across
the US and globally.

The proposed project aims to demonstrate a prototype capable of detecting a leak
in electrofusion joints and wirelessly communicate the leak to an external
network. Such joint monitoring system is highly desirable as pipe leaks can go
undetected for an extended period of time. Moreover, once detected, leaks can be
difficult and expensive to locate, especially as pipes are commonly buried
underground or situated at hard-to-reach or remote locations. The challenge that
comes with this  is to provide a reliable local power source for the sensing
unit that can be on standby for up to 50 years. A second challenge is to
generate a signal, powered by the local power source, that can be transmitted to
the surface and notify a leak to an external signal receiver. A water-activated
battery combined with a radio-frequency identification (RFID) transmitter will
be developed for this purpose. RFID technology is extensively used in a broad
range of industries due to its low-cost and good reliability . This technology
is, therefore, an excellent candidate for providing an affordable joint leak
detection system.