* 1746710
* SBIR Phase I:  GIGAHERTZ ULTRASONIC FINGERPRINT IMAGERS
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Amit Lal, Geegah llc
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to provide spoof-free biometric fingerprint
sensors. Consumer confidence in adopting many technologies such as IoT devices,
and reach a cash-less society is limited by our confidence in transactions being
fraud-free. Around the world, there are varying degrees of fraud and it is well
known that poorer countries have higher levels of fraud then more advanced
countries. By providing a trustable biometric device, the proposed
commercialization plan will allow lower levels of fraud and allow greater degree
of economic activity bringing up standards of living. The technology of GHz
ultrasonics for sensing also has the potential for to be used for applications
in being able to image baby fingerprints, enable fingerprint readers in fire-
arms for authenticated use at very fast speeds, and allow integration with
credit and debit cards. The success of the commercial activities will create a
new paradigm for trusting the electronic economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop
revolutionary new biometric sensors. Biometric technologies range from sensing
the unique patterns of the eyes, to voice, and fingerprints amongst other
markers. Capacitive fingerprint sensors, and optical fingerprint sensors are
very commonly found in smartphones and desktop applications. These technologies
produce images that are often limited in resolution and are not spoof-proof. For
example, optical fingerprint readers can be spoofed by fingerprint images and
capacitive fingerprint sensors can be spoofed by skin-like dielectric polymer
fingerprint molds. Ultrasonic images offer the potential for detecting tissue
material properties that can help identify fake fingerprints. Although many low-
frequency technologies for ultrasonic fingerprint sensing are available, very
few have made it into the market in large quantities owing to cost, packaging,
and insufficient SNR and resolution. In this project the company will extend the
frequency of operation to the GHz range to achieve four to eight times the
standard industry standard of 500 dpi resolution. Coupled with integrated
circuits operating at low voltages, the company aims for integration of the
sensors in very thin platforms such as credit cards.