* 1746570
* SBIR Phase I:  Ureter Detection during Minimally Invasive or Robotic Surgery by Electrical Stimulus Evoked Responses
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Albert Huang, Allotrope Medical
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2018
* USD 224,832.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project directly addresses the
estimated $3.2 billion healthcare burden that develops from iatrogenic ureteral
injuries that occur across the three million abdominal and pelvic surgeries
being performed annually in the United States. Allotrope Medical creates
innovative surgical solutions to improve patient outcomes and reduce procedure
costs, directly addressing this situation. Allotrope?s devices improve
anatomical structure location and tissue identification thereby reducing the
potential for injury while enhancing a surgeon?s confidence for reduced
procedure time. Using smooth muscle stimulation, Allotrope?s StimSite is a
sterile single-use, battery powered device that safely and reliably identifies
the ureter location to avoid injury during these abdominal and pelvic surgical
procedures. The ureter naturally contracts while draining urine from the kidneys
into the bladder. This smooth muscle structure is at risk of injury during
dissection and pinching, the current standard surgical method, to mechanically
elicit this contraction and thereby locating the ureter during surgery.
Allotrope has demonstrated StimSite?s ability to elicit the same contraction
without surgical dissection, thereby diminishing the injury risk while also
significantly reducing the surgical procedure time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR Phase I project will advance the smooth
muscle electrical stimulation technology used in StimSite. The project will
improve product development and clinical understanding of the design's operating
limits while increasing the product's clinical utility through better
integration with the laparoscope's imaging system to display a stable indication
of the ureter position. This project encompasses three objectives: First, using
an instrumented breadboard device, the proprietary electrical pulse waveform
will be studied characterizing how varying the waveform parameters affect tissue
contraction responses. Second, the performance of the preferred waveform will be
evaluated in a porcine model to confirm in-vivo performance of a stand-alone
configuration. Third, available image processing software will be evaluated to
track and trace the ureter contraction and retain a road-map of the ureter
position displayed on the monitor after the ureter has relaxed and is no longer
directly visualized. These three objectives will substantially advance
Allotrope's smooth muscle electrical stimulation technology platform for the
current device use and targeted future applications in esophageal, stomach and
bowel tissue identification, etc.