* 1746895
* Doctoral Dissertation Research - Behavioral Traits and Political Selection in Authoritarian Ruling Parties
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Edmund Malesky, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2019
* USD 23,850.00

Mechanisms behind the political stability of single-party regimes have long
interested scholars and policymakers. As authoritarian ruling parties share many
similarities with corporations regarding personnel management, a growing body of
literature examines the role of personnel selection in durability and survival
of authoritarian parties. When examining behaviors of authoritarian party elites
and strategies of intra-party personnel selection, however, the existing
literature exclusively focuses on the roles of situational factors, such as
environmental and structural constraints, and task performance. Dispositional
factors and behavioral patterns at the individual level, which have been
thoroughly discussed in research on electoral politics and firm management, have
been overlooked in the authoritarianism literature. This project challenges the
assumption that authoritarian party elites have monolithic dispositional
attributes and the proposition that situational factors and task performance
play dominant roles in authoritarian personnel selection. This project argues
that risk propensities, a major behavioral trait at the individual level, have
profound behavioral outcomes in party elites? obedience to the leadership and
policy implementation. Meanwhile, authoritarian parties also manage and assign
the cadres based on their behavioral traits. Using the Chinese Communist Party
(CCP) as a research case, this project contributes to a burgeoning body of
literature on authoritarian ruling parties and broadens our knowledge of
political behavior in non-democratic contexts. This project also presents
original data on behavioral traits and outcomes of party cadres in China, where
political elite data are notoriously difficult to
obtain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project sheds light on our understanding of
authoritarian ruling parties by incorporating original quantitative and
qualitative evidence. This project designs and implements an original survey
experiment among 1,000-2,000 medium-level CCP party cadres who participate
certificate programs at a major university in China. The survey seeks to measure
behavioral traits and opinions of party cadres by employing a variety of
measures of risk propensities, survey experiments that feature priming cues
about different aspects of career uncertainties, and a series of endorsement
experiments. In the meantime, this project will also collect distributional data
of cadres with different behavioral traits and uses the information to
understand the CCP's personnel management strategies. To supplement the
quantitative data, a series of interviews will be conducted with serving and
retiring senior party cadres and collect archival
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.