* 1746589
* SBIR Phase I:  Real-time arrhythmia detection and classification using a waterproof armband
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Justin Chickles, Mobile Sense Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to help identify people that have paroxysmal
or asymptomatic cardiac arrhythmias before they become dangerous. Atrial
Fibrillation (AF) is the most common arrhythmia, and the prevalence of AF
increases with age. AF has a profound impact on longevity and quality of life.
Patients typically develop paroxysmal, short-lived episodes of the arrhythmia
and are frequently asymptomatic. This often leads to delays in diagnosis of AF
until later stages when the arrhythmia is more persistent. Even short episodes
of paroxysmal AF are associated with increased risk for stroke, heart failure,
hospitalization, and death. The population with undiagnosed AF is substantial
and studies have shown that continuous ECG monitoring for more than 3 years is
required to achieve close to 100% AF detection. Current 30-day monitors detect
5% of paroxysmal and asymptomatic cases, since events must occur while the
monitor is being worn. An armband-based approach offers a way to overcome the
current restrictions in chest based monitors and bridges the gap between short-
duration 30-day monitors and long-term implanted monitors.

The proposed project uses an armband-based device to capture electrocardiogram
(ECG) and electromyogram (EMG) signals on the upper arm using a waterproof and
wireless device. The sensors are made from a composite material that can operate
both wet and dry and does not require adhesives or hydrogels to capture all
aspects of the waveforms. The challenge with the upper arm is that the ECG
signals have less magnitude then over-the-heart and it is necessary to remove
motion / noise artifacts as well as EMG signals to create a clean ECG signal.
The research is focused on embedding algorithms into the device and testing and
refining them for removing motion and noise artifacts that are captured by an
accelerometer and to remove EMG signals. After a clean signal is established,
proven algorithms for classification of the arrhythmias can be run embedded in
the device.