* 1746983
* SBIR Phase I:  Atomic High Magnetic Field Probe
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,05/31/2019
* David Anderson, Rydberg Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 05/31/2019
* USD 224,994.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is focused on
developing a new probe technology for high magnetic field sensing and
measurement. The technology utilizes a circuit-free, atom-based field sensing
element that affords absolute measurements of strong fields with high-speed all-
optical readout that is free of electromagnetic interference, directly
addressing capability gaps in existing technologies relevant to a variety of
industries. A broad commercial potential is in fault-detection in condition-
monitoring systems for motors and generators, where faults due to occurrences
such as over-fluxing or magnetization can lead to major damage, costly repairs
and production downtime. The atomic probe addresses an unmet need for reliable,
localized measurements up to several Tesla of magnetic field within and
surrounding conductive components in rotating machines for early fault
detection. The technology also promises to expand capabilities of laboratory
measurement instrumentation and contribute to experimental high magnetic field
science requiring advanced instrumentation for measurement in the 1 to 100 Tesla
range. The extraordinary opportunities for scientific research and technological
development represented by investment in high magnetic field laboratories were
set out in influential reports of the National Academies of Science (2004 and
2013). The field probe is expected to contribute to this on-going, multi-
disciplinary effort. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
project includes the research and demonstration of key components and
capabilities of an atomic high magnetic field probe. The innovation lies in a
fundamentally new measurement approach that provides robust, absolute-standard
(atomic) measurement and sensing of magnetic fields up to tens of Tesla at high
speed and precision with a compact, circuit-free, all-optical sensing element.
The probe operates based on atomic physics principles that describe the
spectroscopic response of atoms in strong magnetic fields, and quantum-optics
phenomena that serve as a practical means to achieve all-optical readout of the
atomic spectra, from which information on the magnetic field is obtained. During
this project, theoretical atomic spectra in strong magnetic fields will be
developed, tested and refined. A vapor-cell probe suitable for sensing strong
magnetic fields will be designed, fabricated, and tested. Laboratory experiments
will be performed to measure the atomic response to magnetic fields in the range
of 1 Tesla at ppm sensitivity levels. The method will also be tested in time-
varying and switching magnetic fields, on timescales of &lt;100ms.
Miniaturization of probes and read-out units will be initiated, leading towards
robust and compact, practical sensing elements with higher operation speed and
improved performance characteristics.