* 1746715
* Engaging Underrepresented Populations in Biodiversity Sciences: A Series of Workshops for Undergraduate Students
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Mare Nazaire, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 07/31/2023
* USD 99,976.00

The goal of this project is to engage undergraduates, especially those from
underrepresented groups, in a discussion on opportunities in biodiversity
sciences thru a series of workshops, mentoring, and shadowing activities.
Emerging global issues, such as climate change, loss of biological diversity,
land and water resource conservation, and sustainable agriculture, require more
reliance on a workforce with training and expertise in biodiversity science.
Four workshops will be conducted over a 4-year period to increase the number and
diversity of undergraduate students interested in pursuing careers in
biodiversity science (including collections science and organismal,
evolutionary, ecological, and environmental biology). Student recruitment will
target students from local community colleges, minority-serving institutions,
and four-year colleges and universities. Professional societies will also be
enlisted to recruit Native Americans, Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiians and
Pacific Islanders, African Americans, and Latino American students to
participate in two-day workshops hosted by natural history museums.
Undergraduate students participating in the workshops will be exposed to
emerging careers and research opportunities by: (1) shadowing museum
professionals to get hands-on experience in collections science; (2) learning
about research and career opportunities from diverse graduate students and early
career professionals pursuing careers in biodiversity science; and (3) getting
practical advice and individualized mentoring to navigate their undergraduate
experience and optimize their potential for graduate school and careers related
to biological sciences, museum studies, and biodiversity collections.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Across a broad range of scientific disciplines, diversity
in research scientists has provided new perspectives and ideas leading to novel
solutions and increased productivity. This series of workshops will work to
recruit, retain, and sustain a larger, more inclusive, and diverse,
undergraduate population of students equipped to engage in creative solutions
for emerging science questions. Workshop activities will introduce
underrepresented populations of undergraduate students to natural history
museums, biodiversity collections, and collections-based researchers as a means
to inspire and educate them in opportunities and data rich resources in
biodiversity science.