* 1746490
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Smart Health Management System for Respiratory Patients
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* James Dieffenderfer, VitalFlo Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of an intuitive, easy-to-use,
Smart Respiratory Health Management System for respiratory patients and their
physicians. This system includes (1) lab-quality lung function data produced by
the proposed mobile spirometer and paired smartphone application, (2) the
interpretation and contextualization of this lung function data based on local
environmental and physiological risk factors, and (3) the delivery of these
insights to physicians and patients. By leveraging this software platform, this
technology is expected to enable physicians to make timely interventions with
their at-risk patients, thereby preventing acute respiratory exacerbations
(e.g., asthma attacks) and any associated hospitalizations or visits to the
emergency department. Currently, respiratory diseases are poorly managed, and
the proposed predictive technology can help reduce the 1.6 million annual
asthma-related visits to the emergency department. By enabling preventative
patient interventions, the proposed technology is expected to reduce the high
cost of asthma-related emergency department visits and hospitalizations. The
proposed system-level solution will empower asthma patients to participate in
their own health and treatment, while simultaneously improving health-related
behaviors, patient-physician communication, and preventative care
coordination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project focuses on the
development of a software platform that connects chronic respiratory disease
patients to physicians, to alert physicians of declining lung health. With this
preemptive alert, physicians can intervene with patients before an acute
respiratory exacerbation, thereby reducing hospitalizations and their associated
costs. There are three steps required to implement this proposed system. The
first is to facilitate the affordable collection of daily lab-quality lung
function data. This step has already been completed via a mobile spirometer and
pair smartphone application. The second step is to interpret and contextualize
the collected data. This step requires the development of a predictive algorithm
that incorporates risk factors from a physical activity and local environment.
The third step is to deliver this data and their interpretation to the physician
in a manner that is seamlessly incorporated into the existing electronic health
records infrastructure and the physician's workflow. The second and third steps
will be undertaken as part of this Phase I grant.