* 1746697
* SBIR Phase I:  All-Carbon, Chemically Cross-Linked 3D Nano Assemblies for Liquid Chromatography
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Balaji Sitharaman, Millennial Materials and Devices Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 02/28/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be the development of high-performance all-carbon
reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) column packing
material. Customers of the $1.3 Billion/year HPLC column market include life
science, biochemical, industrial, nutritional safety, environmental,
agricultural, process engineering, academic and governmental organizations.
Reversed-phase columns account for the majority of HPLC column market. Upon
market entry, our technology will attract customers whose analysis requirements
fall outside the capabilities of current silica- (Hydrophobic alkyl chains
typically comprising of 18 carbon atoms (C18) bonded to silica support) or
graphitic carbon-based columns as well as those who are seeking faster more
efficient analysis at a lower cost. It will also attract customers seeking next-
generation performance capabilities for separation of structurally similar
compounds, biologics, biobetters or biosimilars. Molecules would include
geometric isomers and diastereoisomers (e.g., chiral drugs such as thalidomide),
biogenic (e.g., catecholamines or other hormones that are modulated in many
neurologic disorders such as Alzheimer Disease). Macromolecules include
structurally similar compounds (e.g., hemoglobin variants in sickle cell anemia)
and many drug metabolites (e.g., glucuronide in opioid metabolites) and drugs of
abuse (e.g., cannabis).

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to establish the technical feasibility of a
chemically-crosslinked all carbon column material for reverse phase HPLC.
Chromatography technology plays a key role in the development of life-saving
pharmaceutical products and medical therapies, ensuring the safety of our food
and water, protection of our environment and guarding public health. Reversed-
phase HPLC columns employ a hydrophobic stationary phase. Typical silica-based
reverse phase HPLC columns are not durable, are challenged by elevated pH and
temperature and lack sufficient retention for highly polar and closely related
structures. The newer graphitic carbon HPLC columns are prohibitively expensive
and neither scalable nor functionalizable for improved selectivity. Our
technology's key differentiator is at the molecular surface level, where our
novel proprietary fabrication technology directly connect carbon nanomaterials
with covalent bonds, producing scalable all-carbon column materials. Our overall
objective during Phase I is to identify the optimal column packing conditions
and characterize the chromatographic performance of the columns as a function of
pH and temperature and ability to separate structurally similar small compounds
and biologics. Successful completion of the proposed research and development
plan will allow us to finalize highly differentiated all-carbon nanomaterial
column prototypes that will offer unparalleled chemical and thermal stability,
best-in-class recovery, excellent separation efficiency and increased column
longevity at a significantly lower cost.