* 1746580
* SBIR Phase I:   Integrating alignment angle sensors into limb prosthesis standard componentry
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Esteban Ruiz, APO Technologies, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 02/28/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is an improvement in how artificial limbs
(prostheses) are fitted to the individual user. This promises better
rehabilitation outcomes for people with limb loss, which lowers the risk of
long-term health issues, such as accidental falls, back pain, or conditions that
are associated with a sedentary lifestyle. All those risks can carry substantial
direct and indirect costs for the individual and the society at large. There are
approximately 2 million Americans who are living with limb loss, and who will
potentially benefit from better prosthesis fit. Beyond the expected long-term
benefits, these individuals will experience immediate benefits that include a
more inconspicuous gait pattern, a reduction in skin and muscle soreness, and an
increase in activity radius. The commercial impact of this research will extend
to the industry of prosthetic componentry manufacturing. Currently, the
structural elements of prostheses are mass-produced, strictly mechanical
components. The proposed work will entail the integration of miniature sensors
into those components, which will make them more valuable, and - along with the
economical long-term benefits - justify higher unit prices and thereby a
substantial growth potential for this $400M market. The proposed project is
focused on optimizing the static alignment of limb prostheses. This alignment
needs to be carefully fine-tuned to each individual user of a prosthesis. The
associated work is the domain of the prosthetist, who depends on experience,
patient feedback, and intuition to achieve acceptable results. There are
currently no easy ways to measure and track alignment changes throughout this
process and therefore no data-based approaches to improving it. In the proposed
project, small scale sensors will be integrated into the conventional alignable
prosthesis components. These will provide continuous, accurate real-time
measurements of alignment changes. It is planned to make those measurements
available to the prosthetist via smartphone or tablet PC, so that they can help
streamline the alignment optimization process. In the future, if it is possible
to analyze the so collected data from thousands of alignment procedures,
scientific methods can be applied to solve the problem of imperfect prosthesis
alignments. The proposed work will be focused on customizing the sensors and
associated hardware to existing standard components without making them much
heavier or more expensive. Preliminary tests of the device with a sample of
prosthetists are part of the planned Phase 1 project as well.