* 1746992
* SBIR Phase I:  Prototyping a Laboratory Kit to Assist Undergraduate Instructors in Teaching Self-Assembly
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Emma Sturgill, PurSolutions, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project resides in motivating cross-disciplinary
innovations for more efficient, smarter, and safer technologies. These benefits
will be realized by empowering the next generation workforce with knowledge of a
phenomenon that is revolutionizing the modern day innovation ecosystem. This
marvel is called "self-assembly", and is used by nature to build structures
ranging from protein complexes to living organisms. Researchers are harnessing
this natural phenomenon to drive scientific advancements including nanowires
with increased computing power and pharmaceuticals with greater therapeutic
potential, demonstrating that self-assembly holds the potential to seed
disruptive technologies across multiple disciplines. To unlock the full
innovative potential of this phenomenon, self-assembly must be taught to the
upcoming generation of scientists and engineers in an engaging and insightful
manner. This SBIR Phase I project aims to integrate self-assembly into the
teaching curriculum of undergraduate science courses. By educating students
about the intricacies and applications of self-assembly, this project will
inspire future breakthroughs and accrue compounding societal and commercial
benefits. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to prototype a
consumer-focused minimum viable product (MVP) that assists undergraduate
instructors in teaching the emerging phenomenon of selfassembly. The absence of
such a product to date is likely attributable to the technical hurdles that
challenge the ability to demonstrate self-assembly in a cross-disciplinary yet
straightforward manner. The research objectives incorporate proof-of-concept
experimentation and reiterative product builds to design a prototype that
efficiently caters to undergraduate instructors and their teaching practices.
More specifically, the objectives are to: 1. Design components that demonstrate
self-assembly across multiple scales and disciplines. 2. Create educational
content that effectively disseminates knowledge of self-assembly and its
applications. 3. Field-test and optimize the prototype in response to end user
experiences. The resulting MVP will provide materials and instructions to
conduct various self-assembly demonstrations in a cost-effective and readily
deployable manner. The product would be the first educational tool to address
self-assembly in this manner.