* 1746556
* STTR Phase I:  Relaxivity mechanisms of Fe(III) MRI contrast agents
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Janet Morrow, Ferric Contrast, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 04/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This STTR Phase I project will undertake the development of iron coordination
complexes as alternatives for gadolinium contrast agents which are currently
used in clinical MRI diagnostic exams. New MRI contrast agents are needed to
serve the segment of the population who cannot tolerate Gd(III) agents. This
includes patients with kidney disease and those who have frequent MRI scans and
may accumulate Gd(III). The proposed research involves the study of new
trivalent iron coordination complexes based on those initially studied in the
co-PI?s university laboratory. New iron complexes will be prepared and studied
as contrast agents in live mice to improve characteristics of the agents such as
clearance from the body. Fundamental studies of the iron complexes will add to
the body of knowledge on the paramagnetic properties of iron.&lt;br/&gt;For the
most promising Fe(III) contrast agents, the synthetic procedures will be adapted
for large scale preparation and purity determination. Iron MRI contrast agents
may also be beneficial to society by reducing gadolinium in water supply.
Furthermore, iron as an abundant element is less expensive and more readily
available in the USA than is gadolinium. The commercialization of iron MRI
contrast agents will create jobs in chemical manufacturing, sales, and in
health-related occupations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lead Fe(III) coordination
complex on which this project is based produces longitudinal (T1) relaxivity of
water protons that rival clinically used Gd(III) complexes at 4.7 Tesla, both
under in vitro conditions and also in live mice. Importantly, these complexes
contain macrocyclic ligands that stabilize iron in the trivalent state (negative
redox potentials versus NHE) and do not produce reactive oxygen species even in
the presence of ascorbate as a reductant and peroxide. The importance of
outersphere water and innersphere water interactions will be studied by varying
the coordinating pendent groups on the macrocyclic ligand which is bound to
Fe(III). The ancillary group will be varied to increase binding to serum
proteins and to modify the clearance route of the contrast agents either through
kidneys or through hepatobiliary routes. The complexes will be optimized for
kinetic inertness towards release of iron under biologically relevant
conditions. Toxicity studies in cell culture will be carried out on each of the
new complexes. This research will focus on both pilot scale preparation for the
study of the Fe(III) complexes in vitro and also on larger scale preparations
and HPLC analysis of the most promising new derivatives. In vivo MRI scans in
mice on a 4.7 T scanner will be used to track the distribution and clearance of
the iron contrast agents as a function of time. &lt;br/&gt;