* 1746819
* SBIR Phase I:  Building Extensible and Customizable Binary Code Analytics Engine for Malware Intelligence as a Service
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Xunchao Hu, DEEPBITS TECHNOLOGY LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2019
* USD 224,987.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to spark more cybersecurity innovations, by
reducing the R&amp;D expenditures via providing fundamental security analytics
tools as a service. Global cybersecurity spending is increasing significantly
year over year. Enormous R&amp;D resources have been invested in the development
of a range of security products to meet this market. However, different security
product providers repeatedly build the fundamental security analytics tools and
use them to further develop different innovative security solutions. That is a
huge waste of R&amp;D resources. The proposed solution reduces the R&amp;D
expenditure of customers and lowers the entry bar for the growing cybersecurity
market. With the lowered entry bar, the company anticipates that more
innovations will be put into practice. As a result, with the increased
competition and reduced R&amp;D expenditure, the company expects a reduction in
cybersecurity spending by companies and the
government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project focuses on malware intelligence, which has been a long-standing
as well as increasingly complex cybersecurity problem. Traditional signature
based detection and manual reverse engineering approaches can no longer keep up
with the pace of increasingly sophisticated obfuscation and attack techniques.
The objective of this project is to develop a security analysis tool for malware
intelligence by combining the following two unique techniques: "whole-system
emulation based dynamic binary analysis" and "deep-learning based binary code
similarity detection". The first technique provides a fine-grained monitor
capability to observe the behaviors of malware. The second technique provides
the capability of learning and characterizing complex features. By combining
these two techniques, the proposed technology will be able to better understand
malware and generate actionable intelligence.