* 1746784
* STTR Phase I:  Conversion of food waste to biofuels using an anaerobic membrane bioreractor
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Ashok Damle, Techverse, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project will be a cost-effective, commercially viable,
alternative process for on-site treatment of food waste and energy recovery. In
the U.S., nearly 40% of food is wasted with $165 billion equivalent loss of food
plus associated water, energy, chemicals, and labor used in food production.
Disposal of the food waste involves additional costs and causes environmental
pollution, e.g. rotting food waste in landfills accounts for a large portion of
U.S. methane emissions, a powerful greenhouse gas. Moreover, food waste streams
contain a substantial amount of chemical energy that also is lost by its
disposal. Recovering energy in food waste in the form of biofuel and chemicals,
as proposed in this project, will provide efficient management of food waste
problem reducing food waste disposal costs while producing useful
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes to develop and
demonstrate the performance of a novel, immobilized clostridia cell membrane
bioreactor-based continuous process to convert food waste to butanol. The
conventional stirred-tank fermentation reactor-based food waste conversion
process exhibits low butanol concentration as well as productivity. The proposed
process will address the technical barriers of the conventional process by
immobilizing the clostridia cells on porous media to dramatically increase cell
culture density, and, consequently, butanol productivity and conversion
efficiency. In addition, by separating butanol from the reaction media, recycled
butanol concentration is minimized in the reactor, which alleviates butanol
toxicity. The membrane fouling issues in biomass separation will be addressed by
an "open channel" membrane module design to separate and recycle biomass to the
bioreactor. The energy requirement for recovery of butanol from dilute reactor
effluent will be reduced by an order of magnitude over the conventional
distillation by using a pervaporation membrane. The objective of the proposed
effort is to demonstrate a steady state continuous integrated process for
converting food waste to butanol after optimizing individual components.