* 1746740
* STTR Phase I:  Supercapacitors for Power Supplies
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Isaiah Oladeji, Capacitech Energy, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2019
* USD 224,905.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the first time
commercial development of a copper cable which can transmit and store energy.
Currently, copper cables are used for transmitting electricity. Adding energy
storage capability to these cables is transformative and has the potential to be
employed in a myriad of electrical and electronic applications. Making these
cables into spools of wires and custom sliced into a certain length to achieve a
required capacitance will be very attractive to commercial applications. The
proposed study enables to understand how energy transmission and storage can be
simultaneously performed without mutual interference. These cables can find
niche applications in the automotive, energy, defense, and IT industries.
Moreover, when made into thin wires, it can be weaved into a matrix which can be
used to charge wearable devices. For example, currently, a soldier carries about
30-40 pounds of battery for a three-day mission. However, if energy storage
devices like the one proposed here can be made into an advanced textile form and
can be worn as a uniform, the weight currently carried by the soldiers can be
considerably reduced. A cable energy storage device developed can also be
beneficial for storing energy for clean-energy technologies such as wind and
solar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase
I project fills the gap of a cable-type capacitor which saves space and fits
well with electrical and electronic devices. The objective of this proposal is
to use nanotechnology-based fabrication techniques to grow nanowhiskers with a
high surface area on a copper cable to make cable-type capacitors. These
nanostructures considerably enhance the surface area necessary for the storage
of electrical charges. Since nanostructures are developed only on the outside of
the electrical cable to store energy, the inner part of the cable can still be
used for electrical transmission. The focus of the proposed research is to
develop the processes which can be used to make these nanostructured electrodes
into a cable capacitor. The fabrication techniques for growing nanostructures
will be so designed that making long lengths of the cables are feasible. The
performance of the cable-based capacitors will be tested in terms of
capacitance, cycle life, voltage output, etc. In addition, the flexibility of
the cable will be tested at different bend-angles to evaluate its applications
in flexible energy storage applications.