* 1746140
* SBIR Phase I:  Internally Microstructured Optical Films for Natural Lighting of Building Interiors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Sergiy Vasylyev, Lucent Optics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 06/30/2019
* USD 224,997.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in enabling additional energy savings in
buildings by harvesting natural daylight and using it for illuminating the
interior space with high efficiency and without glare, thus offsetting the need
for electrical lighting. This will make building operations more sustainable and
help improve the energy security of the U.S, create jobs, and reduce greenhouse
gas emissions. Additionally, when commercially available, this new technology
will bring all of the well-known benefits of enhanced natural lighting for
occupants of millions of residential and commercial buildings across the U.S.,
such as connection to outdoors and improved comfort, productivity and well-
being, thus benefiting many groups of consumers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will demonstrate the feasibility of a novel, non-prismatic
optical film material and its use for enhanced daylighting harvesting in
buildings. This material employs thousands of microscopic reflective surfaces
embedded into the bulk of the material and operates by capturing the incident
sunlight and projecting it deep into the building interior. Commercial buildings
alone consume about 20 percent of all energy used in the United States at an
estimated cost of nearly $180 billion. Building interior lighting accounts for
around 30% of that cost. By applying the daylight-harvesting optical material to
windows of building facades, a significant fraction of that energy consumption
can be offset using the natural light captured throughout the day. The project
will provide the critical design, testing, and experimental validation needed to
transition the technology into the commercial sector. The primary objective of
the project is to develop the core light-redirecting material and associated
micro-optical fabrication technology that can be subsequently scaled for low-
cost mass production. A second objective is to develop, test and demonstrate a
prototype daylight-harvesting window film product based on this material.