* 1746692
* SBIR Phase I:  Lignin-Based Formulations for Efficient and Sustainable Control of Plant Pathogens
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Anka Veleva, BENANOVA Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project encompasses the development of a continuous fabrication
process to enable production of larger volumes of the next generation of
agrochemical compounds. Although the first focus is on utilization for efficient
delivery of antimicrobial and antifungal crop protection chemicals, this
platform can be applied for actives and biologicals with other functionalities.
The broader significance of this research and development effort entails the
following aspects: First, in addition to agricultural crop protection products,
the delivery system developed here is expected to find commercial applications
in many products targeted to the consumer, construction markets, and healthcare.
Second, the formulation of benign small structures that have the potential to
replace a wide range of persistent and harmful nanoparticles in various
industrial settings will enhance scientific and technological understanding of
scalable processes on the nanoscale. Third, the sustainable solutions developed
in this project could strengthen existing natural resources, enhance biosecurity
of the U.S. food supply, and improve public health.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to engineer an innovative system for
efficient delivery of agricultural actives. To increase productivity, current
agricultural practices utilize large amounts of crop protection chemicals.
However, the intensive use of agrochemicals creates environmental threats
damaging natural resources and potentially causing climate change. To address
these challenges we are developing innovative, breakthrough platform technology
with potential to increase efficiency of farming with the same or fewer inputs,
while protecting the environment. The goal of this work is to create a new class
of scalable, functionally active, sustainable and eco-friendly materials based
on the widely available, biodegradable and bio-renewable resource lignin. The
first objective of the project is to build a continuous flow process for
preparation of lignin particles functionalized with small amounts of active
biocides. This research will establish feasibility for continuous formulation of
these preparations. The second objective of the study includes characterization
of the new formulations using a series of antimicrobial and antifungal assays.
As a result of the Phase 1 effort, technical risk will be reduced by identifying
the most promising formulations for field studies to be conducted in Phase 2.