* 1746358
* SBIR Phase I:  Commercial Scale Separation Modules with Integrated Sensors for Cost-Effective, Real-time Detection of Membrane Fouling
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2018,04/30/2019
* Alan Greenberg, SepSense Racing Testing LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 04/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to significantly increase the efficiency and reduce
operating costs for water produced by membrane-based desalination. Water
scarcity is an increasingly important global-scale issue that has significant
negative impacts on health, security and economies. Recent forecasts show a
dramatic increase in the number of countries that will soon be affected by water
scarcity given that global water consumption is expected to significantly
increase due to population growth. Membrane-based water desalination, which at
large scale requires a huge capital investment, is recognized as a primary
technology that can significantly improve supply to meaningfully offset scarcity
and its impacts. A critical factor in desalination plant operations is energy
consumption, which increases due to membrane fouling, thus making fouling one of
the most significant factors controlling the efficiency of these plants. The
proposed in-situ, real-time sensing system can be the enabling technology to
allow implementation of advanced plant control algorithms based upon accurate
detection of fouling at its earliest stages. Such active detection capability
will enable the most effective implementation of fouling mitigation strategies
that can be optimized to save energy and reduce cost.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a novel time-reversal waveguide
sensor for detection of early-stage (ES) fouling in reverse osmosis (RO)
membrane desalination, which is the dominant technology for desalinating
brackish water and seawater. Fouling in RO systems has inorganic (scaling) and
organic (biofouling) components and can be a highly variable process that
depends on operational parameters as well as environmental conditions. Efficient
implementation of real-time control of RO desalination for fouling mitigation
requires real-time sensing. The overall objective of the proposed work is to
develop sophisticated ultrasonic sensor technology that can reliably detect
scaling and biofouling in the challenging multi-layer, spiral-wound (SW)
geometry of commercial-scale RO systems. The proposed work will make use of
time-reversal mirrors to produce a simple signal from a multi-mode waveguide
independent of the geometry of the waveguide configuration, thus overcoming the
exceedingly complex and difficult to interpret signals associated with the use
of a standalone waveguide. The goals of the project are to demonstrate the
capability to detect both early-stage inorganic and organic fouling under
realistic operating conditions, the reliability and the robustness of the
technology, and the ability to adapt the technology to the larger size modules
that are increasingly important for commercial operation.