* 1746486
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultrathin Polymer Electrolyte Composites with Exceptional Conductivity, Mechanical Strength and Chemical Durability
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Kristina Hugar, Ecolectro, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to produce polymer composites that enable
commercialization of alkaline electrochemical devices, such fuel cells and
electrolyzers. The use of fuel cell technologies will help preserve the
environment, mitigate climate change, decreasing our carbon footprint and
securing renewable energy supply. Electrolyzers are an increasingly attractive
method of producing ultrapure hydrogen, an essential chemical feedstock and
fuel. Currently, widespread adoption of these technologies is prevented by the
high system costs, which are driven by the platinum catalysts. Operating under
alkaline conditions with alkaline exchange membranes (AEMs) is necessary to
relieve this pain point by allowing the use non-precious metal catalysts (e.g.
stainless steel, nickel, cobalt, and their alloys). Moreover, AEMs will be less
expensive to produce and recyclable at the end of lifetime, unlike the existing
polymer electrolytes, further decreasing the cost of devices. Producing
commercially viable AEMs enables the widespread deployment of fuel cell and
electrolyzer systems by making the technology economically competitive with
incumbent fossil fuel based energy sources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR
Phase I project proposes to produce polymer electrolyte composites that meet the
stringent performance criteria for a commercially viable AEM, including
durability, hydroxide conductivity and mechanical strength under alkaline
operating conditions. A proprietary polymer composition with unprecedented
chemical stability will be incorporated into microporous polymer structural
supports. Typically, cation percentage in AEMs must be kept low, otherwise the
membranes swell excessively and deteriorate during operation. Incorporating
polymers into structural supports permits increased cation concentration and ion
exchange capacity (IEC), resulting in AEMs with high hydroxide conductivity.
Furthermore, the mechanical strength of the composite is determined by the
support and is not reduced by high IEC, like unsupported membranes. A
polymerization method will be employed that allows fine control over cation
concentration and the reaction can be conducted inside the support, simplifying
composite fabrication. The combination of our unique polymer composition and a
structural support that maximizes conductivity without losing mechanical
strength, is a crucial milestone for the commercialization of our technology.