* 1746296
* SBIR Phase I:  Magnetic Pressure Sensor Technology for Detection of Corrosion and NDT Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,11/30/2018
* Qussai Marashdeh, Tech4Imaging LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 11/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is aimed at developing a
nondestructive testing device based on Magnetic Pressure Sensor Technology. The
innovation can detect steel mass and corrosion in bridges, tendons,
infrastructures, and pipes. The technical level of this innovation is ?early
stage?, where the scientific principles have been identified and feasibility
will be established in this effort. Safety is an increasing concern for the
nation?s bridges. According to a bridge report published by the American Society
of Civil Engineers (ASCE), over two hundred million trips are taken daily across
deficient bridges in the United States? largest metropolitan regions. The
innovation possesses favorable features that make it suitable for different non-
destructive testing (NDT) applications. Those features include it being safe to
operate, having real-time fast imaging speed, light-weight, battery operated,
scalable to different sizes, flexible to address different shapes, and
affordable to multiple field deployments. The overall market for non-destructive
testing and inspection was valued at $6.46B in 2015 and is expected to increase
to $11.39B by 2022 at a CAGR of 8.3% between 2016 and 2022. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is the development
of a Magnetic-Pressure-Sensors (MaPS) device, which already demonstrated
significant promise for use in generating volumetric images of steel mass loss
in exposed post-tension reinforcement tendons in bridges. Rotating the MaPS
device around the circumference of the tendon or placing multiple devices around
the circumference; can provide a 2D cross-section map of the total internal
steel mass distribution. The device has also been tested on corroded steel rods
and it was able to react only to the total steel mass as rust (mainly Fe2O3)
loses the magnetic property of iron. The innovation here is the combination of a
magnet, a pressure sensor between the magnet and the surface of the structure,
and a communication device to report the force detected by the pressure sensor.
This combination provides a force signal directly correlated to the mass and
location of steel inside the inspected structure. The objective of this proposal
is to develop a MaPS sensor technology to measure and image steel mass loss in
bridge tendons and pipelines. This will be achieved by developing a magnet
arrangement for better penetration depth, an activation pattern of distributed
magnets, image reconstruction, and mechanical enclosure.