* 1746210
* STTR Phase I:  Organic Additives to Improve Performance in Zinc-Air Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Rohan Akolkar, Octet Scientific, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 02/28/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This STTR Phase I project will remove the most critical roadblock to making
long-lasting batteries from safe and economical zinc and air. Zinc is plentiful
in the U.S. and zinc-air batteries have the potential to hold more than five
times the energy of current lithium-ion batteries, but a key challenge for
making rechargeable zinc-air batteries is that the zinc inside the battery
naturally forms sharp needles called dendrites during recharging. Over time
these dendrites can grow large enough to damage the inner workings of the
battery, reducing efficiency and lifetime. This project will borrow principles
from an adjacent field, the electroplating industry, to create new organic
chemicals that will seek out and stop dendrite growth within the battery during
recharging. Chemical additives have a long history in electroplating for
controlling the shape of metal surfaces, and the same principles can apply to
additives designed here to control zinc growth during battery recharging. This
new technology will make zinc-air batteries cheaper and longer-lasting to
eventually replace existing battery technologies, enabling longer-distance
electric vehicles, reducing equipment weight for soldiers, contributing a
valuable technology to the economy, and helping to maintain the role of the U.S.
as a leader in energy storage
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project
will identify the critical chemistry necessary to elegantly and economically
suppress zinc dendrite formation, alleviating one of the most significant
challenges complicating the full commercial emergence of Zn-Air battery
technology. Eschewing the established tactic of applying existing chemicals from
the catalog, this project will take inspiration from the PI?s experience
designing additives for similar environments in the electroplating industry to
introduce novel proprietary organic chemistry addressing the dendrite bottleneck
directly. The key technical challenge will be to optimize the molecular features
to simultaneously provide efficient dendrite suppression and low voltage loss. A
broad series of molecules will be created to combine strong interactions with
zinc, modest polarization, low cost and straightforward scalability. Evaluating
and iterating upon these candidates in bench-scale electrochemical analyses and
performance tests in coin and pouch cell batteries will yield a dendrite-
suppressing product to bring significant value to Zn-Air technology and other
Zn-based battery markets. At its successful conclusion, this project will not
only produce products for these markets, but it will also provide molecular
design principles useful for the development of other metal-based battery
additives, and promote the merits of novel additive development for the broader
battery industry.