* 1746065
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Everyday violence against women and the state's promotion of "universal breadwinning model"
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Mariel Barnes, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2019
* USD 18,900.00

Gender equality and economic development go hand in hand. A wealth of evidence
shows that economic development has a powerful, transformative, and profoundly
positive effect on the social, economic and political circumstances of women.
And nowhere is this relationship more apparent than in Europe where the states
consistently and systematically score highly across all indicators associated
with gender equality. However, despite these advances in gender equality, recent
survey research shows that Europe has high rates of violence against women,
particularly by intimate partners. This project argues that this
counterintuitive pattern of everyday violence against women corresponds to the
implementation and promotion of specific family policies, such as paid parental
leave, childcare services, and individual taxation. While these policies are
designed to increase female economic independence, they also precipitate the
unravelling of traditional gender roles, which then provokes a violent male
backlash against their partners. By recognizing the role of the state and
identifying which family policies catalyze or exacerbate everyday violence, this
project will help policymakers formulate best practices for addressing violence
against women and improve the status women in Europe and elsewhere.

This project examines a previously overlooked topic in political science - the
issue of everyday violence against women. While analyses of conflict and the
welfare state have increasingly incorporated gender and addressed issues such as
wartime sexual violence and occupational sex segregation, relatively little
research has been devoted to the violence against women during times of civil
peace. This project investigates this unheeded phenomenon and questions why so
many highly developed and egalitarian states, particularly in Europe, continue
to have such high incidences of violence against women. It argues that everyday
forms of violence against women are fundamentally political and can be best
explained by variation in a state's implementation and promotion of the
"universal breadwinning model", which undermines traditional gender norms,
decreases men's intrafamily bargaining power, and then provokes a violent
backlash. To test the proposed theoretical framework, this project utilizes
three interconnected empirical strategies to elucidate not only the sub-national
and cross-national patterns of gendered violence in Europe but also the micro-
level causal mechanisms. First, the project uses an original dataset on the
universal breadwinning model combined with a nationally-representative, EU-wide
victimization survey to quantitatively test the association between violence and
family policy in Europe. This statistical analysis is then supplemented with
comparative historical analysis tracing the emergence and implementation of the
universal breadwinning model, and interview research with experts and female
survivors of violence, which is crucial for establishing the link between family
policies and the micro-mechanism of changing intrafamily dynamics and male
violence.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.