* 1746786
* SBIR Phase I:  A Group Video Game Challenge for Integrated Applied Science Learning
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,07/31/2018
* Lindsey Tropf, Immersed Games, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2018
* USD 224,732.00

This SBIR Phase I project will address the need to retain more diverse students'
science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) interest and increase their
scientific literacy and 21st century skills. These goals are critical for the
United States to remain competitive in the global workforce and reinforce goals
of individual prosperity that are enhanced by developing STEM skills. There is
therefore a strong market need among educators and parents alike for STEM video
games that support development of these skills. This project will create an
expert-level group challenge in an online video game for multidisciplinary
integrated science learning that will increase students' scientific problem
solving and collaboration skills. This innovation will empower teachers to do
hands-on, integrated STEM cooperative group learning with highly engaging
authentic experiences based on well-researched pedagogical best practices such
as cooperative learning and inquiry-based science practices. Key innovations
include novel instructional design for live simulated group challenges and
generating a scalable architecture that will serve as a framework for creating
authoring tools and additional challenges in the future. This work upholds the
National Science Foundation's missions to strengthen the United States'
workforce competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
establish the technical and commercial feasibility of the collaborative live
simulation challenges for groups of students. Key technical risks include
creating effective group simulations with randomly seeded variables that run
live within a 3D Gameworld, given the limitations of consumer and institutional
technology, and developing a scalable architecture which will allow applications
of this innovation in additional contexts. The innovation in these areas will
lead to future applications of this technology to create content authoring tools
which enable scalable group challenge content development to expand to
additional STEM content areas across elementary to high school age groups, and
can be extended to support teachers making custom challenges based on local
interests on demand without technical skills. By the end of Phase I, the project
will lead to (1) producing a playable challenge based on integrated disciplinary
core ideas in middle school level life science, aligned with Next Generation
Science Standards; (2) answering key technical questions around bandwidth and
simulation technical limitations for the proposed solution with accessible
technology in our target applications; (3) addressing key technical risks around
the deployability of the project; (4) collecting initial data on the educational
application benefits.