* 1746230
* RUI: Structure and Properties of New, Practical Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Steven Feller, Coe College
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 12/31/2022
* USD 636,302.00

This project is jointly funded by two Programs in the Division of Materials
Research: Condensed Matter Physics (CMP) and Ceramics
(CER).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Novel glasses are
important for new generations of devices, flat screens, and detectors. Candidate
glasses are being prepared and characterized at Coe College in collaboration
with many groups around the world (e.g., in Brazil, Canada, Japan, and the
United Kingdom). The glass preparations are often non-traditional and use rapid
cooling (about 1,000,000 C/s), laser aero-levitation to nearly 3000 C, and
alternative chemical approaches. The characterization of these glasses probe the
atomic structure and related physical properties. The atomic structure is
identified using an array of spectroscopies. Physical properties that are
important include the glass softening temperature, the efficient use of space by
the atoms, the compositional limits for glass formation, and electrical
conductivity. Projects focus on glasses in medicine, developing conducting
glasses for medical and particle detectors, manufacturing glass composites that
inhibit bacteria, and glow-in-the-dark crystals that last hours. Broader impacts
include the training of about 50 undergraduate and high school students and
reaching out to local schools and across campus. Based on history, it is
anticipated that nearly 30 of these students will continue into graduate
programs. Students serve the nation in industry and national labs in materials
science, computer science, electrical engineering, and several other areas of
engineering and physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: In an age of
fiber optics and displays, innovative glasses are being studied using roller-
quenching, laser aero-levitation, and chemical solution techniques including
sol-gel methods. These approaches allow glasses to be made with reluctant
formulations including binary and ternary vanadate glasses. These glasses are
important as conductive glasses in detectors, high alkali content borate glasses
for bactericidal uses, and scintillating alkali and alkaline-earth borosilicate
glasses that incorporate inorganic and organic scintillators such as ZnO and
P-terphenyl. Students are trained in several techniques including nuclear
magnetic resonance, Raman and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopies, neutron
scattering, atomic force microscopy, X-ray diffraction, electron microscopy, and
laser induced time-of-flight mass spectroscopy. Also, students employ molecular
dynamics simulations of structure using a 120 core computer system. Broader
impacts include the extensive research training of ~40 Coe College undergraduate
students and additional ten high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.