* 1746384
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Device for Early Detection of Uterine Cancer Cells at the Point-of-Care
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Ramonita Diaz-Ayala, Bidea
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project, if successful, will be the implementation of an
effective point-of-care (POC) test that will not only impact the lives of
patients, but can reduce the costs to hospitals, health insurances companies,
and government agencies. According to the National Institutes of Health, cancer
cost the U.S. an estimated $219 billion in 2007, including $130 billion for lost
productivity and $89 billion in direct medical costs. The proposed screening
technology is expected to help gynecologists in hospitals or in private practice
to provide a complete diagnosis in less time, reducing the number of visits and
the endometrial cancer incidence through an early detection, especially in women
over 50 years old. This would benefit the medical insurance by lowering the cost
per patient with this type of cancer. If successful, the proposed non-
label/real-time cancer diagnostic device will contribute to new scientific
findings and engineering aspects in bio-sensing technology. The resulting device
will also provide a non-invasive, fast, and accurate method to detect cancer for
preclinical diagnosis. In addition, the research based on this technology will
improve a range of equivalent studies that use similar systems and biological
indicators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is aimed to
develop a POC technology for the sensitive detection of telomerase as a cancer
measurable indicator in real-time. Telomerase is a distinctive enzyme whose
presence in cells or tissues is used for screening, early cancer detection,
prognosis and/or monitoring a residual cancer disease. The proposed technology
is based on the detection of telomerase in cancer cells through the measuring of
an in-situ elongation process of an immobilized label-free single strand DNA
probe by means of sensitive electrochemical events occurring at the conductive
gold microchip surface. For the development of this new sensing microchip device
the team will use commercially available products. Silicon wafers have been used
as substrate with gold as electrodes due to their reliability but these
materials are expensive and the fabrication is labor intensive. Therefore,
important diagnostic device parameters will be studied after incorporation of
bare bio-sensing strips. Phase I of this project, is aimed at demonstrating the
feasibility of the proposed technology as well as testing the reliability and
robustness of the microchip biosensor using uterine cancer samples.