* 1746588
* SBIR Phase I:  Anti-Tumor Immune Redirectors (AIRs) for cancer treatment
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Joshua Wang, PathoVax
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to develop a new class of cancer therapeutics that
involves the re-directing of the body's pre-existing immune response obtained
through previous childhood vaccination to target tumor cells for cancer
eradication. Globally, cancer continues to be a top 5 leading cause of death
resulting in a high unmet need for novel therapies and treatments. Immune
checkpoint inhibitor drugs have emerged as a potent solution with demonstrated
clinical benefits. However, such treatments are expensive and toxic, and up to
70% of cancer patients do not respond to such drugs due to the absence of an
anti-tumor response. In contrast, the proposed strategy tailors the patient's
tumor to become susceptible towards their own pre-existing childhood vaccine
immunity. This approach will change treatment outcomes for many cancer patients
previously un-targetable by current immuno-therapeutic drugs. This also
circumvents the risky and costly R&amp;D challenges in identifying and/or
producing potent immune responses against cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR
Phase I project proposes to develop a platform technology to mobilize immunity
generated from childhood vaccines and re-direct this activity towards tumors to
eradicate cancer. This will be done via two development aims. The first aim will
demonstrate the ability of the proposed technology to mobilize existing
childhood vaccine responses from mice (with relevant human genetics) vaccinated
with childhood vaccines (MMR, HepB, Chickpox vaccines). The second aim will be
to test whether cancers with known metastasis challenges, such as ovarian and
breast cancer, may be eradicated. Specifically, mice will be vaccinated with an
appropriate childhood vaccine, then injected with relevant syngeneic tumors.
Once the tumor is established, the proposed therapeutic will be injected to see
if it can induce pre-existing immunity developed from the childhood vaccine and
redirected towards the tumor. Therapeutic effect will be assessed based on the
number of metastases and tumor weight/volume. If successful, this platform will
provide both tumor specificity and broad applicability to a wide variety of
cancers.