* 1746607
* SBIR Phase I:  Optoelectronic Microplates: Disruptive Optical Stimulation Technology for Drug Discovery Screening Assays
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Elena Molokanova, Nanotools Bioscience
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to develop specialized cell culture plates that can
provide dynamic optical stimulation of cells during kinetic ion channel drug
screening assays. The proposed cell stimulation technology is expected to
improve the efficiency of drug discovery, and lead to more promising drug
candidates with a wide range of mechanisms of actions. Since effects of drugs
often depend on functional states of drug targets, in vitro high-throughput
assays must be able to re-create different functional states during drug
screening. Currently, screening assays acquire the data either from one
functional state or an ensemble average of heterogeneous states, which is not
representative of in vivo settings. The proposed microplate-based cell
stimulation technology will help drug discovery companies to introduce more
efficient drugs faster while reducing the development costs, because the
proposed technology can dynamically "cycle" ion channel drug targets through
different functional states while evaluating drug effects in kinetic assays.
These minimally-invasive all-optical assays will have increased information
content and enhanced predictive values. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I
project proposes to develop nanotechnology-based optoelectronic microplates that
can serve as a light-controlled actuator enabling dynamic optical stimulation of
cells for all-optical drug screening assays. Current cell stimulation
technologies require either genetic modifications of cells (which can affect the
drug screening results) or electric-field stimulation (which requires
specialized instrumentation and can damage cells). The proposed technology is a
non-invasive optical stimulation plate-based platform that can work on
genetically and structurally intact cells, and will be compatible with existing
screening instruments. The research plan in the material science area covers the
development of protocols for deposition of graphene materials and comprehensive
characterization of graphene-coated microplates in cell-free and cell-based
modes. The biological research plan includes the development of all-optical
screening assays that incorporate graphene-coated microplates for enabling
optical stimulation. Specifically, the goal is to focus on calcium imaging
assays for L-type voltage-gated calcium ion channels that will be "cycled"
through different functional states by light illumination using optoelectronic
plates. The validation process will include the evaluation of pharmacological
effects of known state-dependent calcium channel blockers. It is anticipated
that optoelectronic microplates will be compatible with existing cell culture
protocols and imaging instrumentation.