* 1746976
* SBIR Phase I:  Reactive Polyolefins (x-PAOs) as Advanced Organic Phase Change Materials
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Jonathan Reeds, Precision Polyolefins, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project seeks to reduce the cost
and complexity of incorporating energy-saving phase change materials (PCMs) into
end-use products by developing a new class of form-stable PCM-modified resins
that contain a unique reactive-polyolefin component. Importantly, the
development of new PCMs for the passive thermal regulation of electric vehicle
(EV) batteries has the potential to increase EV safety, range, and
affordability, representing an addressable market currently valued at $87m and
that is growing at 20% per year. Validation of these advantages should
significantly benefit society by increasing electric vehicle performance and
reducing the frequency of expensive battery replacement, thus increasing the
adoption of energy efficient vehicles and reducing green-house gas emissions.
This project can also result in an increase in the penetration of energy
efficient PCM technology in additional markets worth a combined $370m, including
building materials, textiles, electronics, and packaging, which can have a large
positive economic impact on society. Finally, successful realization of the
goals of this SBIR Phase I program will further enable scientific /
technological understanding of PCMs that are based on organic materials.

The intellectual merit of this project is the validation of a new paradigm for a
bottoms-up approach to the design, production, and optimization of structurally-
well-characterized reactive polyolefins of tunable molecular weight and narrow
polydispersity that possess superior performance and stability characteristics
as organic phase change materials (PCMs) for waste heat management as compared
to conventional paraffin-based PCMs that have remained virtually unchanged for
the past half century. To achieve this goal, reactive polyolefins that are the
best candidates for commercialization will be identified through optimization of
molecular structure, stereochemical tacticity, and the temperature and kinetics
of main-chain and side-chain phase transitions. Reaction variables will also be
optimized to provide the highest yields of reactive polyolefins under
industrially-relevant and scalable process conditions. The development of PCM-
modified thermoset resins based on reactive polyolefins will provide access to
commercial waste heat management applications that employ physical constructs
obtained from casting or injection molding and should benefit from lower
production costs, a wider range of applications, and greater long-term
stability.