* 1747316
* EAGER: University and Corporate Research: Substitutes or Complements?
* SBE,SMA
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2020
* Sharon Belenzon, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joshua Trapani
* 06/30/2020
* USD 224,142.00

Even as they focus on innovation as a source of growth, American corporations
have steadily move away from in-house research. This is not because research is
not relevant for invention. To the contrary, inventive activity relies on
research more than ever before. One explanation might be the growing size and
relevance of university research and an emerging division of innovative labor in
which firms and universities specialize in different sets of activities that
innovation requires. If university research substitutes for corporate research,
expansion of relevant university research will reduce corporate research.
However, firms differ not only in the pool of relevant knowledge, but also in
the type of inventive activity they perform. Specifically, firms that are
producing more novel inventions, and inventions that rely more on recent
scientific advances, may have greater incentives to invest in internal research
because the scientific problems they face are likely to be less generic and
hence less likely to be solved by university scientists. The broader value of
the project consists of significantly expanding the data infrastructure for the
science of science policy. Specifically, this project provides firm level
measures on the use and production of scientific and engineering knowledge, and
on the novelty of the inventive activity of the firm. The information will be
useful to policy makers, industry practitioners, scholars, and anyone interested
in the role of science and engineering knowledge in
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages advanced machine
learning techniques to explore this question. It matches 20 million scientific
publications to 6 million patents for the period 1980-2016 to develop measures
of the relevance of science and engineering research to inventive activity. It
uses this measure to quantify the relevance of university research for 4000
R&amp;D performing publicly traded American headquartered corporations. It then
analyzes how variations in the flow of relevant university research is related
to in-house research by a corporation. A second part of the project develops a
measure of the degree of novelty of the patents filed by US headquartered
corporations in order to analyze how firms with more novel inventions respond to
changes in the flow of relevant university research. These firm level data are
available to the broad public, through an easy-to-use web platform.