* 1747115
* STTR Phase I:  Enabling Interference Management in Communication Networks Using True Time-Delay Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Daniel Blumenthal, GenXComm Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to vastly improve
broadband access to the home across The Nation using true full duplex
technology. By bringing full duplex communications to wireline and wireless
systems, this proposed effort aims to improve connectivity, enhance coverage and
enable new applications for both dense urban and sparse rural communities. This
effort benefits first responders, law enforcement and other essential services
by providing more reliable, higher bandwidth access to
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
(STTR) Phase I project will further develop an existing framework for full
duplex communications, taking it from early stage prototype to a more mature
proof of concept, while simultaneously enabling the company to understand the
commercial impact of this technology on multiple communication industry
segments. This Phase 1 project will begin by device fabrication for tunable
filters, then progress to proving its technical applicability for wireline and
wireless communication links. The primary milestones include: device
characterization, integration, testing and yield analysis. This process will
validate assumptions on both the technical and business fronts, enabling
disruptive materials and fabrication processes to emerge from an academic
environment into the commercial world.