* 1747788
* Workshop:   Community Building for Long Non-Coding RNA; Fall/Summer; Morgantown, WVA; Houston, TX
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Xiaobo Zhou, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 99,999.00

The recent discovery that the human genome is extensively transcribed is
changing our traditional view of gene regulation, and gene function. A
significant part of this transcription involves long non-coding RNAs (LncRNAs).
LncRNAs are known to function as RNA genes and are involved in various
biological and cellular processes, such as genetic imprinting, chromatin
remodeling, gene regulation in both plants and animals, and embryonic
development in vertebrates. Not surprisingly, LncRNAs have been implicated in
several difficult diseases, such as cancer, and diabetes. Although some
individual LncRNAs have been well studied, their nature and functions are still
not completely understood. Over 30,000 have been identified, with this number
increasing daily. Thus, our ability to experimentally study individual LncRNAs
and their functions in the wet-lab is far outpaced by the sheer volume and
diversity of available data, and the increasing rate at which the data is being
generated. There is an acute need for computational tools to simplify the
process of characterizing the known LncRNAs to determine their functional
associations. Yet, automated methods will undoubtedly generate an enormous
number of hypotheses on the potential functions of a given lncRNA, far beyond
the capacity of any individual wet laboratory to verify. This calls for a
collaborative community-driven approach, where researchers from various fields
will come together to address a critical problem. Several workshops will be
organized, bringing together researchers interested in prioritizing issues of
importance to furthering research in this area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of
these workshop activities is to build a diverse community of scholars centered
on the problem of functional annotation of LncRNAs, including LncRNA detection
and data generation, and standardization of lncRNA nomenclature. Such a
community will bring together computational scientists, molecular and structural
biologists, medical scientists, and others, from academia,government, industry
(especially healthcare and pharmaceutical industry), to focus on key issues in
our improved understanding of LncRNAs and their functions. By creating public
forums of the outcomes of discussions and activities, these workshops will raise
awareness on key problems and challenges in studying the biology of in LncRNAs,
their functions, and information sharing challenges such as annotation, and
nomenclature standardization. A highly diverse community of researchers will be
encouraged to participate, who could provide a novel perspective to these
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.