* 1747582
* EAGER:   Emergent Quantum Confinement-Induced Properties of a New Class of Aromatic Ligand-Passivated Hybrid ITO Nanocrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Rajesh Sardar, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2020
* USD 155,043.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Nanocrystals (NCs) have inorganic
core dimensions on the order of a billionth of a meter. It is challenging to
assemble them into larger superstructures. Along these lines, this award, which
is supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division
of Materials Research, addresses the forefront of modern nanoscience and
nanotechnology-related research. Using polymers as solvents to synthesize
ultrasmall tin-doped indium oxide (ITO) NCs this project targets a material with
potential applications in fabrication of improved optoelectronic devices such as
photovoltaics, light-emitting diodes, photodetectors, and photocatalytic solar
fuel production. The project investigates how surface attachment of
appropriately chosen organic molecules produces hybrid-ITO NCs (artificial
molecules), and as a consequence alters the optoelectronic and electrochemical
properties of the individual ITO NCs and their assemblies. Traditionally these
properties are varied by changing the inorganic core size of NCs. Because of the
different underlying mechanism to tune properties, the impact of this research
is expected to be far-reaching in the context of new materials design, advancing
molecular level understanding in nanoscience and materials chemistry, and
economic expansion and sustainability. Additionally, this project provides
multidisciplinary research training opportunities, including inorganic
chemistry, materials science and nanotechnology, for graduate and undergraduate
students. Through these activities the principle investigator fosters the next
generation STEM educators and innovators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Ligand-passivated nanocrystals (NCs) are of
immense interest to chemists, physicists, and materials scientists, because NC-
ligand interfacial electronic interactions and bonding greatly impact their
chemical and physical properties. Through this Solid State and Materials
Chemistry-funded project the principle investigator synthesizes and
characterizes a new class of ultrasmall, quantum confined hybrid-ITO NCs.
Functionalizing the NC core with uniquely designed aromatic ligands allows the
researchers to manipulate the interaction and electronic coupling of interfacial
energetic states between the inorganic (ITO core) and organic surface ligands.
This leads to new structure-function relationships, which are fundamentally
different from those previously characterized in traditional larger ITO NCs.
Specific objectives of this project include: (1) experimentally characterizing
the optoelectronic properties of this new class of hybrid-ITO NCs, both to
understand the fundamental chemical and structural processes that exist at the
NC-ligand interface and to control electronic coupling between individual
energetic state of the NC and ligands, (2) correlating experimental
spectroscopic data with computational models to predict the effects of the NC
size and the electronic and/or chemical structure of surface ligands on
optoelectronic properties, and (3) predictably assembling hybrid ITO-NCs into
artificial solids and then measuring charge transfer and transport properties in
the solid-state with the aim of understanding mechanisms controlling such
phenomena. Taken together, results from this project are crucial in ultimately
guiding the preparation of novel inorganic-organic hybrid nanomaterials to
increase efficiency of solid-state optoelectronic devices and photocatalysts.