* 1747705
* EAGER: Molecular Mechanism of Permeases
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Ronald Kaback, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,990.00

Transport of sugars, amino acids and other nutrients across cell membranes is an
unsolved biological problem. This process is mediated by proteins. LacY is one
of such proteins and it is involved in the transport of lactose and protons.
LacY operates in a manner typical of membrane proteins that catalyze transport
against a concentration gradient (i.e. active transport). In this process, in
the presence of a proton motive force, downhill transport of the protons is used
by LacY to drive uphill concentration of sugar against a gradient. The aim of
this project is to understand precisely how this coupled mechanism works. The PI
has obtained LacY crystal structures at the atomic level, and
biochemical/spectroscopic studies show that sugar- and proton-binding sites gain
alternating access to either side of the membrane as the result of reciprocal
opening and closing of cavities on either side of LacY. This proposal will
investigate structural aspects of LacY at different states of the transport
cycle by using crystallographic approaches. This project will also provide
training to undergraduate students and research associates by directly involving
them in experimental aspects of the research.

The aim of this research is to develop an atomic-level understanding of the
mechanism of lactose/H+ symport by the lactose permease of Escherichia coli
(LacY), a paradigm for the Major Facilitator Superfamily (MFS), the largest
family of membrane transport proteins. Members of the MFS are found in the
membranes of all living cells. However, despite an increasing number of X-ray
structures of MFS members, including 7 of LacY from the PI's laboratory, as well
as the quantitative demonstration that lactose/H+ symport is driven
thermodynamically by chemiosmosis, the mechanism of this chemiosmotic process is
not completely understood. Thus, it has been demonstrated that galactoside
binding to highly dynamic protonated LacY triggers a global conformational
change in which sugar- and proton-binding sites gain alternating access to
either side of the membrane, while the proton electrochemical gradient
accelerates the rate of deprotonation, but has no effect on alternating access.
Therefore, LacY behaves like an enzyme except that the transition state(s)
involves the protein rather than the substrate. X-ray structures of LacY inward-
and almost occluded outward-facing conformations provide the structural basis
for studying the alternating access mechanism. The PI plans to study the
alternating access mechanism by applying pre-steady state kinetics, as well as
multiple biochemical and spectroscopic approaches, and by using kinetic data
obtained in real time for several steps in the transport cycle. The PI plans to
determine whether the findings regarding the effects of electrochemical gradient
are generalized by determining whether exchange and counterflow are affected by
this gradient with other MFS symporters. This research also focuses on the use
of thirty-one camelid nanobodies to stabilize LacY in different intermediate
states to be studied by X-ray diffraction. This project is supported by the
Molecular Biophysics Cluster of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division
in the Biological Sciences Directorate.