* 1747210
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Ultra-Rapid, High Definition, Additive Manufacturing System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Milton Meisner, Meisner Consulting Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 06/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will examine a new ultra-rapid 3D printing technology
designed to break down important barriers to the future of Additive
Manufacturing. The subject is a machine and materials set that can provide
exponentially faster object generation at high resolution. This system leverages
several familiar technologies in a new way to provide a path for 3D printing,
generally considered reserved for the high-tech sectors, to become accessible to
everyone. Because the new method is so rapid, detailed, and the materials are so
diverse, it is poised to enhance plastics manufacturing profit margins by
eliminating mold costs in many cases. In this way, many American business forced
to outsource overseas will be able to maintain domestic production and increase
the return of manufacturing jobs to the US. In addition, the manufacturing of
the consumables will also enhance job creation. When this new method is fully
adopted, its use in the medical field will make lifesaving and life enhancing
prosthetic, implantable, and pharmaceutical testing applications much more cost
effective, fundable by Medicare, benefiting all our citizens. By servicing a
higher percentage of the general plastics manufacturing $600B industry, as well
as professional designers, engineers, technical professionals, and the medical
and scientific community, the new system in its many forms will eventually be of
benefit to nearly every industry in the US, increasing the growth and practical
value of the 3D market sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The subject
invention is unique in its use of multiple disciplines simultaneously. As a
solid-state system, pressure-biased build material presses up against a glass
screen, which is micro-porous, and is laced with the same kind of electronics as
are found in flat screen displays. The discrete addressing normally reserved for
video images, known as row-and-column refresh rates, is instead used to activate
resistive material generating micro-heat spots in this open weave configuration.
The heat stimulates the build material to transit the glass and solidify
topside, at 1000 dpi resolution, or 1 million droplets per square inch. These
high-resolution droplets conjoin and cool, as an entire layer is created at once
at 30-120 times a second with no mechanical heads tracking back and forth. The
objects should seem to simply appear on the glass at about one to seven vertical
inches per minute, depending on the refresh rate, at virtually any planar size,
and can be used right away, since no post-curing treatment is needed.
Integrating an activated video matrix to build entire cross sections at once,
increases speed exponentially. The pores in the glass rely on the known science
of Microfluidics, a highly refined means of moving an entire 2D matrix of
liquid, to eliminate costly and slow mechanization, and will be studied in this
application. Robust and diverse materials have been developed for many
embodiments and will be tested. Optimizing first in Multiphysics simulation, and
then fabricating a simplified Proof of Concept in Phase I, should provide
compelling evidence for continued work on this novel method in Phase II.