* 1747956
* A Workshop to Finalize the Planning for a National Pilot of an AP in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Leigh Abts, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 08/31/2018
* USD 99,754.00

This project provides support for A Workshop to Finalize the Planning for a
National Pilot of an AP in Engineering, to be held at the University of Maryland
College Park (UMD) in the Fall of 2017. The three goals of the workshop are to:
1) Review and revise the Draft Curriculum Framework for the AP in Engineering.
2) Define the Role Organizations Play in the Pilot. 3) Development of Training
Objectives for the Pilot Teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will
bring together approximately 36 participants from the following sectors within
the education and engineering enterprises: 1) Deans from Schools and Colleges of
Engineering; 2) College Board; 3) K-12 STEM teachers and district level
leadership; 4) community college and four-year faculties; 5) consulting,
technology, and manufacturing industries dependent upon engineering talent; 6)
informal education programs; 7) policy-makers; and 8) public and private
funders. The participants would convene to: 1) review and revise the Draft
Curriculum Framework for the AP in Engineering; 2) plan the criteria and
recruitment of high schools to participate in the pilot; 3) define the role
organizations would play in a pilot of the AP in Engineering; 4) development of
a professional development framework for the pilot teachers; and 5) discussion
of the role of a Learning Management System (LMS).