* 1747760
* IUCRC Phase I GWU: Center for High Pressure Plasma Energy, Agriculture, and Biomedical Technologies (PEAB)
* ENG,EEC
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2024
* Taeyoung Lee, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,118,000.00

Advances in the science of atmospheric pressure plasmas have enabled
breakthrough opportunities to improve our Nation's healthcare, economic
prosperity and defense. These science breakthroughs have resulted in the
development of new technologies in energy, environmental remediation, water
treatment and cleaning, medicine, food processing, and agriculture. These are
the core fundamental areas of science and technology to be addressed by the
Center for High Pressure Plasma Energy, Agriculture, and Biomedical Technologies
(C-PEAB). Drexel University (DU), University of Michigan (UM), and George
Washington University (GWU), leading institutions in the scientific subject
area, are synergistically collaborating with each other and with their
industrial partners as the founding members of the C-PEAB. This effort will
support STEM education with focused recruitment of women and underrepresented
minorities, produce an interdisciplinary workforce, and integrate novel
breakthrough technologies with industry. Building upon long-term collaborations
in plasma science with DU and UM, GWU's unique contribution to the C-PEAB team
stems from our expertise in plasma-based cancer therapy and adaptive plasma
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Low Temperature non-equilibrium Plasma (LTP)
science is the base upon which many modern in-dustries such as microelectronics
and micro-fabrication have been built. Current breakthroughs in plasma-
generating electronics have made it possible to widen the area of LTP
applications to atmospheric and higher pressures. These developments have
stimulated new plasma applications in industries such as food processing,
agriculture, fuel conversion, medicine, water treatment, and pharmaceuticals.
These application areas are the focus of the Center for High Pressure Plasma
Energy, Agriculture, and Biomedical Technologies (C-PEAB). The C-PEAB will
translate science breakthroughs in diagnostics, pulse power and modeling to
optimizing industrial applications in energy, environmental remediation, food
safety and food processing, and medical and bioengineering. C-PEAB will
initially consist of a three-site IUCRC between Drexel University (DU),
University of Michigan (UM), and the George Washington University (GWU) with
subsequent addition of new member universities who have strong industry
collaborations in high-pressure plasma applications pertinent to the C-PEAB. In
particular the GWU C-PEAB site will focus on efficacy and safety of plasma in
biological processes and on development of novel adaptive and controllable
plasma technologies. These problems will be addressed by experimental and
theoretical efforts.