* 1747683
* Travel Support for Early Career Scientists for the Chapman Conference on Non- Volcanic Stratospheric Aerosol; Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain; March 18-23, 2018
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Terry Deshler, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2018
* USD 29,977.00

This project supports student travel to the American Geophysical Union's Chapman
Conference entitled, 'Stratospheric aerosol during the past 20 years: Processes
sustaining the aerosol, interactions with climate and chemistry, and importance
for historical analogues.' This conference provides a venue for the world's
leading observational and modeling experts in stratospheric aerosol and
precursor gases to present and discuss results focused on major science
questions related to the character and processes controlling stratospheric
aerosol during the quiescent to mildly volcanic period of 1996 to the present.
The broader impacts of the conference will derive from the exchange of ideas
that will help focus the research community on the processes controlling
stratospheric aerosol, and provide an opportunity for young scientists to meet,
network, and exchange ideas with leaders in the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual challenges addressed by the meeting participants include: (1)
Comparing and resolving measurements of stratospheric aerosol and gas phase
sulfur from different platforms; (2) Deriving aerosol surface area, cross
section, and asymmetry parameter from remote satellite measurements of optical
properties; (3) Establishing the accuracy of the geophysical quantities derived
from remote optical measurements; and (4) Extrapolating measurements of aerosol
and gas phase climatologies to regions and time periods not measured. Topics at
this meeting will contribute significantly to establish confidence in the
aerosol climatologies used and in providing a basis against which models with
intrinsic aerosol can be tested.