* 1747459
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Partisanship, Gender, and Policy Frames
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2020
* Michael Crespin, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2020
* USD 17,050.00

Despite gains made over the past three decades, women remain the most
underrepresented group in Congress relative to the general population. The
purpose of this project is to better understand how women in Congress represent
women generally. To this end, the project examines the relative influence of
partisanship and gender on the content of congressional communications about
women's issues and voters' responses to those messages. To accomplish this task,
the project analyzes the content of more than 40,000 congressional newsletters
about women's issues and uses the findings to generate a survey experiment to
test how men and women in the electorate interpret messages about women's issues
differently based on the gender of the messenger. This project contributes to an
important, ongoing debate about representation --do women substantively
represent women, are all members purely partisan, or is it something in between?
And, how are voter opinions about women's issues affected by the gender of the
person who presents them? This research will push forward our understanding of
the character of women's representation in Congress, and will broaden the
knowledge held by both voters and members of Congress concerning the quality of
descriptive and substantive representation of women on women's
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project is to evaluate the
relative influence of partisanship and gender on the content of congressional
communications about women's issues and voters' responses to those messages. To
accomplish this task, the project uses structural topic modelling to identify
how gender and partisanship influence communication about women's issues in
congressional newsletters. It utilizes these findings in a survey experiment
that randomizes the gender of the representative delivering the content to test
how men and women in the electorate interpret messages about women's issues
differently based on the gender of the messenger. This project presents several
distinct contributions to the field of American politics generally, and
scholarship on representation and political communication in particular.
Methodologically, it utilizes an innovative methodological tool --structural
topic modelling--to analyze a large corpus. It compares the content of these
texts between categories available in the metadata, including gender and
partisanship. The project then employs these findings in a survey experiment to
assess the effect of the differing content on the electorate. This project will
be the first scholarship, as of this date, to use this method to identify
distinct patterns of communication between male and female members of
legislatures and to assess the impact of these differences on the electorate.
This contribution, and future research that utilizes a similar methodological
approach, will allow us to better understand the character of women's
representation and will facilitate a broader understanding of the content and
impact of political messages generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.