* 1747372
* SBIR Phase I:  Digital Self-Management Intervention for Empowering Youth with Type 1 Diabetes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Matthew Lucas, Mahalo Health Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to transform the life experiences of youth
patients in the Type 1 Diabetes (T1D) community by providing an affordable,
comprehensive mobile platform for monitoring health behaviors, tracking
biometrics, fostering self-empathy/empowerment, and developing healthy diabetes
self-management practices (DSM) through a gamified app. Adherence to DSM
behaviors is an exacting issue with conventional T1D treatment and prevention
regimens, though the use of features found in gaming technologies has been shown
to be motivating in apps for chronic illnesses. Data-tracking applications meant
for public health are believed to yield hidden trends on diet, fitness, mood,
and compliance in both individuals and populations, identifying behavioral
patterns that may be useful for positive behavior change. With a far-reaching
and accessible intervention leveraging the motivational power of games, empathy,
and social interaction, health professionals can use this intervention to
encourage long-term engagement with data-tracking, which in turn creates rich
data sets for tapping into the unseen trends of T1D experiences, contributing to
the growing body of T1D knowledge, enriching T1D youth's quality of life, and
streamline patient-provider communications in a cost-effective way that benefits
the health care system as a whole.

The proposed project aims to provide a better understanding of the affordances
of digital technologies in DSM, with emphases on the role of technology as a
facilitator of diabetes education, DSM, patient-provider communications,
emotional wellness, social and cognitive development, and positive behavior
change. T1D diagnoses represent more than 175,000 youth in the United States,
and despite significant headway in other areas of mobile health, many families
struggle to access T1D tools that dramatically improve the quality of life and
health outcomes of their children. To meet this demand, the objectives of this
research begin with engineering a full-featured youth-facing prototype¯starring
an empathetic virtual pet¯capable of collecting multiple streams of user data
and teaching via instructional modules. Data collected during usability studies
with stakeholders in the diabetes community will provide insight into
effectiveness, efficiency, and satisfaction of users, while a feasibility study
also employing interviews, surveys, and think aloud protocols will offer insight
into the practical use of the app in everyday life over a weeklong period. After
both of these studies have been conducted, transcripts of recorded sessions and
log file data will be analyzed, with the goal of improving the feasibility of
extended product usage and success.