* 1747728
* IUCRC Phase I Rutgers, Newark: Center for Accelerated Real Time Analytics (CARTA)
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Basit Shafiq, Rutgers University Newark
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 12/31/2021
* USD 299,888.00

Nearly every research field and industry sector is struggling with extracting
useful information from massive and dynamic data in a timely way. Developing
tools and technologies in this realm of real-time and accelerated analytics
contributes to promoting the progress of science and to advancing the national
prosperity and welfare. Success in this realm hinges on balancing fundamental
research, technological know-how, and commercial market intelligence. To address
this challenge, this project joins industry members with academic centers to
conduct multidisciplinary science and research towards extracting value from
massive and moving data and enabling better decision making of complex, dynamic
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center of Accelerated Real Time Analytics (CARTA)
project explores the ways in which relatively-high-risk fundamental developments
can be leveraged to help organizations that have longer-term, more complex
analytic needs. The focus of CARTA is on horizontal foundational technologies
that would create an infrastructure capable of powering applications of national
significance. Research at the Rutgers-Newark CARTA site will enable the
development of real time data analytics approaches addressing challenges in
personalized medicine, safety monitoring and adverse event prediction, and
genomics analysis. An overarching goal is to develop holistic, real-time views
of heterogeneous data integrated into the social and mobile
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the work of the CARTA center
will be in addressing the future advanced, real-time analytics needs of the
industry and society. The techniques developed by CARTA can be applied across
industry sectors, including national security, healthcare, manufacturing,
energy, and business intelligence. The fundamental research done at CARTA will
be translated into technology developments, delivering practical solutions to
hard problems. The ultimate success of this paradigm shift by the analytics
industry will rest on the ability of CARTA universities to prepare experts to
take advantage of the science and technologies to solve a variety of real-life
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CARTA research may involve sensitive academic
and industrial data along with public domain data. This data and resulting
research outputs will be maintained using appropriate best practices for each
type of data for a period of three years after the closing of CARTA. A central
repository, suitably tagged for appropriate referencing and documentation, will
be set up at https://carta.umbc.edu for maintaining the acquired and generated
data from Center projects. Project results will be made available in response to
approved user requests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.