* 1747195
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Novel Antibiotic-Alternative Treatment for a Devastating Honey Bee Disease
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Trevor Wienclaw, Esplin Organic Solutions
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is the development of potentially the first FDA-approved
phage therapeutic, non-antibiotic remedy specifically designed for honeybees.
This treatment has the potential to become the global gold standard for treating
American Foulbrood, a devastating honey bee disease caused by the bacteria
Paenibacillus larvae, which threatens 2.7 million beehives in the United States
and 92.5 million beehives worldwide. The American foulbrood treatment market
opportunity is $500 M, and this technology promises a significant reduction of
current unprecedented mortality rates of honeybees, curtailment of antibiotics
being used in beehives, which perpetuates antibiotic resistance in the
environment, and support for organic agricultural
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to expand
the collection of Paenibacillus larvae bacterial strains for novel phage therapy
development, enlarge the library of P. larvae bacteriophages from which an
optimized treatment can be created, and test against each other to determine the
optimal therapeutic phage combination. The expansion of the P. larvae strain and
phages collection is critical because of the high specificity phages have for
their hosts. Samples of P. larvae and phage will be collected from the entire
United States. These greatly expanded phage and bacteria collections will help
to ensure that treatments will be developed to effectively treat any American
foulbrood infection.