* 1747391
* SBIR Phase I:  A platform for identifying antibodies that modulate human membrane receptors involved in disease
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Carlos Gustavo Pesce, Abalone Bio, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to enable the discovery of needed antibody
therapeutics in diseases for which there are no available treatments. These
therapies act by increasing or decreasing the activity of a type of cell
signaling receptor, "G protein-coupled receptors" (GPCRs). Antibodies are highly
specific for their targets, an important characteristic for GPCR drugs, as GPCRs
comprise a large family of structurally similar proteins. In fact, small
molecule drugs for GPCRs often are toxic due to side effects from acting on
structurally similar but functionally unrelated GPCRs. This project will develop
the first technology that directly identifies antibodies by their ability to
modulate GPCR function. These antibodies will impact society's health by
treating currently incurable diseases, and strongly impact scientific
understanding by enabling the study of GPCR-related mammalian physiology and
disease. The commercial impacts are potentially very large. The global GPCR drug
market is over $100B, and over half of marketed antibody therapeutics have
annual sales of over $1B. The platform described here has the potential to
develop many GPCR antibody therapeutics, and thereby generate an enormous amount
of value for patients, society at large, and co-development partners.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a platform for discovering GPCR-
modulating antibodies. This platform could be critical for generating tools for
studying GPCR-related biology and disease, and for developing therapeutics with
fewer side effects than small molecule drugs to treat GPCR-related diseases.
Developing functional GPCR antibodies using traditional methods is encumbered by
the difficulty in producing antigens that represent the GPCR in a functional
state, and a lack of high-throughput assays of GPCR function. The proposed
platform and method expresses human GPCRs in Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeast,
couples activity to selectable phenotypes, and directly selects antibodies that
modulate GPCR function in the same cells. The first objective aims to further
characterize the activity and specificity of camelid antibodies ("nanobodies")
antagonists that inhibit the endogenous yeast GPCR, Ste2, and then perform
agonist selections to identify at least one Ste2 agonist. The second objective
aims to further develop the platform to enable interrogating a broader array of
human GPCR targets using ScFv antibody libraries, and to identify at least one
agonist or antagonist of a therapeutically relevant human GPCR. Positive results
will demonstrate the feasibility of the platform.