* 1747754
* Planning IUCRC University of Connecticut: Center for Hardware and Embedded Systems Security and Trust (CHEST)
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2018,01/31/2020
* John Chandy, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 01/31/2020
* USD 15,000.00

This planning grant award will be used to study the feasibility of establishing
a university-industry partnership focusing on hardware and embedded systems
security and trust. Pre-competitive research conducted in the proposed Center
would be fully supported by the Center's industry members. Integrated circuit
and embedded hardware devices are critical to most modern military and
industrial systems for defense, energy, healthcare, banking, communication,
transportation, and other sectors. These devices are more vulnerable than ever
to malicious tampering by untrusted entities, with threats over a broad range of
attack vectors. Malicious functionality can be added to the devices during the
design process, fabrication, or assembly, leading to compromised systems, often
without detection. This collaborative effort seeks to further the national
defense by developing novel methodologies and technologies that enhance trust
and security of these devices and their respective
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Center will enable researchers and
practitioners from diverse areas -- integrated circuits, design, cryptography,
system safety and resilience, etc. -- to position device security as a coherent,
collaborative discipline. It will be a hub for industry-focused research and a
repository for related data. It will foster dialog to promote advances across
disciplinary boundaries. The University of Connecticut site will lead
collaborative efforts in counterfeit integrated circuits and secure embedded
systems. It will develop novel hardware authentication technologies; formal
verification techniques for secure embedded systems; risk models for the design
of secure embedded systems; and methods to design secure embedded
processors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Center will influence the design,
protection, and resilience of cyber-physical systems from vulnerabilities
associated with device security and workforce development needed for industry,
government, and military. The Center will disseminate research results and
synthesized theories on device security through multiple channels, including
courses taught at the six sites and professional/scholarly activities. The
results bring a significant return on investment, as they improve the readiness
of industry for emergent conditions and improve resilience to threats in terms
of property loss, lost trust, and system safety with respect to missions,
injuries, casualties, cascading effects, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
collaborative group for the Industry &amp; University Collaborative Research for
Hardware and Embedded System Security and Trust is composed of George Mason
University, Northeastern University, University of Connecticut, University of
Texas at Dallas, University of Virginia, and Wright State University. The
collaborators host a website at
https://www.vdl.afrl.af.mil/programs/PG_CHEST_IUCRC with meeting materials,
program information, publications, etc. The website is made available
indefinitely or until the Center transitions to the next
phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.