* 1747739
* IUCRC Phase I: The University of Michigan Center for High Pressure Plasma Energy, Agriculture, and Biomedical Technologies (PEAB)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* John Foster, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 615,000.00

Advances in atmospheric pressure plasma science have enabled breakthrough
opportunities to improve our Nation?s healthcare, economic prosperity and
defense. These science breakthroughs have resulted in the development of new
technologies in green energy, environmental remediation, water treatment,
medicine, food processing, and agriculture. These are the core fundamental areas
of science and technology to be addressed by the Center for High Pressure Plasma
Energy, Agriculture, and Biomedical Technologies (C-PEAB). Drexel University
(DU), University of Michigan (UM), and George Washington University (GWU),
leading institutions in the scientific subject area, are synergistically
collaborating with each other and with their industrial partners as the founding
members of the C-PEAB. This effort will support STEM education with focused
recruitment of women and underrepresented minorities, produce an
interdisciplinary workforce, and integrate novel breakthrough technologies with
industry. While having long-term collaborations in plasma science with GWU and
DU, UM's unique contribution to the C-PEAB team is based upon pioneering
research in plasma modeling of atmospheric pressure plasmas and plasma-based
water purification. UM has extensive experience in the study of plasma
decomposition of contaminants in water as well as engineering the scale up of
plasma reactors to treat volumes of practical interest to the consumer and
industrial sector. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Low Temperature non-equilibrium Plasma
(LTP) science is the base upon which many modern industries such as
microelectronics and micro-fabrication have been built. Current breakthroughs in
plasma-generating electronics have made it possible to widen the area of LTP
applications to atmos-pheric and higher pressures. These application areas are
the focus of the Center for High Pressure Plasma Energy, Agriculture, and
Biomedical Technologies (C-PEAB). The C-PEAB will translate science
breakthroughs in diagnostics, pulse power and modeling to optimizing industrial
applications in energy, environmental remediation, food safety and food
processing, and medical and bioengi-neering. C-PEAB will initially consist of a
three-site IUCRC between Drexel University (DU), University of Michigan (UM),
and George Washington University (GWU) with subsequent addition of new member
universities who have strong industry collaborations in high-pressure plasma
applications pertinent to the C-PEAB. While having long-term collaboration
experience in plasma science with GWU and DU, the University of Michigan's
unique contribution to the C-PEAB team is especially based upon the University's
core expertise in the science and engineering of atmospheric plasmas in contact
with liquids including: 1) advanced computational simulation tools and 2) high
throughput plasma reactors for the purpose of advanced water
treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.