* 1747709
* A Symposium on Indigenous Water Knowledge and Hydrologic Science
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Raymond Torres, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2019
* USD 99,759.00

Part I&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although indigenous peoples are internationally
known as "water protectors", indigenous voices and perspectives are sparse in
hydrology, where only a handful of academic scholars represent a small fraction
of the broad spectrum of indigenous cultures and tribal nations in the United
States. Though few in number, these indigenous scientists play a key role in
bridging the communities of western scientific research and indigenous
knowledge. These scholars have, individually, explored this bridging role
through their own research and education activities, but larger questions remain
unresolved and require synthesis efforts. To this end, the project centers on a
symposium of scholars designed to formulate a vision for hydrology research and
education centered on Native American perspectives and indigenous water
knowledge. Such a meeting has never taken place before. The proposed ?Symposium
on Indigenous Water Knowledge and Hydrologic Science? will be held at the Salish
Kootenai College in Pablo, MT during August 2018. Symposium objectives include:
1) defining research and education priorities in the hydrologic sciences that
are relevant to indigenous peoples in a rapidly changing world; 2) establishing
a network of indigenous hydrologists, other scholars, and traditional knowledge
holders of water; and 3) identifying educational needs and tools to support
integration of indigenous perspectives in hydrology. A key long-term goal of
this project is to build and maintain a scholarly community that is
simultaneously connected to the cutting edge of hydrology and related
disciplines and firmly rooted to indigenous knowledge and pressing water-related
issues of tribes today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
"Symposium on Indigenous Water Knowledge and Hydrologic Science" will bring
together hydrologists and others in August 2018 at Salish Kootenai College in
Pablo, MT to address key questions regarding the water-related research and
education needs of tribal communities that can be answered with solutions rooted
in indigenous knowledge systems. The symposium will also address the role of
indigenous knowledge in crosscutting, water-related research. Participants will
develop a vision and action plan for integrating indigenous perspectives and
knowledge into hydrologic science and related disciplines. Symposium organizers
and participants are well equipped and ideally positioned to address these
topics and to bridge indigenous communities with each other in a collaborative
manner. The project has implications for broadening participation of Native
Americans in hydrology and related disciplines. Approximately 1000 Native
American hold degrees at any level in the geosciences (including Earth,
atmospheric and ocean sciences) and Native American hydrologists constitute a
small fraction of this number. Tribal colleges and minority serving
organizations work in a variety of ways to increase representation of Native
American hydrologists in the workforce and academia, but indigenous voices
remain few. The symposium will include discussions of culturally responsive
education materials and specific opportunities for participants to provide
leadership in areas related to professional development of Native American
hydrologists. The symposium will thus enhance and support efforts to increase
the number of Native Americans pursuing degrees in hydrology and related fields.
Student participants will be actively engaged to foster involvement and
enthusiasm in the upcoming generation of indigenous hydrologists. Symposium
participants will include faculty from research institutions as well as tribal
colleges, with tribal college faculty making up 25%-30% of participants.