* 1747658
* Time Resolved Studies of Outflows from Massive Stars using the Observatory of the Southeastern Association for Research in Astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 01/31/2017,05/31/2022
* Veronique Petit, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 05/31/2022
* USD 429,937.00

This team will use telescopes in Arizona and Chile to collect data on massive
stars expelling gas and dust. Such material is eventually recycled in new star
and planet forming regions. The researchers will measure stellar wind
variability in two groups of stars: those with magnetic fields and those in
binary systems. They will carry out observations ranging from hours to years to
test mass loss models. They will also develop easy-to-use software tools for
undergraduate students, making it easier for them to learn how to do research.
Researchers from Florida and Tennessee will collaborate to complete the work,
including students and a postdoctoral researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team
will use optical echelle spectrographs on moderate-sized telescopes with high
resolving power (R=20,000) to study magnetic OB stars and several early-type
binaries with colliding winds for 210 nights of dedicated time. The observations
will provide equivalent velocity resolution of 15 km/s, which is high enough to
see detailed structure in the massive star emission lines which are typically
1000-3000 km/s wide. They will use the data to test models of magnetospheric
emission based on simulations of magnetized winds. They will also monitor a
diverse selection of massive colliding wind binaries to quantify and model
periodic and non-periodic behavior. The team will use telescopes in the Southern
Association for Research in Astronomy (SARA), which is a consortium of 12
universities.