* 1747786
* Planning Grant: Industry University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) for Bioanalytic Metrology (CBM), Purdue University
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Garth Simpson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

This proposed activity will undertake organizing activities to launch a new
Industry-University Collaborative Research Center for Bioanalytic Metrology, a
joint effort of the University of Notre Dame, Indiana University, and Purdue
University. The effort will bring together a national coalition of analytical
instrument makers, pharmaceutical companies, clinical practitioners, academic
researchers, and other stakeholders, and unite them in a mission to design and
build new, industry-critical systems for chemical measurement and bioanalysis.
These systems are needed to address a fundamental gap in U.S. research and
development; namely, the ability to fully identify, characterize, track, and
model reactivity of biological molecules within human cells. If established, the
technical spin-offs from the center will have direct and tangible benefits for
drug discovery, molecular diagnostics, clinical biotechnology, and fundamental
biochemistry. Moreover, the capabilities envisioned by the center are necessary
for the implementation of other long-term scientific objectives, such as
precision medicine. In addition to this knowledge transfer, the center will also
help train a new and diverse bioanalytical workforce. The outcomes of the
planning exercise will form the basis of a proposal to the National Science
Foundation to establish the Center for Bioanalytic Metrology (CBM).

Genomics, proteomics, metabolomics and bioinformatics provide a holistic
framework to study biological systems with applications ranging from fundamental
studies of biological systems to the design and use of diagnostics and
therapeutics for personalized medicine. To realize the promise of these
technologies, however, we must increase the depth of analysis of proteins,
metabolites and other biomolecular species beyond current limits, thus reducing
the fraction of detected?but unidentified?species known as the ?dark molecules
of life.? This planning grant lays the groundwork for the CBM, joining expertise
at Notre Dame, Indiana, and Purdue. Planning activities will bring together
analytical instrument makers, pharmaceutical companies, clinical practitioners,
and leading academic research groups in analytical sciences and engineering. In
addition to the technical objectives, the CBM will also: i) enable technology
and knowledge transfer to the industrial sector, ii) enhance graduate and
undergraduate education activities specifically designed to increase diversity
of the STEM workforce, and iii) provide valuable updates to chemistry, biology,
computer science, and engineering curricula through the incorporation of
research into existing undergraduate and graduate classes.