* 1747764
* Planning Grant:  Industry University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) for Bioanalytic Metrology (CBM), University of Notre Dame
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Paul Bohn, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

This proposal entails planning for an Industry-University Collaborative Research
Center for Bioanalytic Metrology, a joint effort of the University of Notre
Dame, Indiana University, and Purdue University. Planning activities will bring
together a national coalition of analytical instrument makers, pharmaceutical
companies, clinical practitioners, academic researchers, and other stakeholders,
and unite them in a mission to design and build new, industry-critical systems
for chemical measurement and bioanalysis. These systems are needed to address a
fundamental gap in U.S. research and development; namely, the ability to fully
identify, characterize, and track biological molecules within human cells and
understand their many complex interactions. If established, the technical spin-
offs from the center will have direct and tangible benefits for drug discovery,
molecular diagnostics, clinical biotechnology, and other areas. Moreover, the
capabilities envisioned by the center are necessary for the implementation of
other long-term objectives, such as precision medicine. In addition to this
knowledge transfer, the center will also help train a new and diverse
bioanalytical workforce. The outcomes of the planning exercise will form the
basis of a proposal to the National Science Foundation to establish a Center for
Bioanalytic Metrology.

Genomics, proteomics, metabolomics and bioinformatics provide a holistic
framework to study biological systems with applications ranging from fundamental
studies of biological systems to the design and use of diagnostics and
therapeutics for personalized medicine. To realize the promise of these
technologies, however, we must increase the depth of analysis of proteins,
metabolites and other biomolecular species beyond current limits, thus reducing
the fraction of detected, but unidentified, species collectively known as the
?dark molecules of life.' This planning grant lays the groundwork for a Center
for Bioanalytic Metrology (CBM), joining expertise at Notre Dame, Indiana, and
Purdue. Planning activities will bring together analytical instrument makers,
pharmaceutical companies, clinical practitioners, and leading academic research
groups in analytical sciences and engineering. In addition to the technical
objectives, the CBM will also: (a) enable technology and knowledge transfer to
the industrial sector, (b) enhance graduate and undergraduate education
activities specifically designed to increase diversity of the STEM workforce,
and (c) provide valuable updates to chemistry, biology, computer science, and
engineering curricula through the incorporation of research into existing
undergraduate and graduate classes.