* 1747855
* CAREER: Artificial Muscle Based on Dielectric Elastomers for Dexterous and Compliant Prostheses
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Zheng Chen, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project has the main goal of
realizing artificial muscle with mechanical and dynamic properties similar to
natural muscle. In particular, this project considers the use of a class of
materials called dielectric elastomers (DEs) that have compliance, resilience,
and force per area comparable to biological muscles. Like biological muscles,
these materials can be self-sensing, allowing precise control of contraction or
extension without needing visual feedback or other auxiliary sensing schemes.
The ultimate goal of the project is to achieve dexterous, lightweight, and
energy-efficient prostheses using DE-based artificial muscles, in contrast to
the heavy and inefficient electric motors of the current generation of robotic
arms. The project incorporates aspects of bio-inspired design, device
fabrication, and dynamic modeling, sensing, and control. The success of this
project will help provide affordable, reliable, and comfortable prostheses to
the estimated two million military veterans and civilians who have lost hands,
arms, or legs to accidents, natural disasters, wars, diseases, or aging. This
project will also train the next-generation workforce with skills in the dynamic
modeling, control, and fabrication of devices based on smart materials and
structures. Activities to attract students to this area of research will improve
enrollment in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this research is to
develop lightweight, compliant, and self-sensing DEs to emulate the actuation
and sensing of biological muscles for robotic assistive applications. A first
step towards this goal is to obtain bio-inspired design, modeling, self-sensing,
and control strategies for DE actuators in a prosthetic hand application. This
project will emphasize the following core goals: 1) create a novel artificial
muscle structure consisting of a tubular DE artificial muscle attached to carbon
fiber artificial tendons; 2) derive a low-order physics-based model capturing
the nonlinear elasticity and strain-dependent electrical impedance of the DE
actuator; (3) implement a sensitive and robust nonlinear state observer using
actuator self-sensing of the strain-dependent electrical impedance; (4) derive a
state-boundary avoidance control strategy to protect the DE actuator from
damage; and (5) build a DE-enabled prosthetic hand to demonstrate dexterous
manipulation with efficient, and compliant actuation.