* 1747918
* Workshop: Student support for 2017 Napa Microsystems Workshop. To Be Held in Napa, California, August, 21-23, 2017
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2018
* Gaurav Bahl, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2018
* USD 10,000.00

The proposed project seeks financial support to support the conference
registration costs of up to 50 student participants of the 2017 Napa
Microsystems Workshop, which will be held in Napa, CA on 21-23 August 2017. The
meeting is to bring together researchers on the themes of non-reciprocal
systems, nonlinear systems, parametric resonance, optomechanics, and
microsystems for computing. The central thesis for the workshop is that micro-
electro-mechanical sensors and actuators are approaching a saturation point in
technology development due to the fundamental assumptions of linear time
invariance and reciprocity. A study of non-linear, non-reciprocal, and
parametric systems is therefore necessary to overcome currently faced barriers.
The cross-pollination of ideas between the above described different physical
domains plays a critical role in developing new applications, for example,
borrowed concepts from optics and opto-mechanics can stimulate new capabilities
in microwave, RF, and acoustic systems. The Workshop will provide opportunities
for a diverse group of graduate student researchers to interact with senior
members of the research community, broadening their scientific perspective and
promoting their career development. It will enhance understanding of the science
that underpins the development of micro/nanoscale sensors, actuators, and
microsystems and will promote long-term relationships between researchers in
diverse fields including bioengineering, chemical engineering, mechanical
engineering, electrical engineering and chemistry. The will be Workshop
proceedings that will be disseminated among the conference attendees either
digitally or as a proceedings book of abstracts