* 1747347
* SBIR Phase I:  Production of natural sun-protective compounds
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Charles Bradford, Gadusol Laboratories, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is the development of sustainably produced, effective
natural sunscreen compound found in marine organisms for skincare applications.
The World Health Organization estimates that one in every three cancers
diagnosed is a skin cancer. The prevalence of skin cancer, and the threat of
photoaging, is driving growth in the global market for sun protection products,
which is predicted to reach over $7 B by 2020. However, many chemical sunscreen
ingredients on the market today have been shown to be harmful to the environment
and/or to have adverse health effects. The goal is to produce a previously
identified marine sunscreen compound, gadusol, in an economical and sustainable
yeast biomanufacturing system, and replace problematic sunscreen ingredients in
current use. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop
a sustainable means of producing a natural, marine-based sunscreen ingredient
for skincare applications. This project focuses on increasing yields and
recovery of gadusol, a fish-derived UV-B-absorbing sunscreen, by using the tools
of microbial fermentation and synthetic biology. The gadusol biosynthetic
pathway was recently introduced into yeast. The key technical objectives of his
project are to improve gadusol yields, evaluate yeast-produced gadusol use in
skin care products, and develop methods for purification that will be applicable
to large-scale production. The anticipated outcome of this project is a new and
underutilized sunscreen compound derived from natural sources that has the
potential to provide UV protection without the health and environmental risks
associated with current commercial ingredients.