* 1747776
* EAGER:  Bulk Nanostructured Metals from Twinned Nanowires
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2020
* David Dunand, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 12/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Metals have widespread uses in electronics and
infrastructure, and are the material foundation of modern civilization. A
continuous piece of metal is made of densely packed, very fine grains. The size
and structure of these grains, and the way they pack together determine the
macroscopic properties of the bulk material. Typically, these grains are formed
during the growth of the entire bulk material, and can be somewhat restructured
during further processing. This project explores a contrasting approach, in
which discrete metal nanocrystals are first chemically synthesized to yield
well-defined structure, then assembled and densified to yield the final bulk
nanostructured metal. This new approach allows for much higher degree of freedom
to control the size, structure, and orientation of the metal grains, and can
potentially create metal materials with novel properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The new approach for
creating bulk nanostructured metals departs fundamentally from the current ones,
which are based on extensive plastic deformation of coarse-grained metal, atom-
by-atom growth through electroplating or sputtering-based techniques, and
consolidation of micron-size metal powders. In the new strategy, well-defined
metal grains (i.e., nanowires) are first synthesized "atom-by-atom?" and then
assembled to construct the final bulk metal "grain-by-grain". This can
effectively decouple the tuning of grain microstructures and grain orientations,
leading to new bulk nanostructured metals with previously unattainable
microstructures (e.g., grain shape, orientation and nano-twinning) and novel
properties. The project addresses a long missing connection between bulk
nanostructured alloys (metallurgy-oriented) and colloidal nanomaterials
(materials chemistry-oriented). If successful, it will inspire and catalyze a
long overdue collaboration between these two independent areas of nanomaterials
research. Students trained in the project represent a new breed of material
scientists that can connect metallurgy with colloidal nanomaterials, bringing
fresh mindsets to both areas.