* 1747396
* Enhancing Diversity in Graduate Education:  Research Results From Twenty Years of Empowering Women in Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Amy Buchmann, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2019
* USD 24,263.00

This award supports participation in the session "EDGE (Enhancing Diversity in
Graduate Education) Program: Pure and Applied Talks by Women" held at the Joint
Mathematics Meetings (JMM) in San Diego, CA on Thursday January 11th from 8-10
a.m. and 1-4 p.m. The EDGE program was established in 1998 to empower women,
particularly underrepresented minority women, to complete graduate degrees in
mathematics and to increase the visibility of women in the mathematical
sciences. Since then, hundreds of women have been involved with the EDGE
program. This session will showcase mathematical contributions of women who have
been affiliated with the EDGE program and will serve as a platform to strengthen
the network of women mathematicians. Graduate students, postdoctoral
researchers, and early career faculty will have the opportunity to interact with
successful senior female mathematicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To commemorate
twenty years since the first summer program was held in 1998, the morning
session will feature invited talks by women who participated in one of the early
EDGE summer programs, completed PhDs, and have gone on to lead successful
careers in the mathematical sciences. The afternoon session will feature
contributed talks by graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, and early
career mathematicians who have also been involved in the EDGE program. More
information on the 2018 Joint Mathematics Meeting can be found at:
http://jointmathematicsmeetings.org/meetings/national/jmm2018/2197_program.html