* 1747757
* Phase II Grant Industry University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) for GRid-connected Advanced Power Electronic Systems (GRAPES), University of Arkansas
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Juan Carlos Balda, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2020
* USD 274,000.00

The GRid-connected Advanced Power Electronic Systems (GRAPES) center
(https://grapes.uark.edu) is focused on research and development of the tools,
technologies, and designs of the 21st century modernized electric power grid.
This center is led by the University of Arkansas (UA) with two domestic partner
institutions: the University of South Carolina and the University of Wisconsin
Milwaukee. The GRAPES center will focus on issues involving renewable
integration, microgrid hardware and controls, and fast-acting power conditioning
and protection devices that form the basis of the 21st century electric power
grid. This work will impact millions in the U.S. through enhanced grid
reliability and efficiency, thus lower greenhouse gas emissions. The Center will
make full use of an established national-caliber facility for test and
evaluation of distribution-level power electronic equipment. This will enable
validation of research findings and accelerated insertion of new solid-state
equipment into the power grid. GRAPES will train students to develop and manage
the next generation of power systems, thereby helping to mitigate the shortage
of power engineers. GRAPES will continue to establish new courses that will
integrate research with education to produce students not just competitive, but
superlative in their ownership of unique skills and
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Power electronics enables the integration of
renewable energy sources such as solar and wind, energy storage, new grid
architectures more resilient to natural and man-made attack, and greater
efficiency, all of which reduce greenhouse gas emissions while improving energy
security for the nation. A team of highly qualified academic researchers, guided
by an industry advisory board, with extensive experience in power systems and
power electronics, electronic packaging, semiconductor device modeling, and
controls will focus on the design, development, and evaluation of grid-connected
power electronic equipment. Examples of such equipment include advanced solid-
state transformers, microgrid control methods, novel protection equipment for
both ac and dc power distribution, new converter architectures that promote
higher efficiencies when interfacing renewable resources to the grid, and
fundamental technologies such as new electronic packaging for high voltage
applications and semiconductor device models for advanced analysis of power
electronic systems. In every case, projects are selected and guided by the
industry members of the center to ensure maximum relevance and impact to the
industry in either component development, equipment development, or new
operational methods for the electric power industry.