* 1747234
* STTR Phase I:  3D Printed Vapor Cooled Liquid Hydrogen Storage Tank for Use in Enterprise Level Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Patrick Adam, The Protium Company
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 02/28/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This STTR Phase I project will develop 3D printed liquid hydrogen fuel tanks for
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). UAVs are currently powered by long endurance
low reliability gasoline engines, or short endurance highly reliable electric
propulsion. Hydrogen fuel cells offer the potential for long endurance highly
reliable propulsion if the proper hydrogen storage method is used. Through the
innovative hydrogen storage system developed by this project, fuel cell electric
vehicles can advance national health and welfare through reduction of emissions,
and promotion of energy independence both on the ground and in the air. This
project will develop a new class of liquid hydrogen storage tanks for electric
UAVs that will increase the reliability and performance of surveillance
platforms in the armed forces, reducing risk to American service personnel while
they secure the defense of our nation. The same electric platforms will promote
the national welfare by enabling the inspection of key energy and transportation
infrastructure and serving as intelligence and communications platforms for
first responders during natural disasters. In addition, the key technology
developed in this project will expand the utility of additive manufacturing by
demonstrating the capabilities and performance of engineered plastics in
cryogenic (&lt; -238°F) environments. Such cryogenic rated 3D printed polymer
parts have wide ranging impacts, including cost reduction, across cryogenic
dependent technology areas from medical devices and spacecraft to drug and food
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additively manufactured polymers have never
been used in cryogenic applications until now. The correct selection of polymer
blend, testing and selection of a lightweight impermeable membrane, and thermal
characterization of novel insulation materials are critical to project success.
Since most cryogenic research, such as -423°F permeation of hydrogen through
polymers, has not been studied since the 1960s, extensive cryogenic engineering
and testing experience is required to apply modern materials and manufacturing
methods to the project. The objectives of this project will fill knowledge gaps
by testing metallized polymer films for hydrogen permeability, as well as
manufacturing methods to cost effectively apply it to insulation panels or tank
walls. While prior research has identified a polymer blend that is robust to
cryogenic thermal cycling, the possibility of microcracking has not yet been
thoroughly addressed and will be evaluated in this project. Novel insulation
materials never before used in commercial cryogenic applications will be
thermally characterized and integrated into the prototype tank. This project
will conclude by completing a liquid hydrogen fuel fill and measuring the mass
boil-off rate to test computational fluid dynamic modeled performance.