* 1747669
* EAGER: Cyberinfrastructure Reproducibility Project: Computational Science and Engineering
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Lorena Barba, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,847.00

The progress of science today relies heavily on the use of computers, from lab
workstations to national supercomputers. This project confronts the issue of
ensuring that scientific knowledge stemming from computational research complies
to high standards of reproducibility and rigor. The NSF CISE Directorate "Dear
Colleague Letter: Encouraging Reproducibility in Computing and Communications
Research" (NSF 17-022, 2016) encourages researchers to embrace completeness and
transparency in developing rigorous protocols. Reproducibility concerns often
focus on transparency via open data, code, and other research objects. But
providing the data and code to run all analyses again is, however, a minimum
standard. In the context of high-performance computing where research uses
multi-million-dollar facilities the understanding of where lie the sources of
non-reproducibility is still lacking. This project uses methodical replication
of previous studies in computational fluid dynamics as the model for reaching
that understanding and for developing the guiding principles of study design
that can guarantee, as much as possible, reproducible findings. The results of
this project will serve NSF's mission to promote the progress of science; to
advance the national health, prosperity and welfare; to secure the national
defense by bringing new and necessary understanding about how to achieve
rigorous, reproducible computational research. &lt;br/&gt;This project conducts
methodical replication of published studies in computational fluid dynamics, as
a model for the broad field of computational science and engineering. Its aims
are to 1) identify and characterize sources of non-reproducibility, and 2)
develop guidelines on Design for Reproducibility, i.e., study design
guaranteeing reproducible findings. The project addresses the role of scientific
software libraries (like linear algebra solvers), the influence of hardware
architectures , the role of new technologies for reproducible research (e.g.,
containers, cloud services). The project also provides guidelines for making
assessments about the success of replication studies in the context of high-
performance computing, including when it is reasonable or not to expect bit-by-
bit numerical reproducibility. The research tackles three phases of
computational research: Research methods; Research communication; Research
assessment. The project also develops openly licensed training materials on
reproducible computational research, including a graduate seminar course and a
Responsible Conduct of Research (RCR) module.