* 1747293
* SBIR Phase I:  e-CHEM: A fully-autonomous connected in-situ chemical sensor
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Joyce Wong, FLUIDION US Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project addresses a great demand
for in-situ chemical sensor technology with ability to (1) Measure with high
resolution the environmental footprint of agricultural and urban development,
and (2) Identify potential safety issues related to drinking water quality. High
concentrations of nutrients (e.g. nitrate, nitrite, orthophosphate) in surface
waters are the source of environmental, public health, and economic issues.
Active monitoring of nutrient concentrations in surface waters such as
estuaries, lakes and rivers is critical in assessing their health and
implementing timely action to minimize ecosystem degradation. This SBIR project
aims at developing a disruptive new type of highly miniaturized autonomous water
quality chemical sensor, that can be operated remotely and autonomously, has
minimal installation and maintenance requirements, is capable of performing
thousands of measurements directly in-situ, in both reagent-based and reagent-
less configuration, on a single battery charge. Applications that will greatly
benefit from such sensors range from scientific research, to estimating nutrient
loads, establishing discharge limits, predicting eutrophication conditions and
demonstrating compliance with regulatory reporting requirements. Independently,
the drinking water industry has its own requirements for autonomous chemical
sensors for monitoring reservoirs and distribution networks, optimizing
treatment processes and identifying tank nitrification issues early-on.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project aims to achieve the highest level of miniaturization and functionality
attempted in a commercial water quality sensor. The core innovation of this
proposed e-CHEM system is in the microfluidic chemical analysis module,
combining a novel highly-efficient mixing mechanism to homogenize minute volumes
of reagent with the fluid sample with a microfluidic implementation of dual
reagent-based and reagent-less chemical measurement capability, the possibility
of controlling relevant chemical reactions in-situ via precise on-chip
temperature management, and finally the potential of overcoming the important
hurdle of bio-fouling via novel surface nano-engineering. The parameters
measured will include a selection from: ortho-phosphates, nitrites, nitrates,
dissolved organic carbon, total and/or free chlorine, free ammonia, and pH. The
system will include bidirectional wireless telemetry to enable automatic alert
generation and data transmission to remote servers for visualization, analysis
and interpretation. Target accuracy and response times are superior to
traditional measurement techniques due to full process automation, elimination
of sample degradation and transit times, reduction of human error, and automatic
data centralization.