* 1747583
* EAGER: Measuring the Effects of Academic Climate and Social Networks on Persistence of STEM Undergraduates
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Maralee Mayberry, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2020
* USD 126,010.00

Increasing the participation and success of all students interested in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) undergraduate degrees continues
to be a challenge. This research will add to our understanding of the factors
that impact the participation and success of understudied students. This is
critical information for designing effective education and research programs to
increase participation in STEM. This EAGER proposal will develop a survey
instrument designed to gather information to understand the impact of STEM
academic culture and social networks on persistence. This research and further
research is intended to assist STEM educators and policymakers by providing data
about the persistence of STEM undergraduates to inform interventions to enhance
undergraduate success in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER will develop the
reliability and validity of a survey instrument designed to measure the impact
of STEM academic culture and social networks on STEM undergraduate students?
persistence. Social networks are relationships that convey useful resources that
benefit the network group members. Previous research indicates that
underrepresented groups in STEM are less likely to have access to and benefit
from social networks. The project uses a mixed-methods approach to gather in-
depth interview data, and develop survey questions from the interview data and
relevant literature. The focus is on a population that is understudied, Sexual
and Gender Minority (SGM) STEM undergraduates. SGM refers to individuals who
identify as Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, or Queer/Questioning (LGBTQ) or
other sexual or gender minority positionalities. The survey will be tested on a
purposive sample of SGM STEM undergraduates, refined, and tested again. This
work is informed by prior qualitative work on undergraduate STEM students and
SGM populations. This study could advance knowledge about interventions needed
to broaden participation in STEM fields.