* 1747878
* Workshop on Indigenous Perspectives and Linguistic Practices Relevant to Wellness
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2017,12/31/2018
* Alice Taff, University of Alaska Southeast Juneau Campus
* Standard Grant
* Colleen M. Fitzgerald
* 12/31/2018
* USD 49,581.00

Documenting the language of a given speech community includes recording the
knowledge held by elders and traditional healers regarding physical, mental, and
emotional wellbeing. Importantly, documenting these linguistic practices can
increase the scientific understanding of factors important to health and
wellbeing, including illness preventions and remedies, healing practices, and
perspectives on how to live a healthy life. Native American and Alaska Native
communities show a well-documented, major gap in wellbeing measures when
comparing these communities and non-Native Americans. This award will fund a
workshop that brings together community members and other researchers and
experts from diverse backgrounds to explore these issues surrounding wellbeing
and to present their findings. Better health outcomes for Alaska Native
communities serve the national interest by reducing health inequities. Project
activities will broaden participation by underrepresented groups of all ages in
the social sciences, including involving high school and university students,
some of whom will be trained in video documentation. The conference
presentations will be available to the general public and other academics by
sharing the recordings online. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sharing Our Knowledge
workshops have been held since 1993, bringing together Native and non-Native
Tlingit researchers to present their work to a diverse audience. These workshops
have been an important bridge between academics and indigenous community
members. The Tlingit people have traditionally inhabited coastal Alaska and the
contiguous interior of Yukon and British Columbia, and Tlingit is a severely
threatened language, with 80 fluent first language speakers and many avid second
language learners. The Native American Languages Act, passed by the U.S.
Congress in 1990, enacted into policy the recognition of the unique status and
importance of Native American languages. These workshops serve as a forum
conducive to the production, sharing and documentation of Tlingit knowledge and
language. The 10th Sharing Our Knowledge workshop will occur in 2017 and the
focus on wellbeing will encompass research presentations on the physical,
mental, emotional, spiritual, and economic wellbeing for individuals and
communities. Workshop discussions include the multi-generational impacts on
Tlingit health due to colonization and the documentation of the wellness
teachings deeply embedded in the Tlingit language. Impressionistically speaking,
for those who have witnessed the renaissance of Alaska Native traditions and
languages, such cultural affinities seem to have improved the wellness of Alaska
Natives. Workshop results will also add to the growing literature regarding the
positive interactions between indigenous languages and cultures and wellbeing.
The workshop will have broad impact, and will offer opportunities to cross
traditional academic boundaries including health, biology, traditional
ecological knowledge, archaeology, linguistics, museum studies, cultural
anthropology, education, ethnohistory, art, music, and indigenous law. Project
results will be archived and accessible at the Sealaska Heritage Institute
Archive and at the Alaska State Library Historical Collections Archives.