* 1747560
* Cognition and Body-Worn Cameras
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Kathy Pezdek, Claremont Graduate University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 302,023.00

Cognition and Body-Worn
Cameras&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Police departments
and law enforcement agencies have greatly increased their use of Body-Worn
Cameras (BWCs) in the recent past. However, not much is known about the most
appropriate way to use BWC footage in the legal system. One important question
is whether police officers should review their BWC footage after a use of force
incident. As the U.S. Supreme Court has held that evaluations of an officer's
actions must be based on the original perspective of the officer, it is
important to understand whether viewing the BWC footage influences that original
perspective. This project will study how viewing video footage of an event
affects an individual's memory of the original event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will employ an experimental approach to address how viewing video
footage of an event, such as from a BWC, affects an individual's memory of the
original event and the variables that moderate this effect. The various
experiments will use police officers and civilian participants in simulations
that replicate training and use of force incidents. These experiments will
assess variables on two different populations that control for the effect of
viewing the video on memory, in order to identify the specific cognitive
mechanisms that underlie the effect of viewing BWC footage on memory. This
theory-driven and evidence-based research will foster understanding of the
effects of BWC footage on memory while aiding law enforcement in developing
policies related to BWCs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.