* 1747593
* EAGER:  Exploration of a New Class of Semiconductor Nanocrystals with Aliovalent Magnetic Dopants
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Kevin Kittilstved, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2020
* USD 150,000.00

Non-technical Abstract: This project supports an effort to develop the chemistry
and physics of a class of multifunctional nanocrystals that can lead to new
technologies based on advanced magnetic materials. More specifically, the
project aims to elucidate the materials chemistry and electronic structures of
earth-abundant nanocrystals containing specific amount of metal ions (dopants).
This unique class of targeted dopant ions requires the presence of additional
changes in the structure of nanocrystals. These materials have unique electronic
structures at the nanoscale that can be controlled by varying the type of dopant
ions and cochanging the concentration of electrons by external forces such as
light. To accomplish this work, undergraduate and graduate students are being
trained in both making the novel materials and measuring their electronic
structures using sophisticated spectroscopy and electron microscopy. In
particular, the recruitment and training of undergraduates from underrepresented
groups to work on this project is enabled by the Collaborative Undergraduate
Research in Energy (CURE) REU site at the University of Massachusetts Amherst.

Technical Abstract: The hydrothermal synthesis of colloidal chromium(III)-doped
strontium titanate nanocubes is applied to a variety of transition metal dopant
ions known to substitute at the titanium(IV) site in the bulk. Examining these
multifunctional materials as nanocrystals can impact a number of diverse applied
research fields from visible-light photocatalysis to solid-state memories, and
also serve as potential building blocks for multiferroic assemblies. The
electronic structures of these diluted magnetic semiconductors are unique with
aliovalent dopants compared to traditional, isovalent dopants, due to the
potential redox levels that are within the band gap of the strontium titanate.
As colloidal nanocrystals, these materials unlock new potential for altering the
electronic structure through altering the defect chemistry at the surface, and
providing a path for device fabrication by solution processing techniques. The
objectives of this work are to (1) optimize the synthesis to yield and determine
the electronic structures of a series of aliovalent diluted magnetic
semiconductor nanocrystals, and (2) determine the effect of the Fermi level in
the nanocrystals on the electronic structures and dopant-defect correlations.
The unique electronic structures of the materials in this work also allows the
nature of the charge-compensating defects to be compared between nanocrystals
and bulk powders.