* 1747768
* Planning IUCRC Virginia Tech: Center for Cyber-Physical Systems for the Hospital Operating Room (CyBHOR)
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Shashank Priya, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Perkins
* 01/31/2019
* USD 14,999.00

The U.S. alone spent $2.6 trillion on healthcare in 2014. This number is likely
to increase over the next two decades as Baby Boomers, numbering 76 million,
will retire, including many who work in medical professions. This planning grant
will lay the foundation to establish a site of the Cyber-physical systems for
the Hospital Operating Room (CyBHOR) Industry University Cooperative Research
Center at Virginia Tech (VT). As part of this proposed site, the researchers
seek to develop healthcare and surgical technologies for our most vulnerable
populations: children and older adults. The site will complement existing sites
at Houston Methodist and the University of Florida.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Virginia Tech will use this planning grant to refine the
vision for the new site in order to address growing biomedical needs
complementary to the mission of CyBHOR. To achieve this, an organizational
meeting will be held in the Washington, DC area with prospective industry
members, secure financial commitments from industry partners, and select initial
projects. The planning grant will allow the recruitment and input from multiple
industrial partners to investigate six medical device research projects. Initial
proposed research projects address areas ranging from training the next
generation of healthcare workers via humanoid patient simulation, to treating
both pediatric and geriatric surgical and healthcare needs with real-time tissue
property monitoring. These projects will be refined with industry partners for
the site's initial research efforts that will lead to increased innovation and
competitiveness of U.S. industry, specifically providers of healthcare products.