* 1747853
* Seventh International IEEE Conference on  Computational Advances in Bio and medical Sciences (ICCABS) - Travel Awards
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Sanguthevar Rajasekaran, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2018
* USD 20,000.00

Computational techniques are drastically impacting the way in which scientific
and engineering research are conducted. Impressive advances have been made in
different areas including biology, medicine, and drug discovery. Given the great
importance of these areas to the society at large, it is essential to advance
the state-of-the art in them. Such advances can be made when the scientists from
these domains work together and come up with the best possible diagnosis tools,
treatment procedures, drugs for various diseases, etc. Even though a number of
conferences exist today in the general area of bioinformatics, they focus on one
of these three areas to a large extent. This International IEEE Conference on
Computational Advances in Bio and medical Sciences (ICCABS) has the goal of
bringing together scientists in biology, medicine, and drug discovery and hence
serving as a collaboration platform for them. It is expected that these
collaborations will result in the solution of some challenging
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The requested funds will be used to support the
travel expenses of graduate students and post-doctoral fellows (PDFs). These
students and PDFs will get to meet experts and listen to their research results.
Toward this goal, the plan is to invite a number of keynote speakers and invited
speakers. Not only the attending students and PDFs but also other students will
benefit since when they return to their schools they will communicate their
experience with others in the research group. The conference proceedings will be
of great use to students, researchers, and practitioners. Two journal special
issues are also planned.