* 1747155
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel High Performance Insulation for Energy Efficient Appliances using Discrete Spacer Technology
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Scott Dye, Quest Thermal Group
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 01/31/2019
* USD 134,683.00

This SBIR Phase I project is focused on modeling, designing, analyzing, building
and testing a prototype commercial superinsulation called High Performance
Multi-Layer Insulation (HPMLI). HPMLI is based on a new technology that
significantly reduces heat leak, and allows a multilayer insulation to be used
in commercial applications. HPMLI could provide R-235 thermal insulation,
compared to current state of the art R-6 foam insulation, offering 40-fold lower
heat leak into fridges and freezers and reducing energy use. Heating and cooling
account for 74% of U.S. residential energy use, with water heaters and
refrigerators consuming 26% and $60B in annual costs. This superinsulation,
originally developed for NASA and used for spaceflight, could save 90% of energy
used for refrigeration and heating appliances, reducing energy costs and
protecting our environment. This opportunity is to develop and manufacture a
novel ultra-high-performance insulation for use by appliance manufacturers and
consumers for improved energy efficiency, and will enable the small business to
grow to 17 employees, with $20M in revenue by 2022. This insulation has many
potential applications, including home refrigerators, commercial freezers, water
heaters, refrigerated trucks and shipping containers, industrial hot/cold
processes, food coolers and buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HPMLI is
based on novel discrete spacers and radiation barrier layers, forming a new very
high- performance insulation. A novel system is proposed in which the spacers
self- support the layers against external atmospheric pressure, allowing use in
air. Technical challenges must be solved that carefully balance structural
support, heat flux, cost and ease of integration into appliances. This
insulation is only possible due to the unique properties of the discrete
spacers, which must be designed, developed and tested for this application. The
goals are to successfully build and test a prototype demonstrating greater than
R-200 thermal performance, and able to be vacuum sealed into vacuum panels or
appliance case walls. The system will be thermally modeled for several concepts,
a spacer design iterated, prototype demonstration units built for a fridge
and/or food cooler, and the heat flux through the insulation measured. HPMLI
will be compared to current state of the art foam, and factors required for
commercialization considered in this Phase I design.