* 1747189
* SBIR Phase I:  Shape-shifting robots for Disaster Rescue, Monitoring, and Education
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Alice Agogino, Squishy Robotics Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/ commercial potential of this project is to commercialize
previous research in tensegrity robots for new markets in disaster rescue,
surveillance, scientific monitoring, and STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering
and Math) education. Future deaths by both victims and first responders in
disaster rescue in unchartered risky environments could be prevented by
utilizing semi-autonomous technology to explore the regions of disasters,
provide surveillance to inform first responders, and assist in the rescue of
victims until human first responders can arrive. Current autonomous vehicles can
be ineffective in navigating surface obstacles and climbing steep slopes to
reach areas of interest. Aerial operations may be limited to dropping supplies,
which may not be beneficial if victims are immobile or unconscious. The goal is
to drop the proposed shape-shifting robots from aerial vehicles, so that these
mobile robots can reach previously difficult areas for effective emergency
response. This proposed technology will have broader impact in use for
scientific monitoring and surveillance as well. A secondary market will be for
K-12 students, teachers, parents and roboticists with the potential to have
large impact in STEM education. Robot kits will be developed for educational
applications that will meet new Next Generation Science
Standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will focus on de-risking prior research in the development of
spherical tensegrity structures as a robotic platform for the proposed target
applications. To meet market needs, the specifications need to include impact
testing from a drop from an aerial vehicle along with ground travel requirements
of slope, rubble and speed. New hardware and software will be designed to meet
these specifications. The following three control algorithms and actuation
schemes will be developed and evaluated for target specifications and tested in
simulation and in hardware for locomotion (1) Multi-cable rolling motion on
inclined surfaces, (2) Dynamic rolling using Model Predictive Control (MPC), and
(3) Deep reinforcement learning. For applications where the terrain has been
mapped, a (4) Generative path-planning algorithm will be developed. (5) Control
mechanisms for the internal sphere of the robot will be developed so that the
tensegrity robot will be able to manipulate and orient a payload of sensing
equipment (e.g., camera, ultrasound, infrared, laser, spectrometer) while
traveling on rough terrain. (6) Associated sensor validation, fusion and
estimation techniques will be developed to meet the specifications. The results
will be a proof-of-concept prototype that meets the target specifications.