* 1747506
* EAGER:  Engineering electrical synapses in a sensorimotor circuit
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Catherine von Reyn, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

As scientists work to regrow nerves and replace connections in damaged nerves,
the ability to create and direct the connection, or synapse, between the nerve
and next structure remains illusive. To date, pharmacological treatments and
neural implants show promise in generating new synaptic connections; however,
neither offers control over where synapses are established. Because a neural
circuit's function relies a precise connection, a need exists to generate
targeted synaptic connections as part of neural circuit repair. This project
focuses on how to correctly pair neurons and differentiate these connections
into functionally relevant synapses. Genetic engineering is already utilized to
determine how neural circuits assemble and generate behavior. Building on this
basic neuroscience research, this work will repurpose genetic engineering tools
to achieve a novel goal: engineering neural circuits. These results will develop
tools to precisely manipulate neural connections and establish key principles
for designing connections to have intended functional behavioral outcomes. This
will lay the groundwork for genetic therapies to restore function to injured and
diseased circuits thereby enhancing quality of life and reducing financial
burden on our healthcare system. Undergraduate students will be integrated into
the research team and a biomedical engineering learning series will be developed
for juniors at a local high school that serves at risk and underrepresented
minority students. The goal of both will be to improve interest and retention in
STEM, in particular in biomedical engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteins
that bind across a synapse, including gap junction subunits connexins, show
promise for selective pairing and electrical synapse formation. When expressed
ectopically, their homophilic interactions can generate novel connections in
vertebrate and invertebrate nervous systems. However, functional
characterization of these putative electrical synapses remains limited. Here,
the capacity for exogenous connexins (Cx36) to selectively engineer functional
synapses will be investigated within an escape circuit of Drosophila
melanogaster that contains the required genetic tractability to deliver genes to
pre- and postsynaptic candidate neurons and neural accessibility to determine
functional and behavioral consequences of engineering new connections. Synaptic
function will be assessed through immunolabeling, optogenetics, in vivo whole-
cell electrophysiology, and detailed behavioral analysis.