* 1747283
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Injectable, Enzyme-Degradable Poly(carboxybetaine) Hydrogel Formulations as Aesthetic and Surgical Tissue Fillers
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Andrew Sinclair, Taproot Medical Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project aims to develop degradable zwitterionic hydrogels
(DZH) as injectable soft tissue fillers. Fillers are used to replenish volumes
left by surgical procedures, medical disorders, trauma, or aging. There is great
need for a filler featuring superior longevity to the market-leading hyaluronic
acid (HA) products, while also exhibiting better safety and reversibility than
existing synthetic products. Zwitterionic hydrogels are uniquely biocompatible,
physiologically stable, and can be processed into tunable injectable
formulations. The key milestone targeted in this Phase I project is the
achievement of proof-of-concept DZH materials that can be selectively and safely
degraded with enzymes while maintaining their differentiating strengths:
biocompatibility, longevity, and cost-effective production. Successful
commercialization of DZH fillers will provide patients with a safe, long-
lasting, cost-effective, and reversible treatment, positioning these fillers as
a universal replacement for all currently available product lines. A disruptive
product in the multibillion-dollar aesthetic filler market would form a solid
basis for a sustainable business and ultimately enable the development and
commercialization of many next-generation biomedical
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project intends to show that DZH
formulations based on zwitterionic polymers can meet key requirements of a next-
generation injectable tissue filler. If technical targets are met, DZH products
will be transformative as the first universal, long-term, and reversible tissue
fillers for therapeutic and aesthetic applications. Specifically, their
biocompatibility, rheological properties, selective degradability and aesthetic
outcomes must meet or exceed the benchmark HA fillers, while their longevity
must show key improvement over benchmark products. The main R&amp;D activities
are: (I) synthesizing and identifying strong DZH candidates based on particular
gel network architectures; (II) demonstrating selective DZH degradability with
minimal breakdown by tissue-specific endogenous enzymes; and (III) evaluating
proof-of-concept DZH fillers to ensure they meet or exceed the biocompatibility
and viscoelasticity benchmarks of HA products. DZH biocompatibility and
selective degradation will be studied in vitro to prepare for preclinical in
vivo studies in Phase II. &lt;br/&gt;