* 1747847
* EAGER:   Diamond Delta Doped p FET
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Aristos Christou, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 07/31/2019
* USD 150,000.00

TITLE: A New Diamond Transistor for Future High Power RF Electronics and High
Voltage Switches&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical: Over the
last seven decades, the silicon technology has dominated solid state
electronics. However, the silicon-based semiconductor technology cannot handle
the power levels and switching frequencies anticipated by the next generation of
power applications. This EAGER project aims to create the prototype of high
power diamond based transistors with properties that are beyond the scope of
current devices in terms of operating frequency, power handling capacity,
operating voltage, and operating environment. Such diamond based semiconductor
devices can eliminate the majority of the power losses that currently occur
during AC-to-DC and DC-to-AC electricial conversion, operate at voltages up to
30 times higher than silicon-based devices, and operate at temperatures above
300°C, twice what silicon electronics can tolerate. These devices may
revolutionize power distribution and conditioning, allowing for a more versatile
and stable power grid with efficient access to non-traditional power sources, to
improved efficiencies for electric motor drives, and to improved microwave and
millimeter wave sources. Many of these devices will be appropriate for operation
in harsh chemical, biological, thermal, or radiological environments. This
research will provide a proof of principle for diamond-based high voltage
devices and high frequency devices and will also enable the accurate design of
diamond based FETs, which will exploit advantages of increased temperature and
voltage insensitivity of 2D structures. As a result, the research will lay the
foundation for the development of wide bandgap (WBG) semiconductor diamond
technologies, which will both outperform current Si, SiC and GaN high voltage
device characteristics and will have much higher voltage and temperature
tolerance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The present NSF EAGER research
project is to demonstrate a new transistor concept based on two dimensional hole
gas (2DHG) channels in diamond thereby extending the basic science of diamond 2D
transport channels to high-voltage devices as well as high frequency power
devices. This objective will be achieved through correlations between
experimental results with device design as well as with basic models of charge
transport. Our proposed research will investigate the fundamental device physics
of diamond based field effect transistors (FETs) for high power and high voltage
applications. These diamond based FETs will exploit multiple sub surface
nanometer thick boron ä-doped channels which have been fabricated via the
precision control of chemical vapor deposition chemistry. The proposed plan is
to achieve unique and innovative device structures through the fabrication of
two dimensional conduction channels on single crystal (100) diamond epitaxial
layers grown on diamond substrates. The research is based on the fundamental
understanding of the delta doping and carrier channel formation in diamond 2D
channel devices, and will employ the unique facilities available at the
University of Maryland. The research approach consists of the design and
fabrication of double delta doped FETs based on an optimized channel dopant
profile, as well as utilization of insulating gate materials complex dielectrics
for surface passivation. Device electrical performance will be characterized
after fabrication. Investigations on ä-doped channel FETs will also consist of
in depth device modeling and electrical and physical characterization of
performance.