* 1747138
* SBIR Phase I:  Highly Efficient Transmitter for Emerging Wireless Communication Systems in CMOS Technologies
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,08/31/2018
* Jose Silva-Martinez, Vidatronic
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2018
* USD 222,914.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will occur in the
consumer electronics industry. Recent developments in mobile computing and
wireless internet have led to an increasing demand for portable computers and
smart phones equipped with wireless local area networks (WLAN) operating with
multi-standard capabilities. The market for wireless communications systems
exceeds 6 billion units per year, and full complementary metal-oxide-
semiconductor (CMOS) transmitters promise a common technology platform to enable
multi-standard, flexible, robust, integrated, and cheaper solutions. Improving
the power efficiency and yield of high-performance power amplifiers (PAs) will
have significant impact on the efficiency, reliability, and production cost of
radio frequency (RF) transmitters, ensuring sustainable growth of the consumer
electronics industry. The PA is responsible for approximately 22% of the overall
power consumption of cellular base-stations while cooling represents 13%. For
handheld devices, the PA is responsible for around 40% of battery power while
transmitting information; hence, more efficient PAs will contribute to the
development of greener technologies. Societal benefits will include power
savings, more flexible and cheaper wireless communication
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project will focus on the design of highly-efficient linear RF transmitters
suitable for broadband transceivers implemented in deep submicron CMOS
technologies. Its specialized leverage is based on the digital control of PA
sections such that the power consumption is fully correlated with the power
delivered to the antenna, while the power gain and signal bandwidth are
accurately controlled with a simple yet efficient digital algorithm. The
research team proposes to develop a digitally-assisted linear PA architecture
coupled to the antenna through a 1:3 turns ratio transformer and an optimized
impedance matching network to achieve unique power savings of over 60% at
moderate and deep back-off power levels. The current management based PA is
strategically segmented and automatically optimized for best possible current
efficiency. The architecture is flexible and well suited for the emerging IoT
markets. For cases where the form factor is not an issue, the architecture can
be equipped with a dynamic power supply system to further optimize for power. By
incorporating these techniques, average power efficiency levels in the range of
25% at 9 dB back-off power are expected; these PAE levels surpass existing
solutions by more than 60%.