* 1747943
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Movement Ecology and Hominin Behavioral Evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Jonathan Reeves, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2019
* USD 25,153.00

Humans have shown an extraordinary ability to live and thrive in almost every
environment on the planet. Investigating past strategies that humans used to
negotiate their surroundings is critical to further understanding the origins of
this amazing adaptability. This dissertation project combines computer modeling
and stone tool analysis to understand how our hominin ancestors interacted with
their surrounding environments, providing new insights into the evolutionary
significance of human-environment interactions. The co-PI will conduct K-12 and
public science education outreach activities, and aspects of this project will
be carried out in conjunction with a long-standing field research and training
program, contributing to the training of American students from diverse
backgrounds in archaeology, geology, and
ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Archaeology has developed a variety of analytical
frameworks for documenting human-environment interactions. However, one of the
main issues that researchers face is that the archaeological record is time-
averaged, meaning that archaeological sites do not represent individual
activities but rather an aggregation of them over long time-frames. Thus, in
order to understand how past humans interacted with their environments, new
methods are needed to document meaningful patterns from aggregated traces of
human behavior. This project builds an analytical framework by which hypotheses
regarding time-averaged patterns of past human behaviors can be generated and
tested. The project combines agent-based modeling with measures of stone tool
utilization and transport to characterize hominin land use through the lens of
movement. This framework is then applied to time-averaged lithic assemblages to
characterize human land use patterns in landscapes. These data are mapped onto
raw material source and paleogeographic data to test whether documented
differences in land use patterns are the result paleoenvironmental variation.
Preliminary results of this work indicate that this project has great potential
to provide new insights into hominin ecology and evolution.