* 1747752
* Phase II Industry University Cooperative Research Center for Resource Recovery &amp; Recycling (CR3), Colorado School of Mines
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Patrick Taylor, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 12/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The U.S. Government, academia, domestic industry and the public increasingly
acknowledge the imperative that we conserve energy and natural resources while
exercising judicious stewardship of the environment. The issue of sustainability
is and should be paramount in how we design, manufacture, use, and retire the
many products consumed within the United States and throughout the world. Unlike
solar or wind energy that can be cost effectively harnessed for a long time or
agricultural products as a natural resource, inorganic materials, such as metals
and minerals, are not renewable. Therefore, the need exists for the development
of technologies to address materials recovery and recycling. Although
considerable coordinated academic research is rightly underway to meet energy
challenges, university efforts to build the basic science and technologies for
materials sustainability are less extensive and fragmented despite the prospect
for significant energy and environmental ramifications. Research supporting
materials recovery and recyclability is inherently multidisciplinary and must
respond to the needs of a multiplicity of commercial stakeholders from
throughout the supply chain. CR3 brings together four leading universities with
expertise in materials science and engineering. The industrial application of
new advanced materials will require an increase in the efficiency of materials
resource recovery and recycling to achieve a circular economy
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The advanced manufacturing technologies that are available
today do not have a natural route to implementation in industry. CR3 brings
together key constituencies in the resource recovery and recycling area to
develop comprehensive technology transfer pathways to industry. The primary
focus of CR3 is on key sectors of iron and steel, non-ferrous structural metals,
light metals, rare-earths, energy materials and photovoltaic metals, high value
refractory metals and electronic materials. Technology development addresses the
product manufacturing wastes, post-consumer wastes, instrumentation, sensors and
controls, design for disassembly and conversion of trash to treasure. There are
a number of key industry challenges in the area of resource recovery and
recycling: specifically, scarcity of feed stock materials and increasing cost of
material resources, increasing amounts of waste from industrial processes as
well as end-of-life products, need for solutions for resource recovery, reuse,
and recycling of critical materials, need for energetically favorable,
environmentally compatible and economically viable industrial processes. These
challenges are addressed by CR3 through the development of physical and chemical
processes for secondary resource sortation, beneficiation and concentration, as
well as value-extraction. Recycling technologies have widespread applications
affecting all materials manufacturing, including, metals, plastics, paper,
electronics, glass, organics, polymers &amp; chemicals, etc.