* 1747844
* Collaborative Research: Mechanisms and Predictability of Interactions between Convectively Coupled Kelvin Waves and African Easterly Waves Leading to Tropical Cyclogenesis
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Christopher Thorncroft, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 02/29/2024
* USD 358,184.00

Tropical storms and hurricanes in the Atlantic basin impact lives, the economy,
and society. While the ability to forecast the track of tropical cyclones has
improved, gaps remain in the knowledge and understanding of their formation or
genesis, which is reflected in poorer forecasts. Recent results suggest that the
African easterly waves pathway to genesis in the Atlantic Basin is influenced by
the passage of eastward-moving convectively coupled Kelvin Waves. However, a
quantitative assessment of the processes and predictability of these
interactions is lacking. This collaborative research project between the
University of Miami and the University at Albany seeks to provide such a
quantitative assessment and to seek a more definite answer to an outstanding
question in the tropical storm research: "why do some African easterly waves
develop into Tropical Cyclone (TC) and others do not?". The project is divided
into three phases. The first phase will use three decades of observational and
reanalysis data to test hypotheses on the physical mechanisms related to the
attribution of genesis or lack of genesis to convectively coupled Kelvin Waves,
on time scales of 1-3 days. The second phase will use two decades of archived
ensemble forecast data to investigate and quantify the predictability in the
context of these physical mechanisms. The third phase will extend these ideas
out to 1-2 weeks, accounting for the roles of the Madden-Julian Oscillation and
El Ni√±o and the Southern Oscillation. One novel aspect of the project is the
awareness of the need to take account of convectively coupled Kelvin Wave
amplitude and favorability of African Easterly Wave structures for genesis. A
second novel development is to use ensemble forecasts to push the boundaries of
predictability, in identifying the extent to which the complex interactions are
predictable out to 1-2 weeks, and connecting the predictability ideas to the
governing physical mechanisms and large-scale flow
regimes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will provide quantitative information
to support tropical forecasters. The research will also bridge the gap between
the weather and subseasonal prediction communities by advancing our
understanding of science and predictability beyond traditional weather time
scales, which is recognized nationally and globally as a priority. This will
lead to the identification of regimes where predictive skill of genesis and
tropical cyclone activity is high or low, thereby providing information to
forecasters and ultimately the decision makers who take actions based on a
potential tropical cyclone threat. A by-product of the research will be the
feedback provided to operational modeling centers on strengths and weaknesses of
their ensemble forecasts. Diagnostic tools developed in this research will be
shared with the research community. The project will also advance Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics education by funding two students to
pursue doctoral research, and in advancing new undergraduate and graduate
courses on tropical meteorology. An annual exchange between Miami and Albany
will enable the students to visit meteorological centers and facilities in their
reciprocal cities. Undergraduate Honors thesis projects will be developed.
Several outreach activities related to tropical cyclones, aimed at increasing
scientific literacy among decision-makers, the media and public will be
continued as part of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.