* 1747798
* Phase I IUCRC University of Oregon: Center for Big Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Joseph Sventek, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 01/31/2024
* USD 749,998.00

Recent advances in machine learning are ushering in a new era in intelligent
computing. The NSF Industry/University Collaborative Research Center for Big
Learning (CBL) at the University of Oregon (UO) aims to design novel algorithms
and develop efficient systems for deep learning applications in the era of big
data. CBL will catalyze diverse expertise of faculty members, students, industry
partners, and federal agencies to create state-of-the-art deep learning
methodologies, technologies, and applications across broad domains of business,
healthcare, and Internet-of-Things. CBL will provide training for new scientists
and graduate students, as well as a rich environment for cross-disciplinary
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of CBL is to perform pioneering
research and development in powerful deep learning algorithms, efficient
intelligent systems, and novel applications through unified and coordinated
efforts in the CBL consortium. The CBL research team at the UO includes experts
in data science, artificial intelligence, machine learning, high-performance
computing, health informatics, and bioinformatics. They will explore research
projects related to medical record analysis, health behavior prediction, natural
language processing, performance optimization, financial forecasting, and
computer vision by deploying various deep learning models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CBL is expected to have broad transformative impacts in
computational technologies, education, and society. Through research and
applications to address a broad spectrum of real-world challenges, CBL will make
significant contributions and impacts to the deep learning community. The
discoveries from CBL will amplify opportunities for new products and services of
industry in general, while delivering key techniques to CBL industry partners in
particular. As the nexus of deep learning research and applications, CBL offers
an ideal platform to nurture next-generation talents through world-class mentors
from both academia and industry, disseminate the cutting-edge technologies, and
facilitate industry/university collaborative research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
center's repository is hosted at http://nsfcbl.org. The data, code, and
documents will be organized and maintained on the CBL server for the duration of
the center plus five years. The internal code repository will be hosted at
GitLab. After the software packages are well documented and tested, they will be
released and hosted at popular public servers, such as GitHub and Bitbucket.