* 1747360
* SBIR Phase I:  Addressing the memory bottleneck in deep neural networks in cloud platforms
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,09/30/2018
* Farnood Merrikh Bayat, Mentium Technologies Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 09/30/2018
* USD 224,586.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will consist in defining the way toward an
ultra-fast and energy efficient accelerator for Machine Learning applications
deployed on cloud computing. The merging of cloud computing and Machine Learning
is shaping our everyday life experience. Examples of applications running on the
cloud and exploiting Machine Learning algorithms include data mining, natural
language processing and pattern recognition. These three together represent
cognitive computing and, due to a vast and growing number of APIs for
developers, it is becoming easier to access the computational power of the cloud
and develop new applications. This new computation potential is used by
businesses to connect data and find patterns valuable for commerce or to improve
cybersecurity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will define a new kind of hardware accelerator, able to
speed up cognitive computation by orders of magnitude while reducing energy
consumption compared with state-of-the-art processors. The proposed technology
is fast and energy efficient, but can be prone to low precision and temperature
variation sensitivity. During Phase I, the company will define the hardware
accelerator at the system level, optimizing the design for ultra-high speed and
sufficient precision to carry out the cognitive computation required. At the
same time, the effect of temperature variation and noise will be minimized
through improved design. Finally, the energy consumption of the new designs will
be estimated and compared with the overall performance of state-of-the-art
competitive architectures.