* 1747451
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Voter Demand for the Public Provision of Private Goods
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2018,10/31/2019
* Frances Rosenbluth, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 10/31/2019
* USD 24,323.00

This project investigates the rise of programs in developing democracies that
distribute government-procured private goods like televisions, laptops, and
clothes. Such programs now reach millions of beneficiaries and cost billions of
dollars each year. Critics contend that there is limited evidence that they
correct market failures or constitute an efficient redistributive mechanism.
Supporters argue that they are essential to bridging gaps left by the operation
of markets and ensure greater economic equality. This research aims to
understand if voters reward private goods programs at the ballot box, as well
the conditions under which citizens support them. The research will entail a
survey that asks citizens to choose between hypothetical programs with differing
features, such as the type of good, the value of the benefit, the impact on
other types of government expenditure, and the degree of partisan targeting. The
other major component of the research is an analysis of the electoral effects of
a program that distributed millions of free color televisions. The study will
contribute to our understanding of the political logic of governments' decisions
to publicly provide different classes of goods and how economic development
affects voter demand and political incentives for providing collective and
private goods. The data that will be collected as part of this study will be a
valuable resource for informing public policy through empirical data on citizen
preferences and the correspondence between these preferences and government
action.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study aims to understand the political economy
of in-kind redistribution in developing democracies. It examines the conditions
under which voters support and reward large government programs that distribute
consumer goods. The research hypothesizes that voters support the public
provision of private goods but that this support is conditional on program
design and implementation. A number of related theoretical propositions will be
tested using a forced-choice conjoint survey experiment in which respondents
provide stated preferences over pairs of hypothetical government programs with
randomly assigned characteristics. This design will provide insights into how
voters trade off the type and value of the benefit against features such as
eligibility criteria and possible impacts on other categories of government
spending such as healthcare, education, and infrastructure. In addition, the
proposed design will shed light on how political factors such as partisan
targeting moderate support. These data are paired with a difference-in-
differences analysis of the electoral consequences of a program that eventually
distributed over fifteen million color televisions to understand if citizens
reward such programs or if they are a relatively minor consideration in voting
decisions and an opportunity instead for politicians to forge links with firms
and interest groups. The research will improve our theoretical and empirical
understanding of how political factors shape government efforts to provide
private and public goods. It will also provide insights into the conditions
under which we are likely to observe a shift away from political clientelism and
towards programmatic competition based on the provision of collective goods in
developing democracies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.