* 1747660
* CAREER:Increasing charge separation and extraction by ferroelectric polymer induced persisting electric-field for efficient organic solar cells
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Jinsong Huang, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2019
* USD 288,041.00

Research Objectives and Approaches&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is
to boost the efficiency of organic photovoltaic devices to over 15% by
eliminating the major energy loss channels. The approach is to apply an
ultrathin ferroelectric layer at the organic/electrode interface to induce a
strong electric field into the organic semiconductor layer for efficient charge
separation and extraction. With this unique structure, there will be no need to
apply an external field to have the electric-field-induced charge extraction
persist. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;This project
provides a transformative device design that promises to increase the efficiency
of organic photovoltaic devices potentially to the thermodynamic limit. The
ferroelectric polymer is a universal dual function interfacial layer for both
low- and high-work function surface modifications. Further, this research will
bring new fundamental insight to the physics of charge photo-generation,
collection, and the origin of the open circuit voltage in organic photovoltaic
devices. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;New fundamental
understanding regarding the influence of a strong electric field on charge
dissociation and extraction will establish the theoretical base for new
applications in electric field-controlled electronic devices, including organic
light emitting diodes, excitonic solar cells, high speed photorefractive
polymers, organic bistable memory, organic photodetectors, organic transistors,
and multiferroics. This research will support outreach activities for students
diversified in age, gender, and ethnicity. This platform of learning, which
particularly targets high school students, will encourage students to consider
careers in the energy conversion engineering field and provide the PI the
experience necessary to develop into a stellar teacher-scholar.