* 1747653
* Local and Traditional Knowledge and the Role of Storytelling in Building and Sustaining Resilience in African American and Alaska Native communities
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Chie Sakakibara, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 07/31/2019
* USD 40,000.00

This award will support a workshop to explore community resilience in the face
of social and environmental change. The PI and research team from Oberlin
College proposes to do this through a participatory methodology that creates a
collaboration between community members from Africatown (Plateau), Alabama and
Utqiagvik (Barrow), Alaska and the Oberlin research team. It is the research
teams' thesis that the transmission of knowledge, inter-generationally, is key
to long-term community resilience in response to rapid environmental and social
change. Among African American communities, represented in this workshop by the
residents of Africatown, this knowledge transmission often takes the form of
storytelling and among Alaska Native communities, represented by residents of
Utqiagvik, this transmission is of Traditional Knowledge. By understanding the
relationship between resilience and storytelling and traditional knowledge the
research team proposes that community can be strengthened even when facing
extreme environmental events such as, sea level rise and storm surge flooding or
social, economic, and technological events such as, job loss due to
globalization or the BP oil spill. It is the idea of the research team that by
collaborating closely with the communities in co-producing knowledge through
this workshop on resilience in the face of rapid change they will be able to
identify key elements of the social and cultural systems that can ensure the
long-term health and well-being of many communities.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Although Africatown and Utqiagvik are geographically disparate
communities they share similar challenges to their resilience in response to
environmental and social-economic change. The PIs will hold the workshop in
Africatown, Alabama that will train local community members and their
collaborators from Utqiagvik, Alaska in social science methods and practices.
The Samuel Proctor Oral History Program at the University of Florida has been
engaged to train all workshop participants, including Oberlin students and
researchers, in best practices, methods, and ethics of community oral history,
storytelling and traditional knowledge. Using a model of knowledge co-production
in science, community members and researchers will work together to define the
research questions, choose the methodologies, and create the analytic framework
that will ultimately be turned into a long-term, community based research
project. Undergraduate students from Oberlin College will participate in
trainings and in the ongoing work of oral history. In recruiting students, the
research team has particularly focused on students underrepresented in STEM,
including students of color, women, and first-generation college students. The
conference will highlight how local knowledge embedded in oral history and
cultural traditions can offer responses to contemporary challenges.