* 1747260
* STTR Phase I:  Developing a Technological Intervention to Improve Adolescent Executive Functioning
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Amy Nassisi, Studentivity Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I Projects intends to promote
academic achievement, high school graduation and college and life preparedness
for adolescents (middle through college students) with Executive Function (EF)
deficits. EF deficits are found in a variety of neurodevelopmental and medical
disorders including Traumatic Brain Injury, Epilepsy, Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), the most common childhood behavioral disorder
affecting up to 10% of youth as well as Autism Spectrum Disorder. Youth with EF
deficits struggle to get things done and have high school graduation, college
matriculation and college graduation rates well below national norms. In
addition, these adolescents suffer from anxiety, depression, job loss, substance
use and suicide at higher rates than their peers without EF deficits. Research
supports incentive-based behavioral EF remediation for deficient populations.
But availability of research-based EF remediation support is limited. The
proposed technology aims at enabling students to develop the EF skills needed to
reach their academic potential and improve their life outcomes. The broader
impact of this research is to gather rich data that will advance the scientific
and public understanding of technology as a means of facilitating EF skills
development in adolescent populations with Executive Function deficits.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Phase I project aims to iteratively develop
an app-based EF technological intervention using user-centered design
principals. This technology innovation is in the form of a smart phone based app
that uses gamification and automation to motivate students to make structured
behavior change to learn the time and materials management, planning,
organizational and motivation skills to get their work done with help of their
support team. This Phase I project will focus on 3 Aims. First, we will assess
users' current context (EF remediation approaches and challenges) to validate
user relevance of our approach and refine where necessary for optimal usability
(Aim 1). We will then systematically evaluate the features, usability and
feasibility of the technology intervention?and make additional software design
revisions as needed to promote successful uptake (Aim 2). And we will develop a
functional prototype of the app innovation (Aim 3) tailored to the $2.3 B
Special Education software market.