* 1747961
* Workshop: Bridging the Digital and Data Divide
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Renata Rawlings-Goss, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 99,999.00

Broad and diverse adoption of data science educational programming by
institutions of higher education in the United States is essential to the future
of scientific and economic progress. By developing data science programs and
integrating data science into curricula, U.S. institutions can ensure that
graduates are better prepared for the research and industry needs of the twenty-
first century. While there are significant programs in data science under
development at research-oriented institutions of higher education, progress in
program development at primarily undergraduate, teaching-focused, and minority-
serving institutions is lagging and underrepresented in the national
conversation. Consequently, there is an emerging "Data Divide" between the
different types of institutions of higher education, which would be detrimental
both to science and to the future workforce needs of the nation. This workshop
will identify the unique challenges faced by primarily undergraduate, teaching-
focused, and minority-serving institutions in developing data science
educational programs. Topics to be addressed include instructor training,
infrastructure needs, existing and potential resources, and expertise gaps that
have a disproportionate impact on program development at such institutions. The
workshop will also stimulate discussions about the necessary resources and the
available opportunities for supporting efforts in the development of data
science programs at these types of institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data
Science education is an essential component in the continued competitiveness of
the United States on the international stage. The outcomes of this workshop will
help the community move one step closer to ensuring that data science education
is broadly accessible to a very broad cross-section of the student population
across the nation. The workshop is an important step towards ensuring that
diverse student populations across the U.S. are able to receive education in
data science education regardless of their location, gender, ethnicity,
financial need, or other demographics that may currently limit opportunities for
advancement.