* 1747603
* EAGER: High-Efficiency and Cost-Effective Electrocatalysts for the Direct Conversion of Methane to Methanol at Ambient Conditions
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Xiao-Dong Zhou, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 09/30/2020
* USD 150,000.00

Shale gas deposits contain enormous quantities of natural gas. Transporting low
density natural gas from remote shale deposit locations to its point of use is
often uneconomical, so this "stranded gas" may be flared or burned for energy
recovery on site, circumventing the need for transport. Increasing the
accessibility of this domestic energy supply would decrease fuel prices,
increase energy security, and reduce the environmental footprint of this
resource. One strategy is to extract the larger fuel molecules from natural gas,
and compress them into an easily transportable dense liquid. The majority of
natural gas is methane, though, which requires high energy to compress into
liquid form. Thus, a promising alternative strategy is the chemical conversion
of gaseous methane into liquid methanol. However, this chemical conversion is
extremely difficult using known methods, and the remote location of the shale
deposits relative to chemical manufacturing facilities increases the challenge.
This research project seeks to develop novel electrochemical catalysts that will
more efficiently, effectively, and economically convert stranded gaseous methane
into liquid methanol. Such methods are compatible with small-scale, modular,
manufacturing units that are deployable to remote locations.

This research project rationalizes the use of surface orientation and adatom
decoration of electrocatalysts to promote electrocatalytic oxidation of methane
to methanol. The use of high-index facets of metallic catalysts and the role of
mobile oxygen interstitials on oxide supports is being explored. The potential
for higher-index planes to lower the activation barrier for methane adsorption
and partial oxidation is being examined using Ni (310) and Ni (760). In-situ
Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy coupled with impedance spectroscopy is
being used to probe the role of surface facets, nonstoichiometry, and adsorption
sites in the activated chemisorption and transformation of methane to adsorbed
hydrogen and adsorbed methyl. Given the recalcitrance of methane as a chemical
reactant, successful demonstration of this process would increase the economic
feasibility of using stranded methane and reduce the environmental impact of a
vast domestic energy supply. The research project also involves training both
graduate and undergraduate students.