* 1747628
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2017 ACM Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems (ACM SenSys)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Omprakash Gnawali, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 07/31/2018
* USD 25,000.00

SenSys, ACM Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems, is a highly
selective scientific forum that has successfully created fundamental knowledge
and technologies to build the sensors and smart systems, from the wireless
sensors in homes and offices to large-scale sensors, networks, and data
analytics in smart infrastructures and cities. The conference brings together
researchers from the fields of wireless communication and networking, embedded
systems and hardware, energy harvesting and management, distributed systems and
algorithms, data management, and applications and thus is an ideal venue for
beginning researchers and PhD students to get to know the field from
disciplinary and cross-disciplinary perspectives. The goal of this project is to
provide funding for attending SenSys 2017 by PhD students who are enrolled in
the US institutions of higher learning. The project will enable students who are
not well-funded or who belong to underrepresented groups to attend SenSys. The
students will not only gain exposure to the leading researchers in the field but
also network with peers and start research collaborations as they take
leadership roles in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable
approximately 17 Ph.D. students from recognized US institution of higher
education to attend SenSys 2017 and its co-located events. A grant selection
committee will select the participants based on their financial need, research
potential, and their ability to benefit from this attendance while increasing
diversity among SenSys attendees. SenSys and the field of sensing and smart
systems will benefit from this increased diversity and engagement from the US-
based PhD students. The students will benefit from exposure to the leading
researchers in the field and with increased networking and collaboration
opportunities at SenSys.