* 1747598
* Workshop: Designing a Network for Undergraduate Biomimicry Research and Education; October 6-8, 2017, Cleveland/Akron, Ohio
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Peter Niewiarowski, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Mark Pauley
* 07/31/2018
* USD 19,840.00

This workshop will launch a network of key stakeholders from the biomimicry
community to develop and implement a shared vision for the design of an
undergraduate curriculum platform to enhance research and coordinated education
and training. This exciting interdisciplinary field is built on the premise that
biological systems can inspire new solutions to technical problems in the human
built environment which include renewable energy and access to clean water.
There are amazing sources of inspiration for design in biology (for example how
an octopus can dynamically match the three-dimensional color and texture
characteristics of its environment in milliseconds to "disappear" and how a
gecko can rapidly stick and unstick to nearly any surface) that could engage all
students and attract new talent and ways of thinking, including underrepresented
and underserved students. Despite this, current biomimicry research and
education is mostly conducted on an ad hoc basis and there is a general lack of
collaboration and coordination among sites that have developed formal and
informal programs. The interdisciplinary nature of the field (at the
intersection of biology, engineering, design, and business) relies on
translation and collaboration that is not typically taught in individual
disciplines. A successful biomimicry network could leverage a broad array of
research platforms at the participating sites (e.g., post-doctoral, industrial,
graduate and REU platforms) and help train the next generation of scientists at
the multiple interfaces that contribute to biomimicry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop will be led by the University of Akron Biomimicry Research and
Innovative Center and will include representatives from Great Lakes Biomimicry,
Plant Biomechanics Group (Botanic Garden of Freidburg University), NASA Glenn
Research Center, Cleveland Institute of Art, the Biomimicry Center (Arizona
State University), and the Center for Biologically Inspired Design (Georgia
Institute of Technology). The intensive, collaborative 2.5 day workshop will
engage participants in a creative design process of brainstorming and
presentation sessions addressing research platforms and undergraduate curricula.
The discussion will also cover biomimicry education philosophy and standards and
the roles of a national network in defining and executing undergraduate training
in biomimicry. Outcomes and deliverables of the workshop will immediately inform
pedagogy and degree programs poised to advance biomimicry as a scalable and
repeatable paradigm for innovation and sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is being funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of
Biological Infrastructure as part of their efforts to address the challenges
posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).