* 1747193
* SBIR Phase I:  Cloud Based Laboratory for Remote Experiential Learning in Robotics
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Raghav Mahalingam, Apptronik
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2018
* USD 224,924.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable students and trainees to take
state-of-the-art robotics laboratory classes from anywhere in the world. The
proposed learning system is aimed to be incorporated as online courses, with the
potential of being attended by more than a million students. The addressable
market represents hundreds of millions of dollars considering online courses,
secondary schools and industrial training. Laboratory courses in colleges and
high schools require students to be physically present next to the equipment.
With the proposed remote robotics laboratory, students and trainees can take
laboratory classes just turning on their mobile devices or computers. Most
importantly, the students can conduct the laboratory tutorials anywhere across
the globe and at any time. This technology can be transformative for accessing
expensive laboratory equipment not present in many institutions or companies.
The system we provide consists of a robotic device currently being used inside
NASA robots. Therefore, students using the remote laboratory will learn the use
of real-world, state-of-the-art equipment that can be highly valuable for their
job careers in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will solve
two key problems in online learning. First, no known commercially available
laboratory online course exists that provides students remote hands-on
experimentation. The second is that the same content is delivered to all
students regardless of their current understanding level. Distributed
communications, robotic software and web framework technologies will be
integrated to provide access to state-of-the-art laboratory equipment. The
second key innovation is the delivery of content adaptively tailored to
individual needs. The innovation, consists of three key components. A web
framework that connects equipment to servers and personal mobile devices, an
intelligent content tutoring system, scheduling usage times and student
evaluation regarding skill acquisition and assessments. The team anticipates
that being remotely located will be slightly less effective than being next to
the equipment but superior than learning theory only.