* 1747780
* Planning IUCRC George Mason University: Center for Hardware and Embedded System Security and Trust (CHEST)
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Houman Homayoun, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Perkins
* 01/31/2019
* USD 14,994.00

Integrated circuit and embedded hardware devices are critical to most modern
military and industrial systems for defense, energy, healthcare, banking,
communication, transportation, and other sectors. These devices are more
vulnerable than ever to malicious tampering by untrusted entities, with threats
over a broad range of attack vectors. Malicious functionality can be added to
the devices during the design process, fabrication, or assembly, leading to
compromised systems, often without detection. This collaborative effort seeks to
further the national defense by developing novel methodologies and technologies
that enhance trust and security of these devices and their respective
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Center will enable researchers and
practitioners from diverse areas -- integrated circuits, architecture,
cryptography, system safety and resilience, etc. -- to position device security
as a coherent, collaborative discipline. It will be a hub for industry-focused
research and a repository for related data. It will foster dialog to promote
advances across disciplinary boundaries. The site will lead collaborative
efforts in security of modern computer architecture platform deploy in Internet
of Things and Cloud environments, as well as application-specific integrated
circuit (ASIC) and field-programmable gate array (FPGA) security. It will adopt
advanced machine-learning solutions, to understand the behavior of hardware
attacks at various level of abstraction, to design effective defense mechanisms
at the heart of the architecture and hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center
will influence the design, protection, and resilience of cyber physical systems
from vulnerabilities associated with device security. It will also help with
workforce development needed for industry, government, and military. The Center
will disseminate research results and synthesized theories on device security
through both professional/scholarly activities and courses taught at the six
sites. The results are expected to bring a significant return on investment, in
terms of improving the readiness of industry for emergent conditions and
improving resilience to threats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborative group
for the Industry-University Cooperative Research Center for Hardware and
Embedded System Security and Trust is composed of George Mason University,
Northeastern University, University of Connecticut, University of Texas at
Dallas, University of Virginia, and Wright State University. The collaborators
host a website at https://www.vdl.afrl.af.mil/programs/PG_CHEST_IUCRC with
meeting materials, program information, publications, etc. The website is made
available indefinitely or until the Center transitions to the next phase.