* 1747623
* EAGER:  Collaborative Research:   Group Dynamics and Success in Science and Research
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Brian Uzzi, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 08/31/2019
* USD 13,506.00

This project investigates how to foster the best science, given that most
scientific research is done by teams. The research investigates human behavioral
patterns that indicate the production of impactful research and the ability to
attract grant funding. The objective is to discern characteristics of how
research communities develop, form and operate to introduce novel ideas with
significant impact. Results make the point that scientific success transcends
institutional group boundaries and is a matter of larger communities that
coalesce and have a high turnover of novel topics and members. The key objective
of this project is a first quantification of patterns of human group dynamics
and diversity of scientific content on scientific success in terms of garnering
grant support and providing impactful science. Since NSF supports research at
many different scientific frontiers, our results may allow the detection of
patterns that are valid across many scientific fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project models a corpus of millions of research papers, integrating grant
information of diverse scientific fields and scientific content. Research
publications are used to construct co-authorship networks in different time
windows and scientific fields. Groups in such networks will be detected by the
use of contemporary clustering methods that will point to fission/fusion
patterns of groups. Project data covering the last 25 years of funding from the
National Science Foundation (NSF) and will be integrated with content
information from the body of research publications. Results make the point that
scientific success transcends institutional group boundaries and is a matter of
larger communities that coalesce, split and have a high turnover of novel topics
and members.