* 1747289
* SBIR Phase I:  Helping Students Acquire 21st Century Skills Through Immersive Group STEM Simulations
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Anthony Carr, Discovery Simulations, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will automate an
experiential simulation learning lab by funding the technical conversion from
what is essentially a hardwired product requiring a dedicated lab available to
schools within a limited geographic area to a nationally available online
product. Additionally, the funding will drive the technological innovation
necessary to maintain the immersive, experiential nature of the existing
prototype. The project will also allow for research on the underlying assumption
of the product: will students be more engaged during content instruction if they
are aware that they will be asked to apply their learning in an upcoming
simulation? And, if so, will the improved engagement carry over to improved
performance on summative assessments? Since the unique nature of the product
places it in the middle of the educational technology continuum between digital
content and assessment, using current market trends to estimate its sales
potential is difficult. However, offering the product online will dramatically
decrease its current price point, making the product economically attractive to
thousands of teachers and schools across the United States seeking curriculum
that engages students who learn best in a team-oriented environment and fosters
skill in collaborative, multi-disciplinary problem solving.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies in the
technological innovation that will convert the labor intensive, hardware
dependent prototype into an automated online product while maintaining its
immersive, engaging qualities. The main objective of the innovation is to create
a powerful tool for the classroom teacher that can be implemented in a large lab
or on a single computer. A corresponding objective is to determine how
effectively the tool engages students in the subject matter and develops real
life skills that are in high demand in the 21st century workplace. Teachers will
be able to choose from three distinct platforms: Mission Control, a space
exploration simulation; Leadership Summit, a global policy making simulation;
and Ecosphere, a simulation of areas hidden to the human eye. While being
technologically sophisticated, the product also needs to be simple to install
and to require minimal training to operate. The product will incorporate
multiple controls so that teachers can monitor their students? interactions and
manage their progress for optimum effect. Finally, the innovation will also make
use of the latest developments in commercially available sound and lighting
enhancement products giving teachers control of the timing and level of external
sounds and lights.