* 1747201
* STTR Phase I:  Metal-Free Production of Olefin Metathesis Polymers and Resins
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,04/30/2019
* John Goldstone, Boydston Chemical Innovations, Incorportated
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 04/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I Project will develop a metal-
free route to the production of high performance plastics and composites.
Specifically, this project focuses on a unique class of materials based upon a
thermoset that displays high strength-to-weight ratio and exceptional fracture
toughness. A challenge to broader adoption of these materials stems from the
current reliance on metal-based reagents and catalysts for their production. The
metals impose a significant recurring cost of production, show sensitivity to
air, and remain as contaminants in the final products. This innovation provides
the first metal-free access to such materials. Additionally, the unique metal-
free catalyst system is capable of producing resin and polymer feedstocks that
are not available from metal-based reagents, and may offer advantages in
processing and performance. The projected commercial impacts of the innovation
will be enhanced material performance, lower cost products, and broadened (new)
fields of use. The existing market is estimated to be $578M with 4.9% annual
growth through 2023.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project
is the invention and development of the first metal-free route to olefin
metathesis polymers and oligomers. Prior art has demonstrated on small scale the
ability to use a unique organocatalyst to produce polymer and resin feedstocks
that are easily processable into high performance thermosets and composites. The
organocatalyst approach is a divergence from all previous methods of producing
materials via olefin metathesis and therefore warrants validation and
optimization toward commercial scale-up. The Phase I research aims will include
(1) scale-up through the design and implementation of flow reactor technologies,
(2) mechanical analyses and product specification sheets for thermoset
prototypes, and (3) evaluation of new resins and polymers for use in fiber
reinforced composite materials. The results should be useful commercially and
academically.