* 1747527
* Noyce Northeast Regional Conferences III
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Lisa Gonsalves, SUNY College at Cortland
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,624,254.00

In recognition of the necessity to support teachers as professionals, the Robert
Noyce Teacher Scholarship program appreciates the need and opportunity to bring
Noyce Teacher Scholars, and the university faculty that support them, together
for the purpose of continued networking. Therefore, the Noyce program supports
this structured opportunity for networking, growing in depth of content
knowledge and pedagogical acumen, and challenging each other to work boldly to
improve the teaching and learning of STEM disciplines in high-need school
districts. The Northeast Regional Conferences III project, funded by the Noyce
program, will support three years of Noyce regional conferences to serve and
bring together all Noyce projects in the northeast area. Each year, individuals
(project administrators and Noyce scholars) from 75 projects will receive
financial support through this grant to participate in the conferences which
will be held in a different city each year (Brooklyn, NY, Cambridge, MA, and
Albany, NY). The project will work to provide opportunities for participants to
learn about practices which will enable them to create equitable learning spaces
for their students and communities. Among the entities that will provide
workshops at the conferences are the American Museum of Natural History (AMNH)
in New York and the Alan Alda Center for Communicating Science, located at Stony
Brook University; the latter will develop teacher specific curriculum and deploy
staff to conduct the workshops on effective communication of technical content.
The overarching intent of the conferences is to advance content knowledge and
pedagogical practices of STEM teachers through professional networking,
presentations, and workshops. The conferences will enable participants to learn
about, discuss and practice the latest methods for teaching STEM content and
provide direct training in topics including how to improve communication skills,
leadership, and how to better use informal STEM learning
centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this conference project are informed
by the evaluation of past Northeast Regional Conferences which have occurred
since 2012. All three conferences will focus on the theme of Successful Teaching
in High-Need Schools. The project goals include to: (i) continue to build a
community of Noyce project leaders, teachers and scholars who collaborate to
improve teaching and learning in high-need schools; provide exceptional
professional development opportunities for Noyce Scholars and Noyce awardee
personnel; (ii) advance the knowledge base of teaching STEM in high-need
schools; (iii) explore challenges and successes of long term Noyce projects to
help create a blueprint of success for future programs; and (iv) explore the use
of informal STEM learning as a resource to assist in engagement and recruitment
of future STEM educators. Online mini-conferences will be held with
representatives from regional Noyce projects and their school districts to
collaboratively plan and organize the conference each year. Each Noyce project
in the northeast region will be supported in bringing a team of four
participants, consisting of one faculty/project team member and three Noyce
Teacher Scholars. Other conference participants will include in-service
teachers, Noyce program alumni, local school district leaders, and conference
and keynote speakers. Noyce Scholars and other stakeholders in teaching and
learning of mathematics and science who live near the conference each year will
be accommodated to attend at least one day of the regional conference. The
evaluation will examine both the implementation and impact of the conferences on
the participants while at the conference as well as measure impacts on the
participants after they leave the conferences. The work of those engaged in this
professional networking enterprise has the potential for broader impact as it
advances teaching and learning in high-need school districts and promotes the
continuous progress of Noyce Teacher Scholars as they persist in the teaching
profession.