* 1747801
* EAGER: Collaborative Approach to the Documentation of Endangered Languages in Linguistically Diverse Locales
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Peter Cole, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/28/2022
* USD 226,457.00

There are an estimated 7,000 languages in the world, and half of those not
expected to survive into the next century. One challenge this presents is the
urgent need to document languages in places where local people are shifting to
national or other languages. Another challenge is finding sufficient number of
trained documenters, especially in places that have many local and regional
languages. As a result, there are many languages that have not been documented
and whose survival is threatened. This constitutes a serious potential problem
for the scientific study of the range of variation found in human language. This
project will capitalize on a region where many young, educated people are taking
a greater interest in their local and regional languages, and have the potential
to play a major role in documenting these languages. It will increase the human
resources side of this documentation bottleneck by partnering local citizen
scientists who are not professional linguists or documenters of language with
graduate linguistics students. Investing in the human capital takes the risk
that this approach is depending on continued interest after the project in
documenting these endangered languages. If this investment is successful, it
could have a major impact on scientific knowledge for an area with 10% of the
world's languages. Broader impacts include international research and training
for graduate students, increased attention to endangered local languages, and
the training of citizen scientists who participate in the production of
knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, led by a team of
linguists from the University of Delaware and partner linguists in Indonesia and
Japan will test out a new way to increase the involvement of young Indonesians
in the documentation of their languages by creating teams of Indonesians (who
are native speakers of these endangered languages) and American graduate
students who hope to specialize in language documentation. Aside from the
national language, Indonesian, linguists have only just begun the task of
documenting Indonesian languages (recording an annotated sample and describing
the language). Indonesia is estimated to have 719 or more languages, and east
Indonesia is particularly rich with undocumented languages. The American and
Indonesian members of the teams differ in terms of their strengths in the skills
relevant to language documentation, the Indonesians having much stronger
language skills and an understanding of the cultural context, and the Americans
having greater technical training in linguistics and language documentation. By
combining Americans and Indonesians in teams, it is hoped that the team will
combine the strengths of the two groups, and, thus, will be much more successful
in language documentation than either group could be individually. The project
will provide field experiences in East Indonesia for two groups of
American/Indonesian teams in two successive years. If this methodology does in
fact seriously increase productivity and quality of documentation, it may
constitute a new model for language documentation that can be applied with
success to other parts of the world. Project materials will be archived at
PARADISEC.