* 1747250
* SBIR Phase I:  An Engineering Platform for Adaptive Medicines
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Philip Lee, SENTI BIOSCIENCES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to develop a cell-based platform technology that can
sense inflammatory sites and respond by producing anti-inflammatory factors to
treat autoimmune diseases. There are more than 80 types of autoimmune disease
with more than 23.5 million Americans affected. Autoimmune diseases are the
number one cause of morbidity for women in the U.S., and one of the top 10
causes of death for women under 65 years old. The annual healthcare burden of
these diseases is estimated at more than $100 billion in the U.S. alone. Current
treatments for autoimmune diseases are effective for some patients, but a
majority either do not respond or become refractory. Furthermore, standard drugs
result in systemic immune suppression, which can cause severe and chronic side
effects. Hence, there is substantial market need for anti-inflammatory drugs
that can act locally at the site of inflammation, and deliver the "right dose at
the right time" depending on the severity of the flare. If successful, the
adaptive cell therapy platform being developed in this proposal will serve as
the basis for a next-generation therapy to existing biologics.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a cell-based technology that
localizes to a site of inflammation, senses inflammatory signals, and triggers
the release of anti-inflammatory agents. The substantial technical and clinical
progress made in recent years in synthetic biology and cell therapies is
enabling development of this type of product. The goal is to design and optimize
synthetic gene circuits to program cells to locally sense inflammatory signals
such as TNFalpha and release anti-TNF drugs. The plan is to introduce these
circuits into adult stem cells that have been used safely in numerous clinical
trials against autoimmune diseases and have a well-established commercial
development path. The engineered cells will be tested in culture to show
input/output response to different levels of TNFalpha, and then tested in mouse
models of disease. If successful, lead candidates will be further developed in a
Phase II application.