* 1747207
* SBIR Phase I:  Secure eXtreme Communication : Hybrid Co-Processor Device for IoT Secure Communication
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Juan Rincon, Tamosi, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 01/31/2019
* USD 221,880.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the ability to address secure communications
with virtually no overhead at reasonable cost. The asynchronous engine developed
in this program will enable robust encryption and decryption while offering
improvements in power efficiency, data throughput and security. According to
SDM, the market for encryption and decryption technology could be as high as
$38.5 billion by 2020. Additionally, there is a recognized need for encryption
and authentication of power and chemical/process plants in the U.S., currently
dangerously underserved. The initial market is estimated to be $270M and the
serviceable addressable market is $2.7B. This program's primary focus will be on
the asynchronous engine for the industrial and data center industries with a
total market of $27B. In addition, the proposed technology will be flexible
enough to be incorporated into encryption-decryption products in many other
industries. These include consumer goods and services, such as mobile
communications devices, entertainment and transportation (vehicles,
airplanes).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will address the need for cyber security for Internet-of-Things
(loT) systems using an innovative approach: an asynchronous engine using chaotic
functions to generate an infinite length key for encryption and decryption.
During the past few decades, information has emerged as the most valuable asset
for both individuals and corporations. Cyber-attacks no longer exclusively
target military or large enterprises; everyone from private citizens to
businesses to governments requires secure communications. The methods of
encryption rely on digital schemes to encrypt and decrypt messages using
general-purpose CPUs and software; which means that loT devices impend hacking
of information, system function, corporate profits, and national security. Our
unique approach will include a discrete-logic program with reconfigurable
chaotic oscillators loaded into a field programmable gate array (FPGA). This
hybrid system will be tested with different loT devices and network
configurations. The long-term goal of the hybrid encryption-decryption engine is
to build a hardware encryption device to secure peer-to-peer communication. The
innovative solution will allow the attached device to execute much faster than
current solutions of similar complexity while reducing or eliminating overhead,
and allowing one-time pad encryption.