* 1747322
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Traditional Institutions and the Modern State
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2021
* Thad Dunning, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2021
* USD 22,231.00

Mayors of some rural municipalities in Latin America have only limited revenue
to produce infrastructural projects, but they can sometimes compensate for this
dearth of resources by partnering with leaders of communal landholding
institutions, or communities which operate at the sub-district level. Community
leaders can mobilize unpaid labor from community members through traditional
institutions called "labor corvees." Through collaboration with these leaders,
mayors can provide public works more efficiently by avoiding the highest input
cost for infrastructure projects' labor, and using the resources of the
municipality, community leaders can provide higher quality public works for
their communities. Despite the potential benefits for both sides, such
cooperation has become increasingly rare. This project examines the conditions
under which these cooperative arrangements emerge, focusing specifically on the
strategic interaction between community leaders and mayors. The proposed
research contributes to a long-standing debate in political science on whether
traditional and state institutions substitute for or complement one another.
This research develops a theoretical framework that reconciles these two
approaches, showing the conditions under which states and traditional
institutions are complements as opposed to substitutes. In contrast to much of
the existing literature on this topic, which relies heavily on qualitative and
observational data, the work uses field experiments and natural experiments to
evaluate the theory. More broadly, the results of this research will shed light
on causes of intra-district inequality. Communities have varying levels of
access to the local government and its resources, and this project will shed
light on important sources of this inequality. A deeper understanding of these
dynamics may assist central governments globally in targeting programs and
resources to areas that are not normally prioritized by, or accessible to, local
state officials.

This project examines the conditions under which states reinforce or undermine
traditional institutions. An early literature on the subject argued that state
institutions would either crowd out or mostly disrupt traditional institutions.
A separate literature, which is more recent, has argued that traditional and
state institutions are complementary, and that through cooperation or
delegation, state officials can take advantage of opportunities presented by
traditional institutions. This project develops a theoretical framework that
attempts to reconcile these two approaches by examining when cooperative
relationships emerge between state officials and leaders of traditional
institutions. To explore this question, the study uses two main strategies.
First, it exploits a natural experiment from early twentieth century in Peru to
test how variation in initial exposure to state institutions affected the long-
term persistence of traditional institutions of unpaid labor. Second, the study
uses a regression kink design with contemporary data to examine when mayors
direct state resources to traditional institutions of unpaid labor. To
supplement these analyses of main effects and to test for mechanisms, the author
relies on a multi-method strategy, which includes archival research, interviews
with state officials and community leaders, a field experiment with over 100
mayors, and a conjoint experiment and behavioral game with over 300 current and
former community presidents.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.