* 1747589
* Workshop: Support for Conferences and Mentoring of Underrepresented Groups in Political Methodology
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Jeffrey Lewis, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2018
* USD 110,328.00

This project supports the Society for Political Methodology's efforts to support
underfunded graduate students, expand mentoring and networking efforts for women
and members of underrepresented groups, as well as to develop new inclusive
programs for making the subfield more accessible to groups with historically
lower participation in the activities of the subfield. In addition, the project
also supports providing undergraduate students with the tools and counseling
needed to pursue political methodology in graduate school. During the award
period the project will: (1) ensure that qualified, but insufficiently-funded
graduate students can attend and participate in our highly successful Summer
methodology meetings, (2) continue holding small thematically oriented meetings
that emphasize particular technical skills and foster a high level of networking
and mentoring,(3) continue a series of small meetings for women methodologists
that deliberately mix senior leaders in the subfield with young, emerging
scholars who can benefit substantially from such close personal interaction,
and, (4) providing one on one interaction between undergraduate students and
political methodologists with the goal of preparing undergraduates to do
graduate work in political methodology. This includes maintaining and developing
multiple venues for presenting, discussing, and advancing quantitative methods
in political science, with a direct focus on finding, mentoring, and enabling
under-represented groups in political methodology. Since all of the programs and
initiatives in this proposal are targeted at individuals in these circumstances,
the effect is to dramatically widen the access to the intellectual breadth of
methodology. The summer meeting is well known in the discipline for faculty-
student interaction, network formation between junior and senior faculty, and
revealing the process of creating new knowledge in quantitative political
science.

Methodology plays a special role in the large, diverse field of political
science, since it reaches across other areas of research in the discipline, with
a history of providing knowledge and tools that help researchers who are not
themselves self identified as methodologists. Thus the planned investment in
graduate students and increased inclusion of underrepresented groups from this
support will have an impact that stretches across the discipline. In addition,
the techniques developed and presented at political methodology conferences has
been of use to a wide variety of users from scholars in other social sciences to
people in the private sector to analysts working for various government
agencies.