* 1747313
* SBIR Phase I:  High Rate Composite Tooling
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,09/30/2018
* Zachary Wing, Advanced Ceramics Manufacturing
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop new low
cost, high performance tooling materials for composite manufacturing. The use of
advanced fiber reinforced composites in aircraft has become a necessity to
achieve higher performance and greater fuel efficiencies. Boeing?s 787 and
Airbus?s A350 are two such aircraft that exemplify the push to increase
composite content above 50% by weight. There is a similar push in other
transportation vehicles as well. A large opportunity exists for RTM process
technology to reduce costs and streamline composite manufacturing operations.
Phase I results will have a large impact on the composites industry through cost
reduction and manufacturing efficiency gains. It will allow a broader
manufacturing base to produce composite parts. Society will see benefits through
the broader use of fuel efficient composites in air and land based vehicles. The
technology developed can generate $10-$20M in annual revenue within 5 years of
the program end. This effort will also foster collaboration between Advanced
Ceramics Manufacturing and large aerospace manufacturers. Undergraduates at the
University of Arizona and local high school students will have an opportunity to
work on the project. Results of this research will be disseminated in
multidisciplinary conferences and journals.

The intellectual merit of this project is developing low cost materials and
manufacturing processes that enable composite materials to be produced in high
rate resin transfer molding (RTM). Compared to autoclave based processes, RTM
offers several key advantages. This includes: high internal and external
geometric complexity, less waste, lower volatile emissions, higher production
rates, and excellent surface finish. However, the injection of high pressure ?
high temperature resin presents a tooling challenge. Tooling can be a limiting
factor for utilizing RTM as the preferred manufacturing route. A large
opportunity exists for new tooling technology that can withstand RTM conditions
and be easily extracted from the composite after the cure cycle. A soluble RTM
capable material will allow RTM applications to grow and reduce the cost of
composite manufacturing. The project will develop a new soluble binder-aggregate
system that can withstand all RTM process conditions. The results of the Phase I
will demonstrate a low cost RTM compatible tooling system that can be formed at
high rate and used in high rate composite RTM cycles.