* 1747096
* SBIR Phase I:  A scalable high-throughput cell engineering platform
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Paulo Garcia, Kytopen Corp
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is the development a scalable, automated, genetic
transformation platform that is 10,000X faster than the current state-of-the-
art. The fields of synthetic biology and genetic engineering are currently
limited by the ability to re-program microorganisms with foreign DNA. There have
been significant advances in the synthesis of DNA, screening of genetically
engineered microorganisms, and bioinformatics. However, the technology used to
deliver DNA and perform genetic transformation has not advanced in a similar
way. Phase I of this SBIR will result in a prototype high-throughput genetic
transformation platform to demonstrate the utility of the system. This system
will allow genetic engineers to more rapidly develop microorganisms for the
production of bioengineered chemicals and materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a high-throughput, automated platform
for genetic transformation of bacteria using a proprietary flow-through
electroporation technology that is fast, reliable, and scalable. A key step in
genetic engineering of cells is to introduce the foreign DNA that re-programs
the cell. Electroporation, cell permeabilization using pulsed electric fields,
is the most efficient and widespread method to deliver DNA into microorganisms
for this application. State-of-the-art electroporation involves cuvettes that
expose the cells and DNA to uniform electric fields. However, this process is
currently slow, labor-intensive, and expensive. The proposed technology can be
automated by augmenting existing liquid handling robots, and, when operated in
parallel, may improve the genetic transformation rate by up to 10,000X compared
to current methods. This will represent a paradigm shift in areas dependent upon
genetic transformation where DNA delivery using electroporation is currently a
major bottleneck. Ultimately, the goal is to address the need for a high-
throughput genetic transformation platform to accelerate innovation in synthetic
biology.