* 1747183
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Control in Authoritarian States
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Sarah Lee, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2019
* USD 23,550.00

Why do authoritarian states choose to limit religious freedom? What explains the
Chinese Communist Party (CCP)'s decision to repress certain Christian churches
while allowing other Christian churches to operate? Currently, the CCP
officially permits Christian churches to operate contingent on registration with
the government. However, recent accounts reveal that the CCP has repressed both
registered and unregistered churches, suggesting that registered churches are
not safe from repression, and not all unregistered churches are targets of
repression. The CCP's position as both the guarantor and repressor of religious
freedom calls into question which aspects of religion the CCP finds permissible
or threatening. Despite the broad relevance and timely importance, this topic
has remained largely unaddressed due to China's restrictive environment. Through
intensive fieldwork in China, this project seeks to explain the thought process
behind the CCP's selective treatment of churches, thereby shedding light onto
both the Party's broader political objectives and the decentralized decision-
making process of the authoritarian state. At a broader level, this project
speaks to historical legacies, state-society relations, human rights, and
international relations.

Why do authoritarian states choose to limit religious freedom? The CCP's
position as both the guarantor and repressor of religious freedom calls into
question which aspects of religion the CCP finds permissible or threatening.
This project addresses these questions by explaining the variation in the CCP's
treatment of Protestant churches in China. It examines how local threats
(domestic factors) and the concern for foreign influence (international factors)
explain the Party's repression of Protestant churches. Due to China's
restrictive environment, studies on this topic have suffered from limits in data
collection and research methodology. Through a combination of interviews,
surveys, and archival research in China, this project fills this gap by, first,
developing a comprehensive, on-the-ground index of government treatment of
churches, and second, collecting observations of domestic and international
factors that may influence the CCP's treatment of churches. Understanding which
churches the government chooses to repress sheds light onto the Party's
objectives and the decentralized decision-making process of the authoritarian
state. In addition, the project highlights the topic of religion, which itself
has often been mistreated and underemphasized in existing political science.
This project ambitiously, but justifiably, aims to fill important gaps in
literature by building upon existing knowledge and paving new intellectual and
methodological roads through intensive field research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.