* 1747731
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: The early evolution of lamp shells and relatives (brachiopods) using an integrated approach combining genomics and fossils
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Erik Sperling, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Schneider
* 08/31/2020
* USD 120,249.00

Lamp shells and relatives (brachiopods) are marine animals that are one of the
world's oldest forms of multicellular organisms. Although no longer numerous
today, brachiopod species were a dominant component of marine ecosystems 540-250
million years ago. Because of their mineralized shells, brachiopods have a high
chance of being preserved as fossils, and have one of the most complete fossil
records of any animal group. This project aims to solve a long-standing debate
regarding how different brachiopod groups are related to each other and to other
animals. Living brachiopods from North America, Croatia, Japan, New Zealand, and
several other localities around the world will be sampled for genetic material
that will be used to reconstruct evolutionary relationships among brachiopods.
These genetic data will then be combined with data from their rich fossil record
to test whether rates of evolution were higher during the Cambrian period than
during more recent time periods. Several workshops will be organized to train a
new generation of early career scientists in a diversity of genomic and
paleontological methods. This project will also develop new instructional videos
and accompanying lesson plans designed to teach high school science students how
to build earth science content from a biological foundation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Brachiopods are amongst the first mineralized metazoans to
appear in the fossil record during the Cambrian, yet agreement about the
phylogenetic relationships among these early forms is still unknown. While the
brachiopod fossil record will ultimately be key to determining character
homology and polarity during the evolution of the distinctive brachiopod body
plan, correctly reading this record has been difficult due to disagreement about
relationships among the living clades. This project will use an integrated
approach to understand the phylogeny of brachiopods and macroevolutionary
patterns of early animal evolution. First, a widespread fieldwork campaign will
collect brachiopod specimens suitable for high-quality RNA extraction and
transcriptome sequencing. These data will form the basis for the heart of this
study: the first phylogenomic study of brachiopods, which will result in a
robust phylogenetic framework for the modern clades. Second, a comprehensive
morphological database for living and fossil brachiopods will be constructed and
calibrated using a molecular clock. These molecular and morphological data
sources will be combined to test hypotheses of morphological and molecular
evolution during the rapid diversification of form during the Cambrian
radiation.