* 1747887
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of lignin-based biodegradable plastic alloys via solvent free reactive extrusion
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Tony Bova, MOBIUS PBC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate the
ability to create a new family of biobased and biodegradable polymers produced
from agricultural and forestry waste streams that have the potential to mitigate
landfill-bound, single-use plastics prevalent in agricultural operations. In
conventional agricultural operations, farmers use plastic mulch films to block
weeds and retain moisture in the soil, ultimately increasing crop yields.
Unfortunately, the non-degradable plastics that are used must be removed after
harvest and sent to a landfill as they are not recyclable due to contamination
by soil and pesticides, leading to significant labor and disposal costs and
increasing environmental burden. In this project, lignin polymer alloys are
investigated as an innovative biodegradable plastic platform which can be used
as an alternative to conventional materials that are not recyclable. Agriculture
films represent a global market of $2.5 billion. Other attractive market
opportunities include agricultural containers ($5 billion), garbage bags ($10
billion), and packaging ($115 billion). Lignin as a renewable feedstock is an
excellent candidate for low cost, biodegradable plastics. Successful
demonstration of commercial-scale uses for lignin is vital for the emerging
biorefinery industry, and a primary task to secure the energy and materials
future for the US.

The intellectual merit of this project addresses the need for low-cost, biobased
plastics to replace petroleum derived materials, while ensuring a closed-loop
lifecycle that does not generate financial and environmental burden due to waste
accumulation. To date, lignin-based polymers have been prohibitively expensive
due to the need for extensive solvent-based modification and separations
processes. The objective of this research project is to demonstrate the
production of lignin-polymer alloys with: 1) unmodified lignin contents of 50%
or higher through solvent-free, high shear melt processing; 2) enhanced
interfacial surface area for material durability; 3) mechanical properties near
or exceeding that of low-density polyethylene; and 4) biodegradability under
both ambient soil and thermophilic composting conditions. The expected technical
results will be production of at least 1 optimal formulation meeting the above
conditions identified as suitable for use in agricultural mulch film
applications. If all 4 of these are achieved, further research in a subsequent
Phase II award will allow for demonstration of scaled manufacturing of this new
family of sustainable biomaterials and has the potential to lead to some of the
first commercially viable lignin-based plastics in the US for use in
agricultural plastic applications and beyond.