* 1747436
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant in Political Science: Representation and Political Support in the Face of Inequality
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Gregory Saxton, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2019
* USD 21,897.00

High levels of economic inequality challenge the core principles of democracy
and pose major challenges to the deepening and strengthening of democratic
regimes. This project investigates the impact of economic inequality on
political support and representation in the Americas, a region with the highest
levels of inequality in the world. It asks: Who gets meaningful representation
in a context of inequality; What policies do blue-collar and white-collar
politicians promote in office to address inequality; and How do inequality and
working class representation shape people's attitudes about democracy and
representation? Evidence shows that high levels of economic inequality reduce
citizens' trust in government and support for democracy, and the continued
exclusion of the poor and working class have led to party system collapses and
the rise of undemocratic populist leaders in a number of countries throughout
the Americas. This research advances democracy promotion by investigating the
conditions under which inequality undermines popular support for democratic
governments. Moreover, this research emphasizes the importance of political
elites' class backgrounds and attitudes about inequality for shaping citizens'
satisfaction with democracy and support for egalitarian policies. An implication
of this research is that even in a context of economic inequality, democratic
governments can increase political support among citizens by ensuring that
economic policies are made via fair and transparent procedures, and that all
citizens are given meaningful voice through
representation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the specific
circumstances under which economic inequality erodes political support and
undermines democratic representation. Although prior research has demonstrated a
clear connection between high levels of inequality and decreased political
support, it is unclear why citizens blame the government for inequality, and
which groups of citizens dislike inequality the most. This research theorizes
and tests the causal mechanisms linking inequality and political support. It
applies social psychology research, as well as fairness and equity theories, to
the study of political support and hypothesizes that citizens rely on
information about distributive fairness (fairness of economic outcomes) as well
as non-economic information about the fairness of government policies and
procedures, when evaluating the political system. Additionally, the research
project incorporates an overlooked elite perspective into studies of inequality
and political support. Although prior research on this topic focuses almost
exclusively mass public opinion, this project theorizes that ordinary citizens'
perceptions of inequality and fairness, as well as their subsequent evaluations
of the political system, are shaped by the attitudes and behaviors of political
elites. The researcher uses a mixed-methods design to test the hypotheses. In
particular, it combines large-N statistical analyses of public opinion data with
original survey experiments from Argentina, Mexico, and the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.