* 1747756
* Computing and Intersectionality (The Social and Behavioral Structures at Play for Black Women in the Computing Sciences):  An Inclusive Agenda for Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Jamika Burge, GPRA Strategic Management, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 08/31/2022
* USD 557,526.00

Computing and Intersectionality builds on the growing focus on gender equity in
computing in the United States. The disproportionate underrepresentation of
women in computing fields is an ongoing national challenge. Within that larger
dialogue on inclusion, there exists a growing body of work and focus on the
intersectional factors that affect women of color within the larger population
of women. The underrepresentation of women of color is more acute than the
underrepresentation of women generally and the factors that contribute to that
warrant exploration. Computing and Intersectionality is timely work and
addresses this phenomenon directly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the work is
to establish a standing national conference that directly addresses issues
associated with women of color within the computing sciences. It is a standing
meeting to explore the particular dynamics of their experiences and to assess
and determine effective institutional strategies to overcome the current
challenges. Concurrent with the establishment of a standing meeting, Computing
and Intersectionality develops a journal of scholarly research for both social
scientists and computer scientists, to focus on the intersectional factors that
affect women of color. Results from this project will inform the broadening
participation and STEM+C communities on specific factors of recruiting,
retention, and graduation associated with women of color in computing. It is an
important complement to the larger effort on gender equity, which cannot be
entirely successful if women of color are not equally
successful.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.