* 1747750
* Planning Grant:  Industry University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) for Bioanalytic Metrology (CBM), Indiana University
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Lane Baker, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

This award supports planning for an Industry-University Collaborative Research
Center for Bioanalytic Metrology, a joint effort of Indiana University, the
University of Notre Dame, and Purdue University. The meeting will bring together
a national coalition of analytical instrument makers, pharmaceutical companies,
clinical practitioners, academic researchers, and other stakeholders, and unite
them in a mission to design and build new, industry-critical systems for
chemical measurement and bioanalysis. These systems are needed to address a
fundamental gap in U.S. research and development; namely, the ability to fully
identify, characterize, and track biological molecules within human cells and
understand their many complex interactions. If established, the technical spin-
offs from the center will have direct and tangible benefits for drug discovery,
molecular diagnostics, clinical biotechnology, and other areas. Moreover, the
capabilities envisioned by the center are necessary for the implementation of
other long-term health objectives, such as precision medicine. In addition to
this knowledge transfer, the center will also help train a new and diverse
bioanalytical workforce. The outcomes of the planning exercise will form the
basis of a proposal to the National Science Foundation for the Center for
Bioanalytic Metrology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genomics, proteomics, metabolomics
and bioinformatics provide a holistic framework to study biological systems with
applications ranging from fundamental studies of biological systems to the
design and use of diagnostics and therapeutics for personalized medicine. To
realize the promise of these technologies, however, we must increase the depth
of analysis of proteins, metabolites and other biomolecular species beyond
current limits, thus reducing the fraction of detected?but unidentified?species
known as the ?dark molecules of life.? This planning grant lays the groundwork
for a Center for Bioanalytic Metrology (CBM), joining expertise at Indiana,
Notre Dame, and Purdue. Planning activities will bring together analytical
instrument makers, pharmaceutical companies, clinical practitioners, and leading
academic research groups in analytical sciences and engineering. In addition to
the technical objectives, the CBM will also: (a) enable technology and knowledge
transfer to the industrial sector, (b) enhance graduate and undergraduate
education activities specifically designed to increase diversity of the STEM
workforce, and (c) provide valuable updates to chemistry, biology, computer
science, and engineering curricula through the incorporation of research into
existing undergraduate and graduate classes.