* 1747340
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Rapid Biologics Characterization Device
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2018
* Erik Gentalen, Intabio Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2018
* USD 224,996.00

This SBIR Phase I project will establish the feasibility of a new protein
analysis system for rapid and precise quality characterization for biologics -
protein-based drugs such as antibodies and recombinant proteins. Biologics have
achieved remarkable efficacy for many diseases, e.g. cancer, psoriasis, and are
the fastest growing drug development segment. However, biologics are highly
complex molecules manufactured in living cells, and as a result, frequent
quality testing is required for development, regulatory approval, and commercial
manufacturing of biologics. Current testing approaches are cumbersome and too
slow to provide the required throughput, taking weeks to complete an analysis.
This project will utilize microfluidic technology?s ability to seamlessly
integrate multiple analytical functions to complete a protein characterization
analysis in only minutes. The innovative approaches and research resulting from
this project will advance the fields of protein separation science and expand
the microfluidic technology field. This project will also transform biologic
drug development and manufacturing by making the critical testing less
cumbersome and faster, and will enable more frequent, comprehensive testing.
This will result in profound productivity gains that will translate into a
greater number of higher quality drugs developed in less time and with less
cost.

This project will demonstrate proof-of-concept for a novel quantitative protein
analysis platform for biologics that combines optically-monitored, capillary
isoelectric focusing (cIEF) and mass spectrometry (MS). This project proposes to
develop an innovative microfluidic device that incorporates a novel light guide,
which is capable of measuring protein levels while simultaneously performing
electrophoretic separation and electrospray ionization. Adding this light guide
to this device enables a powerful integration of imaged cIEF and MS techniques,
enabling simultaneous quantitation and determination of mass and charge
heterogeneity profiling of unlabeled protein samples. This microfluidic device
will be the first demonstrated integration of these analytical functions in a
robust and rapid system suitable for the bioproduction environment. The goals of
this project will be to: 1) design and test chips to identify the most optimal
design, 2) identify wall coatings required to modify chip surfaces to enable
microfluidic electrophoresis, and 3) develop reagents and assay conditions to
enable electrophorectic separation by isoelectric focusing that are compatible
with ionization for electrospray delivery to mass spec. Success in Phase I will
lead to a Phase II program in which we will develop a commercial microfluidic
chip and reagent kit, develop the commercial instrument system, and validate the
system performance for GMP compliant use.