* 1747133
* SBIR Phase I:  Advancing HIgh-Power Diamond Devices Towards Commercialization
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Brianna Eller, ADVENT Diamond
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 01/31/2019
* USD 224,996.00

TheÂ broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the innovation of diamond technologies that
will enhance the efficiency and reliability of electric vehicles, thus
supporting the development of green technology and reduction of CO2 emissions.
Specifically, diamond diodes will reduce powertrain losses by about a third and
thus directly translate into a 10% increase in electric power vehicle (EPV)
range. While the impact of diamond diodes is significant, the development of
this technology is also intended to advance diamond power devices. Additional
diamond components - such as insulated gate bipolar transistors (IGBTs) - will
increase the efficiency and reliability of electric vehicles even further.
Moreover, the successful commercialization of diamond will ultimately affect
many power markets in addition to EPVs: including converters and inverters in
geothermal drilling, aerospace, and power grids; high-frequency applications
such as radar and communication systems; and extreme environment electronics
relevant to the nuclear industry and space exploration, such as the exploration
of Venus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project expects the fabrication of
diamond freewheeling Schottky-PIN diodes for EPVs. These devices will utilize
lab-grown diamond to produce and test PIN diodes. While growth techniques have
recently been developed to enable to the fabrication of such structures, much
innovation is still needed to facilitate scalability and commercialization of
diamond devices. Therefore, in Phase I, the scope of research will consist of
the following activities to make diamond diodes for powertrain converters and
inverters in EPVs: (a) demonstrate the expected performance of diamond
freewheeling diodes using simulations, (b) control the doping concentrations and
thickness of single-crystal diamond layers, (c) develop scalable fabrication and
patterning processes for diamond devices, (e) determine electrical
characteristics of diamond PIN diodes, and (f) investigate the reliability and
possible failure mechanisms of packaged diamond PIN diodes. A significant
challenge for diamond devices for power applications will be the achievement of
cost parity. Considering the relatively high cost of diamond substrates, an
innovative commercialization strategy will be adapted to keep initial costs low,
allowing diamond devices to achieve cost parity faster.