* 1747439
* EAGER: Examining the Origins and Molecular Pathways of Alternate Allosteric Networks in the Lacl System
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Corey Wilson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

How proteins communicate with their environment is critical to many life
processes and detailed molecular knowledge of this process is required for the
development of next-generation biotechnologies. Allosteric communication is the
principal means by which proteins translate an environmental signal into a
useful response (e.g., gene expression). Understanding the detailed mechanism of
allostery is a vexing problem. Despite more than three decades of study, this
fundamental mode of biological communication remains unsolved at the molecular
level. A thorough understanding of allosteric communication will facilitate the
development of new protein design rules. The design of "custom made" allosteric
functions promises to revolutionize biotechnology, namely with regard to the
development of more competent biological drugs, diagnostic tools, and industrial
processes. These technological advances will be achieved by enabling precise and
predictable biological communication in response to desired environmental cues.
In addition to advancing our understanding of allosteric communication, this
study will enable the development of new scientists in a cutting-edge research
area, and will include the training of underrepresented groups in STEM. This
initiative will contribute to the development of a diverse and engaged science
and engineering workforce.

The goal of this study is to decipher the underlying molecular mechanism by
which allosteric signals traverse the scaffold across LacI variants with
alternate allosteric control. This study will be accomplished by the
construction and characterization of a synthetic phylogenetic tree of alternate
allosteric networks. To complement inferred evolutionary relationships,
experimental maps of communication will be constructed for two or more linages.
Members of a given linage will be evaluated biophysically to decipher the
underlying molecular mechanism. Phylogenetic and biophysical data will be
leveraged to design alternate allosteric routes in the LacI scaffold in which
precise performance metrics (i.e., tuned dynamic range, ligand sensitivity and
temporal responsiveness) are conferred. This study will help identify whether
allostery in the LacI scaffold can be conferred via multiple networks of
residues, or whether allostery requires a single conserved network of residues.
Upon completion, this study will enable the testing of assertions with regards
to the origin and molecular mechanics of alternate allosteric communication via
the development of design rules for specific allosteric operations. In turn,
this algorithm will produce novel LacI-based transcription factors for use in a
broad range of biotechnological applications, specifically in synthetic biology.
In addition, this study will significantly broaden our fundamental understanding
of allosteric communication.