* 1747751
* Phase I IUCRC University of Missouri-Kansas City: Center for Big Learning (CBL)
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Praveen Rao, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 01/31/2024
* USD 859,980.00

This project establishes the NSF Industry/University Collaborative Research
Center (I/UCRC) for Big Learning (CBL) to accelerate innovation and impact of
Deep Learning in various embedded applications. The vision is to create
intelligence towards intelligence-driven society. Through catalyzing the fusion
of diverse expertise from the consortium of faculty members, students, industry
partners, and federal agencies, CBL seeks to create state-of-the-art deep
learning methodologies and technologies and enable intelligent applications,
transforming broad domains, such as business, healthcare, Internet-of-Things,
and cybersecurity. This timely initiative creates a unique platform for
empowering our next-generation talents with cutting-edge technologies of
societal relevance and significance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of
Missouri at Kansas City (UMKC) site focuses on the deep learning in embedded
systems for mobile and IoT applications. It is based on a framework called
DeepLite for deep learning model compression and acceleration that can fit
cutting edge deep learning capabilities in embedded systems with very limited
computing, storage, communication and power capabilities. DeepLite allows
embedded deep learning model training and compression for power, storage,
computation complexity tradeoffs with learning performances for targeted
embedded applications like immersive content capture, depth and action sensing,
visual surveillance, next gen image and video compression and communication.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CBL is expected to make wide ranging and long lasting
impact to machine learning algorithm, system and application research,
accelerating deep learning technology innovation and adoption in the real world,
enable transformative new capabilities and new applications in all aspect of
society, from education, medicine, media, to security and defense. CBL
seamlessly integrates innovation, engineering education, technology business
incubation, and community engagement. It facilitates closer interactions and
cross pollination of ideas between academia and industry, broaden the research
horizon for faculties and students, while help shrink the time to impact and
time to market of new technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The center repository
will be hosted at http://nsfcbl.org. The data, code, documents will be well
organized and maintained on the CBL servers for the duration of the center for
more than five years and beyond. The internal code repository will be managed by
GitLab. After the software packages are well documented and tested, they will be
released and managed by popular public code hosting services, such as GitHub and
Bitbucket.