* 1747820
* Breakthroughs 2030:  A workshop to be held October 2-5, 2017 at the Beckman Center, Irvine CA
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Roberta Schoen, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 08/31/2018
* USD 99,000.00

The Breakthroughs 2030 workshop will be held October 2-5, 2017 at the Beckman
Center at the University of California in Irvine, California. The workshop
brings together a cross-disciplinary group of scientists to discuss the future
of food and agriculture science. The workshop is part of a year-long study
organized by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine (NAS)
to identify critical gaps and discover breakthrough research areas to advance
food and agriculture in the U.S. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is designed
to stimulate creative thinking, catalyze new research directions, build
partnerships and attract research input from disciplines not typically
associated with food and agriculture. The workshop will consider seven science
focal areas selected after a significant public input period during the summer
of 2017. During the input period, a public website will gather ideas, which will
be synthesized as the seven focus areas through Town Hall meetings in August
2017, and will culminate in the Breakthroughs 2030 workshop. The facilitated and
public workshop will include diverse participation from across disciplines and
demographics. Workshop attendees will discuss the bottlenecks and future
approaches needed to accelerate progress in each of the seven focus areas
related to food and agriculture. Outcomes will be a final report to be published
by the NAS in 2018 as a guiding blueprint to advance food and agriculture into
the next decades.