* 1747783
* Phase I IUCRC University of Florida:  Center for Big Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Joel Harley, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,050,478.00

This project establishes the NSF Industry/University Collaborative Research
Center for Big Learning (CBL). The vision is to create intelligence towards
intelligence-driven society. Through catalyzing the fusion of diverse expertise
from the consortium of faculty members, students, industry partners, and federal
agencies, CBL seeks to create state-of-the-art deep learning methodologies and
technologies and enable intelligent applications, transforming broad domains,
such as business, healthcare, Internet-of-Things, and cybersecurity. This timely
initiative creates a unique platform for empowering our next-generation talents
with cutting-edge technologies of societal relevance and significance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project establishes the NSF Industry/University
Collaborative Research Center for Big Learning (CBL) at University of Florida
(UF). With substantial breakthroughs in multiple modalities of challenges, such
as computer vision, speech recognition, and natural language understanding, the
renaissance of machine intelligence is dawning. The CBL vision is to create
intelligence towards intelligence-driven society. The mission is to pioneer
novel deep learning algorithms, systems, and applications through unified and
coordinated efforts in the CBL consortium. The UF Site will focus on intelligent
platforms and applications and closely collaborate with other sites on deep
learning algorithms, systems, and applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CBL
will have broad transformative impacts in technologies, education, and society.
CBL aims to create pioneering research and applications to address a broad
spectrum of real-world challenges, making significant contributions and impacts
to the deep learning community. The discoveries from CBL will make significant
contributions to promote products and services of industry in general and CBL
industry partners in particular. As the magnet of deep learning research and
applications, CBL offers an ideal platform to nurture next-generation talents
through world-class mentors from both academia and industry, disseminates the
cutting-edge technologies, and facilitates industry/university collaboration and
technology transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The center repository will be hosted
at http://nsfcbl.org. The data, code, documents will be well organized and
maintained on the CBL servers for the duration of the center for more than five
years and beyond. The internal code repository will be managed by GitLab. After
the software packages are well documented and tested, they will be released and
managed by popular public code hosting services, such as GitHub and Bitbucket.