* 1747845
* SBIR Phase I: Comprehensive Online Platform to Enhance Care Coordination and Improve Behavioral Health Outcomes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Anupam Khandelwal, SageSurfer Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to increase treatment options and to improve
health outcomes for patients using a comprehensive algorithm-based behavior
health intervention. It can address Institute of Health Improvement's Triple AIM
to improve population health, improve patients' experience of care, and reduce
per capita healthcare cost. The proposed platform is aimed at optimizing
treatment outcomes by enhancing motivations, maximizing treatment adherence,
engaging families and natural supports, and supporting self-care management for
individuals with chronic/serious behavioral health conditions. The proposed
technology is expected to enable patients to receive an ancillary, active
treatment that keeps them functioning in daily life. By enhancing the clinical
experience for patients and clinicians, individuals with behavioral health
conditions can self-monitor and communicate their experiences to their clinician
and record them in real time, allowing monitoring and assessment by the
behavioral health provider.

The proposed project will develop and test a novel behavior health technology
intervention on improving patients? ability to feel in control of their
treatment and improve their well-being. The technology is expected to enable
ongoing, real-time feedback to the both the patient's personal and professional
care team to monitor the impact of enabling/impending factors on treatment
progress to continually refine the care plan and interventions so that optimal
results can be achieved. The platform consists of a secure mobile and web
platform used to provide proactive interventions, advanced algorithms used to
personalize care and provide insights to the behavioral health provider. The
team plans to assess whether the combination of personal support effectively in
the patients' care together with advanced correlations using deep learning can
help in predicting interventions including crisis episode, improve patient's
treatment planning and wellness.