* 1747057
* SBIR Phase I:  Conceptual Learning of Calculus through the 3D Serious Game Series: Variant
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Amber Muenzenberger, Triseum, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2018
* USD 224,991.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to significantly reduce Calculus failure
rates. Success in Calculus is a prediction of persistence in STEM degree
programs; but many students do not successfully complete Calculus courses. This
reduces graduation rates and restricts hiring into STEM careers. Ultimately,
this barrier impacts the Presidents call for one million more STEM graduates.
When playing Variant, a 3D educational game, students are drawn into an
interactive world and gameplay. The game allows students to develop a conceptual
understanding of Calculus without reliance on definitions, terminology,
formulas, and calculations, via a heuristic, experiential learning environment.
Variant assists learners in grasping core concepts in Calculus, which ultimately
leads to higher persistence, retention, and graduation rates in STEM degrees.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is focused on developing the Variant
games series for higher education and secondary (grades 9-12) Calculus. Unlike
current games and homework platforms that rely on repetitive drills or address
lower level mathematical concepts, Variant presents complex experiential
explorations. Variant differentiates itself from other games in terms of
educational rigor and its 3D environment, that allows students to be more
engaged and immersed when learning Calculus content. A stealth assessment will
be integrated within the game system to provide real-time feedback and inform
development of the instructor portal. Without interrupting the game experience,
the stealth assessment measures a players knowledge gain and validates gameplay
as a measure of achievement of the student learning objectives.