* 1747095
* EAGER: Secure Workflow Provenance for Collaborative Data Analytics
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Shiyong Lu, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Wei-Shinn Ku
* 08/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

Collaborative data analysis has become a necessity and trend in the era of big
data. In such collaborative environments, intellectual property protection
mechanisms are critical to maintain and encourage research partnerships. Such
mechanisms shall protect not only data sources and data analysis algorithms, but
also protect data provenance, i.e., data processing history. For example,
participating parties may request to secure their access and sharing of various
kinds of data products (source, intermediate, and final), processing steps, and
their inter-dependencies. However, existing mechanisms do not provide such fine-
grained protection on multi-step data analytics procedure (workflow) provenance.
To address such a challenge, this project aims to study and explore novel
mechanisms to secure the access and querying over collaborative scientific
workflow provenance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goal of this project is
to understand in depth about  the feasibility of dataflow provenance-oriented
access and querying mechanisms. This high-risk, high-reward work will produce
the following two outcomes: (1) a multi-level fine-grained secure provenance
access and querying mechanism for provenance collection, including sensitive
data as well as sensitive dependencies between data, tasks, and users, and (2)
automated analysis algorithms to ensure that provenance access and querying
policies would conform to desirable constraints on evolving dependencies. The
intended techniques and tool will be evaluated in genomic data analysis domain
to demonstrate its usability and significance in the context of collaborative
data analytics. The expected techniques will be equipped to the NSF-sponsored
collaborative scientific workflow tool for secure data analytics collaboration.