* 1747624
* The Midwest Numerical Analysis Day
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Erik Van Vleck, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 03/31/2022
* USD 7,200.00

This award provides support for 24 regional participants to attend "The Midwest
Numerical Analysis Day", which will be held on April 14 to 15, 2018, on the
campus of the University of Kansas, in Lawrence, Kansas. Funds will provide
support for women, underrepresented minorities, and young participants (graduate
students, postdoctoral fellows, and junior faculty). Scientific computing is a
rapidly growing multidisciplinary field and has become a common tool for using
advanced computing capabilities to construct mathematical models for complex
problems, to develop quantitative analysis techniques, and to understand and
solve the scientific problems arising from different disciplines. Numerical
analysis is the core of scientific computing, an area that develops and studies
algorithms of obtaining the numerical solutions of the mathematical models of
real world problems. With the increasing power of modern computers, large scale
and complex simulations become possible, which in turn requires collaboration
among numerical analysts, algorithm designers, and exports in applied sciences
and engineering. Such an interdisciplinary collaboration has increased
significantly and become a new norm in last decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
conference will bring groups of researchers in mathematics and applied sciences
and engineering who are interested in scientific computation and related
applications. It will facilitate a transfer of knowledge among different
disciplines and promote the collaborations. The conference will provide an
excellent opportunity for regional researchers in all stages of their careers,
especially for young faculty members, postdocs, and graduate students, to
present their research results, have the opportunities to exchange the ideas
with people from different disciplines, and gain experience and improve their
skills in communication and presentation. Moreover, the conference will invite,
encourage, and support people from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.