* 1747700
* Conference Support for the 2017 American Electrophoresis Society Annual Meeting
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2017,03/31/2018
* Soumya Srivastava, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Angie Lueking
* 03/31/2018
* USD 6,000.00

A region of charge separation, known as the electrical double layer, forms at
the surface of most solids that are immersed in an aqueous solution. As the
surface of most solids bares a slight charge, ions dissolved in the aqueous
solution segregate to the surface to counterbalance this charge. The ions
closest to the surface are in close proximity to the counter charge, and then a
secondary layer forms to gradually diffuse the charge formed in this layer. When
an external electric field is applied, these charged particles move in response,
in a process known as electrophoresis. Electrophoretic motion can be used to
separate and purify macromolecules, as different types of particles have
different charges associated with them. Electrophoresis can be used to identify
or isolate target cells or biological compounds for diagnostic purposes. There
is growing interest in the application of a nonlinear electric field to
manipulate biological particles in microfluidic devices, as well as enabling
other separations and material assembly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
provide travel funds for twelve students to attend and participate in the 2017
Electrophoresis Society Annual Meeting of the American Electrochemical Society
in Minneapolis, MN. This meeting unites academic, industry, and government
researchers working in all aspects of electrokinetics. The focus of this meeting
is on electrokinetics, including subtopics on use in cellular analysis and
separation, applicability to particles, drops, adn bubbles, use in microfluidics
and other miomolecular analysis, and a number of other topics. The society is
proactively working to increase student participation. To this end, several
activities have been incorporated in this meeting to engage students, including
training workshops, an interactive poster session, and a Lunch with Leaders
program to facilitate student/faculty interaction. Students receiving travel
awards resulting from this grant will serve as co-chairs for the various
technical sessions and contribute to a journal article in Electrophoresis
summarizing the meeting. This opportunity provides a key resource to facilitate
student training and professional development.