* 1747522
* EAGER:   Collaborative Research:  Inverse Procedural Material Modeling for Battery Design
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Holly Rushmeier, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

Nearly all portable electronic devices commonly used today -- cameras, phones,
music players and the like -- rely on rechargeable Lithium-ion batteries.
Improvements in the capabilities of these devices can be achieved by improving
the design of these batteries. This work will produce new computational methods
for designing batteries with desirable properties such as high power output and
long lifespan. The new computational methods will use techniques that have
successfully described complex volumetric structures (such as porous rocks and
sponges) in computer graphics for film and games. These computer graphics
techniques will be applied to describing the materials in batteries. Instead of
focusing on finding volumetric structures that give the correct visual
appearance, the new computational methods will focus on structures that produce
the correct performance characteristics such as power density. The new
volumetric descriptions will be used to generate a large number of potential
volumetric materials, and these models will be characterized in terms of battery
properties and performance. Using recently developed machine learning
techniques, this large number of potential models will be converted into a form
that is convenient to use in battery design. In addition to providing tools to
create improved portable batteries, the new computational methods have the
potential to be further extended and applied to other problems involving
materials with complex volumetric structure such as understanding geologic
measurements and designing conservation strategies for cultural heritage
monuments and artifacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A straightforward approach to
battery design is to theorize material microstructures, run forward simulations
to assess their performance, and evaluate the results. However, simulations
require hours (up to 50 hours on current multi-core systems for power density
calculations), making forward simulation prohibitively expensive for iterative
design. The design process can be dramatically improved if an inverse function
is available that can produce a microstructure description given desired
performance characteristics. Barriers to creating such an inverse function are
the complexity of microstructure descriptions and the relationship between
structure and performance. To create an inverse function, we need a
microstructure description that is lower in dimension than a full enumeration of
a high-resolution grid. A procedural model can provide such a lower dimensional
description. The approach explored in this project for finding appropriate
procedural models is based on combining and transforming models that have been
successful in other problem domains to fit data from real battery material
measurements. Given an appropriate procedural model, the design problem is
reduced to determining the procedural model parameters that generate the input;
a problem called "inverse procedural modeling". Even with a compact
microstructure description, the problem is too complex to be mathematically
inverted. Rather than attempt to find a mathematical function, machine learning
(deep neural networks) are used. A database of microstructures and their
performance characteristics will be populated synthetically with example
microstructures computed from a large sampling of procedural model parameters.
Forward simulations will be run on these samples to compute properties
(tortuosity and area density) and performance characteristics (power and energy
density.) Machine learning optimizations will then be used to find the
relationship between model parameters and performance characteristics and this
relationship will be used in the design process. The overall method of finding
procedural models to fit data and then learning the relationships from synthetic
data generated from the models brings the power of new data-driven approaches to
the domain of battery design. The software, data and publications resulting from
this project will be available at the project website
(http://hpcg.purdue.edu/Eager2018/).