* 1747785
* Phase II IUCRC UNC Charlotte Site: Center for Visual and Decision Informatics (CVDI)
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Wenwen Dou, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 02/28/2023
* USD 453,708.00

The Center for Visual and Decision Informatics (CVDI) focuses on developing
advanced visual and decision support tools and techniques that enable decision
makers to improve the way organizations' information is interpreted and
exploited. This award will create a CVDI Site at the University of North
Carolina, Charlotte, which will focus on data science and big data analytics
research related to risk mitigation in financial services, healthcare, and
social good. Financial services and healthcare, along with energy, retail, and
logistics are the key sectors of Charlotte's economy. On the other hand, social
good is an important issue currently facing Charlotte community. Social good
analytics can aid the community's effort to improve living conditions of its
citizens, which will positively influence the overall workforce readiness for
employers. This contribution will be measured in novel data collection
mechanisms and long-term outcomes of implemented policies. The net effect will
be more resilient industry, increased economic development, increased social
capital, and increased economic mobility in all segments of the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher team on this award is uniquely
focused on developing long-term capability for researching, understanding, and
documenting risk, as well as creating tools and applications for explaining and
predicting such risks. This will be accomplished through the application of
data- and analytics-driven technologies, including, but not limited to, data and
analytics platform, advanced visualization techniques, artificial intelligence
and deep-learning algorithms, agent-based modeling and simulation, network
science analysis, and systems dynamics methods. Over the next 5 years, this Site
will seek to transform UNC Charlotte into the national hub of innovation and
creativity for the benefit of industry and the
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.