* 1747722
* Collaborative Research:  EAGER:   Salinity-based selection between sister clades of abundant coastal bacterioplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Elizabeth Kujawinski, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 121,177.00

Adaptation to new environments is a fundamental challenge for organisms,
including microbes, in expanding their habitat range. It is important to
investigate the cellular mechanisms underlying salinity tolerance in coastal
bacterioplankton and their different responses to salinity in nature because (i)
it will provide fundamental understanding for how microorganisms evolve to
inhabit environments with different salinities, and (ii) alterations in coastal
salinity are connected to climate change, so the way these alterations affect
abundant coastal microorganisms also alters the biogeochemical cycling of, e.g.,
carbon. The project will examine microbial adaptations to salinity and determine
how changes in salinity affect microbial metabolism using two closely related
groups of abundant coastal bacterioplankton as model taxa. In addition, the
research will continue and expand microbiology Course-based Undergraduate
Research Experiences (mCUREs) in high-throughput cultivation and microbial
characterization at the Lousiana State University. Sections of freshman biology
laboratories will learn how to isolate, characterize, and molecularly identify
microorganisms from local aquatic systems. mCURE sections will lead to newly
isolated strains, genome sequences, and physiological data, these results will
be published with the contributing students as co-authors. The relative success
of mCURE sections will be assessed compared to traditional freshman biology
sections. mCURE sections will offer unique opportunities for LSU students by
creating excitement about research through discovery of new organisms and
generating knowledge of the coastal habitats that are essential to the
livelihood of the Gulf Coast.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evolutionary transition
between salt- and freshwater environments occurs rarely in microorganisms. In
one of the most abundant aquatic groups, SAR11, the transition between salt- and
freshwater environments has happened only once: all freshwater SAR11 belong to
subclade IIIb/LD12, which has also been found to inhabit coastal environments
where salinity varies widely. The first reported isolates of the SAR11
freshwater clade LD12 and a member of the sister clade IIIa from the same region
are now available. These pure culture representatives provide a powerful model
for experimentally investigating adaptations to new environments in
microorganisms, specifically (i) the genomic pathway and regulatory distinctions
that arise during the evolutionary transition from marine to freshwater
environments, and (ii) the physiological mechanisms that underlie the ecological
restrictions imposed on microorganisms by ionic strength in coastal and
freshwater environments. Furthermore, because these organisms have distinct
differences in metabolic potential, the isolates facilitate testing (iii) the
effects of changing coastal salinity on microbial contributions to other
biogeochemical cycles, such as that for carbon. The project will test the
hypothesis that the relative ionic strength tolerances between the sister
lineages (LD12, IIIa) result from fundamental differences in metabolic
flexibility at a genomic and regulatory level. To do so it will assess
transcriptional and metabolic responses to varied ionic strength for both taxa
and measure the distribution and activity of both groups in nature to translate
laboratory findings to the field. The research will provide new understanding of
LD12 habitat range and insights into how the "freshwater" lineage evolved from a
SAR11 common ancestor. The project will also more generally provide important
information on microbial responses to salinity changes in coastal systems and
the evolutionary paths separating freshwater and marine
microorganisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by Biological
Oceanography, Division of Ocean Sciences in the Directorate for Geosciences and
by Systems and Synthetic Biology, Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
in the Directorate for Biological Sciences.