* 1747116
* SBIR Phase I:  Micro-Fluidic LiDAR for Autonomous Vehicles
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2018
* Andrew Miner, Mirada Technologies Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2018
* USD 224,962.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to hasten the
deployment of autonomous transportation systems, which stand to reduce driving
accidents and fatalities, enable new paradigms in urban design, reduce vehicle
traffic, increase automobile efficiency, and improve air quality, benefiting the
immediate health of drivers and non-drivers alike. Advanced Driver Assistance
Systems (ADAS) are simpler implantations of semi-autonomous controls systems,
but are already saving lives by providing intelligent cruise control, lane
departure warnings, steering assistance, and preemptive emergency braking. As
ADAS improves through advanced sensor hardware developed in this work and
becomes more widely deployed, more accident will be avoided and lives saved.
Autonomous vehicles are expected to accelerate current trends from private
ownership of multiple vehicles to transportation services, such as Uber and
Lyft, and autonomous vehicle services, a trend evident in New York city and San
Francisco, where parking lot capacity is dropping. As carpool lanes have
promoted wiser commuting and reduced congestion, future autonomous lanes can
enable platooning, where vehicles travel at reduced distances between each other
at high speed, reducing drag, increasing fuel economy, and better utilizing
public infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will result in a vision system that delivers
three dimensional data of objects in view, allowing for the widespread adoption
of delivery robots, drones, advanced driver safety systems in vehicles, and
autonomous vehicles. To deliver performance and reliability at a cost that
enabled wide adoption, the company will address the challenges facing incumbent
technologies with two key technological innovations: A high speed, wide angle
laser beam steering technology based on magneto-hydro-dynamics, and the use of
neutrally buoyant optomechanics. These two innovations allow for light beams to
be swept across a wide field of view, delivering 3D point cloud data at high
frame rate with operational immunity to vibrations from road hazards such as pot
holes and speed bumps. The end objective of the research is to demonstrate a
fully functionally imaging system operating with components developed in this
work. It is anticipated that the developed components will implement precise
spatial control of laser sources by a low cost electromagnetic drive motor,
demonstrating performance metrics consistent with deployment on production
vehicles.