* 1747562
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Using Prospect Theory and Human Perceptions of Wildlife to Predict Support for Invasive Species Management.
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Sarah Anderson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2020
* USD 16,885.00

Many environmental issues are highly politicized. Invasive species impacts are
an example of an environmental problem that has not become politicized. Invasive
species are also one of the most important drivers of declines in global
biodiversity, estimated to cost $120 billion annually in management and
mitigation costs in the US, making this a salient and important issue for land
and wildlife managers. Invasive species management can be particularly difficult
because the public perception of risks associated with management can influence
the success or failure of that action. Despite this, little is known about how
to frame the management of invasive species in a way that facilitates public
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prospect theory suggests that the public will
respond more strongly to frames that communicate losses than gains. Because
invasive species policy is as yet not politicized, it provides a useful test of
prospect theory in the environmental arena where costs are often concentrated
and benefits. By testing prospect theory across a range of species, this
research can evaluate how individuals perceive risk and salience of species
identity in determining the perceived need for management. This response to
messaging frames may be further modulated by the perception of a species, which
can, in turn, influence the success or failure of the implementation of
management strategies. By accounting for species identity in our analysis of
messaging frames, we can identify how species identity interacts with messaging
frames to shape policy outcomes. This project helps to unite the fields of
social ecology and public policy by providing novel research to understand the
role of framing in the public's perception of risk associated with environmental
management. We expect that mammals and other "cute" species will reduce support
for management, making messaging frames more relevant to support outcomes. In
contrast, we expect that messaging frames related to species that are
traditionally thought of as undesirable (e.g. reptiles or amphibians) will be
less relevant in determining public support. Broadly, this project can inform
managers about how to frame and message about invasive species to increase
public support for management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.