* 1747029
* SBIR Phase I:  Universal Power Converter for AC-DC, DC-DC, DC-AC and AC-AC Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Debiprasad Panda, Universal Real Time Power Conversion LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is that it will serve as
a one-stop power conversion solution across the power conversion industries. The
proposed Power Converter can convert power directly from AC-DC, DC-DC, DC-AC and
AC-AC in a single stage without an interim AC or DC link. The said power
converter can take fixed frequency, variable frequency or DC voltage as input
and can deliver another fixed frequency, variable frequency or DC voltage at the
output. The voltage can be stepped up or down and the power can flow back and
forth in the said power converter. Having all the power conversion features in
one hardware can serve almost all power conversion applications such as
aircraft/spacecraft/ship, hybrid/electrical vehicle, renewable energy,
automation industry and almost all other power conversion needs by a mere change
of software. Such technology has a potential to become a mass-produced commodity
and in effect the cost of the power converter can be dramatically reduced across
all industries, Market research organization has estimated that by 2020, the
power converter market will be valued at $65 billion. Therefore, the commercial
impact of this one stop power converter solution will be
significant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will introduce a multifunctional power converter with single
stage power conversion. By employing bi-directional 4-quadrant wide band gap
switch, intelligent filters at input and output, advanced pulse width modulation
and commutation scheme a more efficient, robust, smaller foot print, low-weight
power converter will be realized which will convert power from input to output
much faster with reduced loss and at the same time it will not need any bulky DC
or AC link in between. By operating less number of semiconductor switches at a
given time the loss and size of the power converter will be reduced. By having
intelligent filter, high power quality at the input and output will be achieved.
The multifunctional use of this power converter will cut down the number of on
board power converters in aircraft/spacecraft/ship in a system level which will
provide multi-fold benefit in terms of fuel economy. By having less loss, the
power consumption will be reduced and by having smaller size and weight the
payload will be less, which will improve the fuel economy. By reducing number of
on board power converters the on-board weight will be reduced further.
Therefore, overall fuel economy will be significantly improved.