* 1747397
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Information, Public Opinion, and Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2019
* Mary Gallagher, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2019
* USD 15,733.00

This project explores how political information manipulation in authoritarian
regimes can affect the behaviors, attitudes, and opinion of individuals. This
project is important to our understanding of how authoritarian regimes gain
popular support and maintain control over populations using social media and big
data. Planned survey experiments will measure the effect of political
information manipulation tactics (censorship, astroturfing, and digital
repression). As much of social interaction has moved into a digital space,
governments have greater access to personal and social data. At the same time,
the fields of artificial intelligence and machine learning have experienced
unprecedented growth along with a similarly rapid growth in the power of
microprocessors. These advances have given governments better tools to digest,
process, and make informed decisions based on these massive stores of personal
data. This project is a first step toward understanding how these common data-
driven information manipulation tactics work and impact individuals in
authoritarian governments, essential knowledge for scholars of modern politics
and public opinion in a highly networked and digital
age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the effects of experiencing political
information manipulation on individual behaviors and opinion in authoritarian
regimes are explored using both survey experiments and large-N correlational
analyses. It is hypothesized that government information manipulation that is
covert---when the identity of the government as information manipulator obscured
---will increase the magnitude of individual-level effects in a direction
favorable to the government. More specifically, when compared to more overt
government information manipulation, covert information manipulation will be
more persuasive, will more dramatically increase positive perceptions of the
state, will more dramatically decrease one's sense of political efficacy, and
will decrease one's willingness to express opinions more than overt
manipulation. To test these hypotheses, a pseudo experiment will be run using a
large database of syndicated articles identified using automated near-duplicate
detection. Syndicated state media articles, appearing on different news websites
with identical text but different comments, will be compared across a treatment
group (articles with comments from astroturfers and ordinary users) and a
control group (articles with comments from only ordinary users). Variables
targeting each of the hypotheses above will be drawn from the text using
statistical and natural language processing methods. Additionally, three survey
experiments will be conducted to test, respectively, the effect of censorship,
astroturfing, and digital repression in overt and covert forms. This work is
critical to understand how modern authoritarian regimes leverage social media to
guide public opinion, mobilize regime support, and demobilize
opponents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.