* 1747688
* I-Corps: Platform for Scaled Autonomous Vehicle Technology
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Evangelos Theodorou, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 05/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to help bring
safe self-driving vehicles to market more quickly. Self-driving vehicles could
eliminate over 90% of the 35,000 annual traffic fatalities that occur in the
United States alone, convert commuting time into increased productivity or
leisure time, and completely overhaul society's relationship with
transportation. Billions of dollars are actively being invested by established
automotive manufacturers, technology companies, startups, and researchers. The
self-driving vehicle market is projected to be $27 billion by 2025, and grow to
$77 billion by 2035. Despite all of the activity, there is still a gap in the
ability to test self-driving vehicles in between the two current methods of
computer simulations and full sized vehicles. Scaled vehicle technology provides
an intermediate method to enable faster prototyping and testing of new
algorithms and electronics in the real world without the risks and costs
associated with full sized vehicles. This would provide immense value to society
both in terms of accelerating a large new industry and reducing human casualties
and injuries of the transportation system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project will investigate the commercial potential of a self-driving vehicle
industry testbed. It involves a combination of new theory and algorithms with
hardware systems that interact in the real world. The technology platform is a
scaled vehicle testbed, 1/5 the size of a car and weighing 45 lbs. It includes a
sensor suite, onboard computer, and is ready for self-driving testing out of the
box. Using these as autonomous vehicle testbeds, self-driving vehicle
technologies can be tested in the real world without endangering people or
expensive equipment. This technology is based on a fleet of prototype autonomous
vehicle testbeds that have been used for controls, machine learning, and
computer vision research successfully applied to the self-driving domain.