* 1747533
* Toward the Establishment of a Reciprocal Knowledge Exchange Community for Extending BPC Capacity and Impact
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Lecia Barker, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 01/31/2023
* USD 299,022.00

The National Center for Women and Information Technology (NCWIT) is running a
series of "Knowledge Exchange Workshops" to build capacity in the Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE) community for broadening
participation in computing (BPC). The workshops will bring together a range of
stakeholders -- CISE Principal Investigators (PIs), department chairs, the CISE
BPC Alliances, and other national organizations that focus on inclusion in
science and engineering -- to support the PI community in planning for
meaningful broadening activities as introduced in the recently issued Dear
Colleague Letter (NSF 17-110).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CISE has long supported work
in broadening participation BPC with targeted programs and specific requirements
in some solicitations. The pilot discussed in the Dear Colleague Letter aims to
expand that work by encouraging involvement of the larger PI community. The
workshops will promote a "Knowledge Exchange," giving the PIs and department
chairs the chance to discuss their current BPC efforts, needs and concerns, and
giving the Alliances and the other organizations the chance to describe their
existing resources and programs, and the communities they serve. The expected
outcomes include a wider understanding of the BPC efforts currently underway,
the creation of new partnerships that will increase the availability of
community efforts that individual PIs could join in fulfilling their own BPC
goals, and facilitation of the development of departmental BPC plans that
provide new opportunities for faculty involvement. These workshops will lead to
an expansion of the community of CISE change leaders poised to implement reform
efforts.