* 1747778
* Phase 1 IUCRC Rutgers-New Brunswick: Center for Accelerated Real Time Analytics (CARTA)
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Dimitris Metaxas, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 05/31/2024
* USD 750,000.00

Nearly every research field and industry sector is struggling with extracting
useful information from massive and dynamic data in a timely way. Developing
tools and technologies in this realm of real-time and accelerated analytics
contributes to promoting the progress of science and to advancing the national
prosperity and welfare. Success in this realm hinges on balancing fundamental
research, technological know-how, and commercial market intelligence. To address
this challenge, this project joins industry members with academic centers to
conduct multidisciplinary science and research towards extracting value from
massive and moving data and enabling better decision making of complex, dynamic
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center of Accelerated Real Time Analytics (CARTA)
project explores the ways in which relatively-high-risk fundamental developments
can be leveraged to help organizations that have longer-term, more complex
analytic needs. The focus of CARTA is on horizontal foundational technologies
that would create an infrastructure capable of powering applications of national
significance. In this context, at Rutgers-New Brunswick (RU-NB), the CARTA/RU-NB
site will enable new application domains through innovative machine learning,
statistical, modeling methods and technologies for accelerated and real-time
analytics. Having these technologies and tools will be key in achieving the
goals of the overall CARTA center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of
the work of the CARTA center will be in addressing the future advanced, real-
time analytics needs of the industry and society. The techniques developed by
CARTA can be applied across industry sectors, including national security,
healthcare, manufacturing, energy, and business intelligence. The fundamental
research done at CARTA will be translated into technology developments,
delivering practical solutions to hard problems. The ultimate success of this
paradigm shift by the analytics industry will rest on the ability of CARTA
universities to prepare experts to take advantage of the science and
technologies to solve a variety of real-life applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CARTA research may involve sensitive academic and
industrial data along with public domain data. This data and resulting research
outputs will be maintained using appropriate best practices for each type of
data for a period of three years after the closing of CARTA. A central
repository, suitably tagged for appropriate referencing and documentation, will
be set up at https://carta.umbc.edu for maintaining the acquired and generated
data from Center projects. Access to all models and project results will be
stored on line and made available for downloading in near real time to respond
to approved user requests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.