* 1747446
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Electoral Uncertainty and Policy Change
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2018,09/30/2020
* Charles Shipan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 09/30/2020
* USD 23,335.00

How does electoral competition over majority control influence a legislature's
ability to draft and pass meaningful legislation? Today, even the most casual
observers of politics understand legislative gridlock to be a key feature of the
modern legislative politics. Since at least the 1990s, scholars, media pundits,
and even politicians have called attention to these institutions' lack of
productivity, most often attributing the phenomenon to growing ideological
polarization between the two major political parties. But while the widening
gulf between the political parties --and the influence it likely has on policy
change and legislative gridlock-- is undeniable, this project examines a crucial
factor that most accounts of legislative gridlock have ignored: the rise in
competition over majority control. This project develops a new theory of policy
change that articulates and tests the conditions under which this sort of
electoral competition encourages or stymies policy change, beyond what
polarization alone might predict. Ultimately, the project would provide an
explanation for why even popular legislation often fails to gain traction, and
why polarization does not itself always predict a legislature's levels of
productivity. Tying legislative productivity to electoral competition in this
way would also carry with it potential normative, constitutional, and policy
implications regarding topics such as the frequency of elections and the
appropriateness of partisan agenda-setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How does
competition over majority control alter the strategic calculus of partisan
agenda-setters in a legislature and what influence may it have on aggregate
policy change? Beginning with Mayhew's (1973) seminal work, electoral dynamics
have remained at the heart of nearly all modern analysis of legislative
politics. Yet in spite of this centrality, and in spite of the sharp differences
in electoral competitiveness over majority control American political history
(Lee 2016), little theorizing or empirical research has delineated how electoral
dynamics influence the policy change process. This project ties together key
insights from both the electoral and policy change literatures in political
science to create a new, elections-adjusted model of policy change and provide a
series of novel empirical tests of this theory. First, using new data measuring
contemporaneous beliefs regarding macro-level competitiveness, this project
examines how well my elections-adjusted policy change model predicts legislative
productivity since 1940, compared to current models (e.g., Krehbiel 1998, Cox
and McCubbins 2005). Second, the project leverages the reauthorizations process
and new, interest-group-based estimates of bill locations to examine whether and
how macro-level competition influences bill-level decisionmaking regarding
policy change. Finally, capitalizing on the broad coverage of bill location
estimates (including locations of bills that failed to receive a roll call
vote), this project examines how macro-level competition influences the agenda-
setting decisions made by majority leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.