* 1747407
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Coup-Proofing Democracy
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Sharanbir Grewal, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2019
* USD 18,900.00

After the Arab Spring, both Egypt and Tunisia attempted to transition to
democracy. Egypt's transition quickly collapsed in a military coup, while
Tunisia remains on the path to democratic consolidation. Why? More generally,
why do some democratic transitions fall to military coups, while others do not?
While existing literature focuses on the opportunity for a coup that is created
through economic recessions and political polarization, this dissertation
instead highlights the military's will to seize that opportunity. This project
examines how the military was treated in the regime prior to democracy will
shape whether it gains or loses from democracy, and thus whether it stages a
coup or supports the transition. This approach is tested through case studies of
Egypt and Tunisia, a survey experiment of military officers, and a statistical
analysis of all democratic transitions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Why do some
militaries stage coups against nascent democracies while others do not? This
project argues that the military's decision to thwart or accept a democratic
transition is shaped by its former autocrat's coup-proofing strategy. Militaries
are more likely to obstruct democratization when they had historically been
coopted by their autocrats through a share of power or shared identity, and thus
lose their privileged positions under democracy. By contrast, militaries should
be more supportive of democratization when they had historically been
marginalized, fragmented, and counterbalanced by their autocrats, and thus gain
from democracy. This project examines this theory through case studies of Egypt
and Tunisia, drawing upon nearly 100 interviews and a survey experiment of
military officers. It then probes the generalizability of the theory through a
cross-national analysis of all democratic transitions between
1783-2016.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.