* 1747664
* Planning IUCRC Baylor College of Medicine: Center to Stream Healthcare In Place (C2SHIP)
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Bijan Najafi, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Perkins
* 01/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

Various aspects of economic burden of the United States are associated with an
aging population, of whom 70% will need some kind of long-term care. C2SHIP
(Center to Stream Heathcare In Place) will unite the best minds in academic
medicine with leaders in the biomedical industry to research and develop
intelligent monitoring and intervening wearable technologies, and in particular
will be focused on enabling and promoting aging in place, personalized medicine,
and smart management of chronic and non-communicable disease through
telecommunication, data mining, and comprehensive feedback. The thrust of our
research will be on the aging patient's central role and responsibility in
enabling an optimized healthcare ecosystem. This award supports planning for the
formation of this Industry-University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC).

Our trans-disciplinary research will pursue research and development in
reconfigurable designs and system integration centered on the aging/health "in
place" concept: establishment of an environment or mobile hub for patient-in-
need within his/her own location facilitated by the streaming of data to medical
professionals at remote locations in real time through the Internet of Things.
This represents a crucial first step toward characterizing abnormalities in
environment and activity. Moreover, C2SHIP will focus on the mitigation of
physiological, environmental, and psychological changes for real time management
and intervention as well as infuse new in place technologies into relevant user
communities and residences.

C2SHIP will investigate techniques and mechanisms that can facilitate real time
interventions for a number of chronic diseases. The Center will not only advance
the science of physiology, aging and pediatric medicine but also accelerate both
knowledge and intellectual property transfer between academia and industry
through our collaborative partnerships. This will allow for the rapid
development of new in place technologies that can potentially transform health
care delivery, reduce health care costs related to care of chronic disease and
preventable readmissions, and, moreover, improve outcomes and quality of life
for aging and chronically-ill patients.