* 1747149
* SBIR Phase I:  Scalable Manufacture of Natural Fiber Welded Yarn
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,09/30/2018
* Aaron Amstutz, Natural Fiber Welding, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2018
* USD 224,968.00

This SBIR Phase I project aims to prove the technical feasibility and the
economic viability of natural fiber welded and dyed yarns and fabrics. Natural
fiber welding is process that swells and mobilizes polymers within natural
fibers to create higher performance yarns and fabrics. At sufficiently fast
rates, individual fibers are fused and bonded together without glues or resins
while retaining a majority of the natural structure and order of natural
polymers. This leads to improved mechanical properties while maintaining the
benefits of a natural product. Moreover, during the welding process, functional
materials and chemistries including dyes, antimicrobials, and flame retardants
can be simultaneously locked within yarns and fabrics in new eco-friendly ways.
This new ability has potential to displace, for example, present day resource
intensive processes such as indigo dyeing for denim which is a water and
chemical intensive process that requires significant equipment investment.
Inclusion of indigo dye via natural fiber welding processes has tremendous
potential to reduce the environmental impact of denim manufacture while saving
costs and simultaneously improving the performance of resultant fabrics and with
innovative new design effects. This type of disruptive innovation would bring in
sustainable US-based manufacturing throughout the value chain of the massive
multitrillion dollar per year textile
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An extremely promising and tunable
class of solvents for natural fiber welding processes are called ionic liquids.
This project explores several new types of ionic liquid-based solvent systems
co-optimized with new automated hardware designs to cost effectively enact
natural fiber welding processes with cotton and other natural fiber-containing
yarn substrates. In so doing, ionic liquid-based process solvents are recovered
in a closed-loop recycling process thereby enabling economic viability as well
as creating an eco-friendly manufacturing platform. This project will focus on
proving proof of concept with new combinations of ionic liquid(s) and co-
solvent(s) to enable concurrent welding with indigo dyeing while developing high
efficiency recycling methodologies. There are known methodologies to separate
ionic liquids in dilute aqueous solutions but these have not yet been developed
for situations where additional miscible co-solvents are present. The objective
of this project is to demonstrate natural fiber welding processes that deliver
indigo dye into cotton-based yarn substrates while achieving high rates of
recycling with process solvents that contain co-solvent(s) and to enable
scalable processes for potentially billions of pounds of denim products produced
annually.