* 1747447
* SHF: EAGER: HI-HDFS - Holistic I/O optimizations for the Hadoop distributed filesystem
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Srinivasan Parthasarathy, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

File systems and their outdated POSIX "byte stream" interface suffer from an
impedance mismatch with the versatile I/O requirements of today's applications.
Specifically, the I/O path from the application to the raw storage device is
becoming longer and it involves the interplay of intricate software and hardware
components. This produces complex aggregate I/O patterns that application
developers (often subject matter experts with limited knowledge of how massive
concurrency creates I/O bottlenecks) cannot optimize based on intuition alone.
File systems that tout their high scalability, such as the Hadoop distributed
file system, largely do so by limiting applications to sequential access
patterns. The question of whether one can accelerate the I/O performance of the
Hadoop distributed file system for analytical applications with complex data
models that cannot readily serialize data contiguously for fast sequential
access remains open.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to address this
question and build HI-HDFS -- a framework that automatically collects and
manages semantically richer I/O metadata to guide object placement in the Hadoop
distributed file system. The HI-HDFS framework synthesizes the I/O activity
across software components throughout the datacenter in a navigable graph
structure to identify application-agnostic motifs in I/O activity. A novel I/O
forecasting technique identifies and ameliorates bottlenecks at large scale by
inspecting I/O activity from small-scale runs. Overall, the HI-HDFS framework
challenges the I/O optimization mantra that manual data placement is the
cornerstone of I/O performance and paves the way towards next-generation object-
centric storage systems for high-performance computers. The efficacy of this
automated approach will be examined on a complex data processing workload from
the domain of emergency response which exhibits I/O patterns that are
characteristic of modern analytical applications. The broader impacts of this
work are expected to include open-source prototype implementations as well as
pedagogical impact on a cloud computing course for both Computer Science and
Data Analytics undergraduate majors at Ohio State.