* 1747108
* SBIR Phase I:  Bluebird: Integrated Internet-of-Things for Education
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Sibel Guler, Teknikio
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2018
* USD 224,545.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop an easy to
use internet-of-things (IoT) platform, called "Bluebird", for use in K-12
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) education. This project will
employ a craft-oriented approach to STEM education, which breaks down gender
barriers and engages students from diverse backgrounds. It is estimated that 65%
of primary school children will grow up to work in jobs that do not yet exist.
This new workforce will be the result of what is being referred to as the
"fourth industrial revolution", brought on by a fusion of technologies in the
physical, digital, and biological spheres. The goal of this project is to
develop an ecosystem of IoT technologies that prepare students for these
industries. The platform to be developed will disrupt the current commercial
landscape by providing an affordable and student-friendly alternative to devices
which are either expensive or overly challenging for beginners to adopt. The
resulting product platform will serve the global smart education and learning
market, which is expected to grow to $586 billion by
2021.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is to develop
a "smart" education tool that will enable educators and learners to control the
ways in which technology shapes their lives. This innovation will eliminate the
major hurdles that create conceptual, practical, and economic barriers for
students to gain literacy of information networks and human-centered design. To
achieve this goal, the team will research and develop a platform and an easy-to-
use device that overcomes the technical challenges of providing IoT experiences
in the classroom, where wireless internet is often unreliable, and the security
and privacy of students must be safeguarded. The key objectives for this project
are 1) to develop a classroom-ready framework for IoT including curriculum that
adheres to educational mandates; 2) to design and build low-cost and low-power
hardware, firmware, and protocols for the platform; and 3) to design and
implement a mobile application to facilitate communications and programming. The
anticipated result of this research is a platform that provides K-12 classroom
access to IoT tools and skills. The design and manufacture of this project opens
up a new market as Bluebird users craft their own IoT ideas, products, and
services.