* 1747835
* WORKSHOP: Support for the Academy of Management Organizational Communications and Information Systems 2017 Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Likoebe Maruping, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2018
* USD 25,850.00

This grant supports travel of a diverse group of approximately 30 dissertation-
stage students at US institutions to participate in an international doctoral
consortium with distinguished research faculty. The Organizational Communication
and Information Systems (OCIS) doctoral consortium at the 2017 Academy of
Management (AoM) meeting in Atlanta, Georgia, will be one and a half days of
talks and interactions among OCIS students and researchers. The doctoral
consortium provides students with feedback on their work from other students and
faculty members, allowing them to enhance their own dissertation research
proposals. Additionally, because of the diversity of the business sub-
disciplines and communities involved in the AoM conference, the consortium will
allow students to establish research connections beyond their own disciplines.
Consequently, participation will allow students to develop a better
understanding of the different research communities, which will facilitate their
participation in future inter-disciplinary research. In the past, the OCIS
doctoral consortium has been a successful venue at which students can take major
steps toward becoming professional researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The OCIS
division at the annual AoM meetings provides a leading international forum for
the presentation and discussion of research and practical issues related to the
use and impact of information and communication technologies in organizations
and society. The intellectual merit of this travel grant is that it provides a
forum for doctoral students to exchange insights and receive feedback and
guidance in order to enhance the quality of their dissertation research,
establish new research collaborations, and develop a greater awareness of
ongoing cutting-edge research in the field of organizational communication and
information systems.