* 1747726
* Planning IUCRC Wright State University: Center for Hardware and Embedded System Security and Trust (CHEST)
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2018,11/30/2018
* John Emmert, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Perkins
* 11/30/2018
* USD 15,000.00

Integrated circuit and embedded hardware devices are critical to most modern
military and industrial systems for defense, energy, healthcare, banking,
communication, transportation, and other sectors. These devices are more
vulnerable than ever to malicious tampering by untrusted entities, with threats
over a broad range of attack vectors. Malicious functionality can be added to
the devices during the design process, fabrication, or assembly, leading to
compromised systems, often without detection. This collaborative effort seeks to
further the national defense by developing novel methodologies and technologies
that enhance trust and security of these devices and their respective systems.

The to-be-planned Center is intended to enable researchers and practitioners
from diverse areas -- integrated circuits, design, cryptography, system safety
and resilience, etc. -- to position device security as a coherent, collaborative
discipline. It will be a hub for industry-focused research and a repository for
related data. It will foster dialog to promote advances across disciplinary
boundaries. The site will lead collaborative efforts in reverse engineering,
Trojan detection at the digital parasitic level, and design for security. It
will develop attack models to better understand Trojan risks and improve
detection; probabilistic Trojan detection techniques; and methods to avoid,
mitigate, and protect against Trojans.

The proposed Center is expected to influence the design, protection, and
resilience of cyber physical systems from vulnerabilities associated with device
security and workforce development needed for industry, government, and
military. The Center will disseminate research results and synthesized theories
on device security through multiple channels including courses taught at the six
sites and professional/scholarly activities. The results are expected to bring a
significant return on investment, as they improve the readiness of industry for
emergent conditions and improve resilience to frequencies, natures, and
severities of threats.

The collaborative group for the Industry & University Collaborative Research for
Hardware and Embedded System Security and Trust is composed of George Mason
University, Northeastern University, University of Connecticut, University of
Texas at Dallas, University of Virginia, and Wright State University. The
collaborators host a website at
https://www.vdl.afrl.af.mil/programs/PG_CHEST_IUCRC with meeting materials,
program information, publications, etc. The website is made available
indefinitely or until the Center transitions to the next phase.