* 1747299
* SBIR Phase I: A New Paradigm for Skill Development- A Training Platform Integrating Problem Solving and Mobile Programming to Create Peer-Led Skill Training for High School Student
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Arun Saigal, Thunkable, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2018
* USD 224,912.00

This SBIR Phase I project creates an online integrated training program that
combines problem solving and app development. Trainees will be able to create
mobile apps to address challenges facing their own communities. Mobile apps have
become key to addressing many pain points. Currently, skilled developers work
with customers to understand problems and create applications to solve problems.
Unfortunately, this restricts app creation to those that have access to
development resources and understand problem solving techniques. The platform
created in this project will democratize access to app development by giving
problem solving and app development skills to high school students. Thus, it
presents an opportunity to every citizen to create apps that can address their
own or their community's challenges. This opportunity can have a
transformational impact particularly on underprivileged communities where people
have very little access to resources. Mobile app development is also a skill
that has the potential for significant income generation opportunity. At the end
of the training, students will be certified for their problem solving and app
generation skill ability. High school students who have certification to prove
their problem solving and App Development skills become highly valued employees
in the work force of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project creates a
drag-and-drop tool that allows anyone to be able to create smartphone
applications, as well as an online portal that explains how to use the platform.
The app creation tool will allow users to (1) develop a smartphone app for
multiple operating systems; (2) live test their apps on their mobile devices;
(3) download their completed apps onto their personal devices; and (4) publish
their apps to the app store of their choosing. The online learning platform will
deliver multimedia content to teach and enable users across the country to be
able to build mobile applications on this platform. The world's mobile
population is expected to reach 5.7 billion people by 2020, yet only a very
small number of these users are expected to be able program these devices. Thus,
this project looks to build a tool that lowers the barrier to building mobile
smartphone apps via a drag-and-drop interface, as well as educate users on how
to use this tool.