* 1747773
* Planning IUCRC University of Texas at Dallas: Center for Hardware and Embedded System Security and Trust (CHEST)
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Yiorgos Makris, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Perkins
* 01/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

Integrated circuit and embedded hardware devices are critical to most modern
military and industrial systems for defense, energy, healthcare, banking,
communication, transportation, and other sectors. These devices are more
vulnerable than ever to malicious tampering by untrusted entities, with threats
over a broad range of attack vectors. Malicious functionality can be added to
the devices during the design process, fabrication, or assembly, leading to
compromised systems, often without detection. This collaborative effort seeks to
further the national defense by developing novel methodologies and technologies
that enhance trust and security of these devices and their respective
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Center is expected to enable
researchers and practitioners from diverse areas -- integrated circuits, design,
cryptography, system safety and resilience, etc. -- to position device security
as a coherent, collaborative discipline. It will be a hub for industry-focused
research and a repository for related data. It will foster dialog to promote
advances across disciplinary boundaries. The University of Texas at Dallas site
will lead collaborative research efforts in security and trust of analog, mixed-
signal and radio-frequency devices. It will investigate threat detection and
threat prevention methods in wireless communications and it will develop an
array of solutions for protecting intellectual property from unauthorized
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center will influence the design, protection, and
resilience of cyber-physical systems from vulnerabilities associated with device
security and workforce development needed for industry, government, and
military. The Center will disseminate research results and synthesized theories
on device security through multiple channels including courses taught at the six
sites and professional/scholarly activities. The results are expected to bring a
significant return on investment, as they improve the readiness of industry for
emergent conditions and improve resilience to frequencies, natures, and
severities of threats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborative group for this
Industry-University Cooperative Research for Hardware and Embedded System
Security and Trust is composed of George Mason University, Northeastern
University, University of Connecticut, University of Texas at Dallas, University
of Virginia, and Wright State University. The collaborators host a website at
https://www.vdl.afrl.af.mil/programs/PG_CHEST_IUCRC with meeting materials,
program information, publications, etc. The website is made available
indefinitely or until the Center transitions to the next phase.