* 1747484
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Collective Security and Jurisdictional Conflicts
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Leslie Johns, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2019
* USD 18,773.00

This study has implications for understanding the relationship between
international organizations and national governments. The lessons learned here
about the conditions under which people delegated power to the Catholic Church
could inform our understanding of the conditions under which people are willing
to delegate power to the UN or NATO. The Protestant Reformation was one of the
European history's most transformative events. It ended the ideological monopoly
of the Catholic Church and eventually led to the separation of church and state.
The Reformation is conventionally thought to have begun with the theological
dispute initiated by Martin Luther in 1517 and to have ended with the Peace of
Westphalia in 1648. This research asserts that, in important ways, the
Reformation began well before Luther's 95 Theses and ended only in the
eighteenth century. Specifically, it considers two major manifestations of papal
authority in European states - appointments of bishops and collection of taxes
from prelates - and seeks to explain why certain states won a higher degree of
independence from the Holy See than others, and when they did so. Secular rulers
shared sovereignty with the papacy in exchange for participation in military
alliances against common non-Catholic threats. Over time, the value of such
alliances grew larger to Southern and Central European states, whereas Northern
European states became net contributors, which is one major reason (or so is
being argued) that Protestantism initially took root in the North. To test this
proposition, the project assembles a new database of tax receipts of the papal
financial office, the Camera Apostolica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Catholic
Church was a pivotal actor in the political and economic development of pre-
modern Europe. The recent literature has illuminated the manifold first-order
consequences that the Protestant Reformation (1517) had for politics, markets,
and society. What remains unclear is why the Church's power declined more
quickly in some regions (Scandinavia) than in others (Central Europe). The
investigator argues that the temporal influence of the Church persisted insofar
as there was demand for collective security, and that this demand was relatively
stronger in Central and Southern Europe. An effective and enduring alliance of
Catholic states against the "infidels" (the Turks in particular) required
partial delegation of legal and fiscal authority to a common non-territorial
jurisdiction, namely the Church. These powers were exercised locally by bishops,
who limited rulers' discretionary power over domestic and international affairs,
and papal collectors, who transferred "spiritual revenues" from Catholic states
to the Curia. The investigator uses the variation in the amount of taxes
collected by the papacy in the late Middle Ages and early modern period across
time and space to explain secularization as a function of external military
threat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.