* 1747058
* STTR Phase I:  An immersive gaze-controlled video game to help children on the autism spectrum improve their eye contact, emotion recognition, and joint attention skills
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Benjamin Farber, BioStream Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to improve the way educators and therapists
teach social skills to children who are on the autism spectrum (as well as those
affected by other social skills disorders) and deliver cost efficiencies that
could expand access to such support across diverse socioeconomic classes and
geographical regions. These advances have potential to produce meaningful
quality-of-life improvements for these children in areas such as employability,
educational attainment, and personal relationships. Given that there are ~900K
children on the spectrum in the US alone, and that the rate of diagnosis has
been rising in recent years, the technology has significant potential for
impact. It also has significant commercial potential: the US special education
and therapy market is estimated at over 8 billion dollars, and feedback from
therapists and educators has indicated significant commercial demand for a
product like this. In addition, by pushing the frontiers of video game-based
training by incorporating real-time eye tracking data, the proposed project will
expand scientific and technological understanding of how video games can be used
to shape human behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
involves furthering the development and evaluation of a video game designed to
help children on the autism spectrum improve their social skills?a significant
and growing need. Key development activities include (1) adding multiple types
of gaze-controlled social skill training exercises, namely those targeting
emotion recognition and joint attention; (2) incorporating a low-cost, consumer-
grade eye tracker; (3) building an automated feedback system to ensure proper
player positioning relative to the eye tracker; and (4) refining adaptive
algorithms to personalize game difficulty and maximize engagement. These
features will be designed and implemented by a diverse team with expertise in
video game development, autism research, and technology commercialization.
Evaluation will consist of tracking performance against quantitatively
measurable success metrics related to game playability and engagement via human
subject research across 10 participants (50 gameplay sessions). The expected
result is a video game that addresses multiple social skill deficits, engages
the target demographic, and can be deployed by therapists, educators, and
parents in a cost-effective manner.