* 1747642
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impact of NGO Service Provision
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Guy Grossman, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2020
* USD 14,996.00

In political philosophy, the provision of essential services has been treated as
the basis for an implicit contract between states and citizens. According to
these theories, the state's reliance on citizens for tax revenue gives
governments an incentive to promote citizen welfare by providing public
services, while the reliance of citizens on the state for services such as
healthcare and primary education gives citizens an incentive to monitor
government performance and punish politicians for under-performance. One
implication of these theories is that the availability of alternative services
provided by non-state actors is likely to disrupt this relationship and
undermine political accountability. The impact of non-state services on domestic
politics has gained renewed relevance due to the rise of development NGOs. This
project develops and tests a theory of the political economy of NGO service
provision in developing countries using new and novel data on NGO service
delivery and citizen political behavior. Specifically, it examines whether NGO
service provision causes citizens to invest fewer resources in political
engagement with government, allows governments to garner political benefits such
as increased electoral support, and encourages governments to retrench their
role in service delivery. The findings have implications for development aid
policy, effective philanthropy practices, and social policy in developing
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;According to some theories from political
philosophy, the state's reliance on citizens for tax revenue gives governments
an incentive to promote citizen welfare by providing public services, while the
reliance of citizens on the state for essential services gives citizens an
incentive to monitor government performance and sanction under-performance. One
implication of these theories is that the availability of substitutes for
government-provided services is likely to disrupt this relationship. Although
there is a long history of non-state service provision in both developed and
developing countries, the impact of these actors on domestic politics has gained
renewed relevance due to the rise of development NGOs. This project develops and
tests a theory of the political economy of NGO service provision in developing
countries. Specifically, it asks whether NGO service provision causes citizens
to invest fewer resources in political engagement with government, allows
governments to garner political benefits such as increased electoral support,
and encourages governments to retrench their role in service delivery. To test
these hypotheses, new and novel data, including spatial data on aid, protests,
election returns, public opinion surveys, government budget data, and an
original spatial dataset of all health facilities in Uganda over a ten-year
period (developed in partnership with the Uganda Bureau of Statistics) is
leveraged. To bolster a causal interpretation, the impact of a randomized NGO
health intervention on the political attitudes and behavior of citizens in
treatment and control communities is evaluated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.