* 1747974
* I-Corps: Epileptic Seizure Detection System
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Konstantinos Tsakalis, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 03/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will benefit
epileptic patients by improving diagnostic systems for doctors, freeing them
from manual scanning of continuous electroencephalogram results. This is
expected to bring about significant reduction of cost in health care and enable
novel commercial applications of monitoring of epileptic patients. The nonlinear
analysis technique applied in this project has the potential to open up new
applications in neuroscience and may prove to be essential in recognizing how
and why seizures occur as well as other neurological disorders. The high
resolution of the approach also indicates a potential in identifying seizure
precursors, which would better assess seizure susceptibility and ultimately lead
to seizure suppression through external intervention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project further develops a reliable and automated seizure detection
mechanism which will potentially aid medical practitioners and patients with
epilepsy. The established practice for patients suspected of epilepsy is a
manual process, highly labor-intensive, and prone to human error. The technology
developed here addresses these problems by utilizing techniques from chaotic
systems and nonlinear measures that more accurately describe brain activity and
yield significantly more accurate results in seizure detection using EEG data
compared to standard linear measures. It combines state-of-the-art solutions
from both algorithms and computing hardware. At the heart of the method, there
is a recently developed algorithm for the estimation of Lyapunov exponents, a
measure of chaoticity, that was shown to provide unparalleled resolution and
noise immunity. This method is computationally expensive. To adhere to the real-
time constraints of the application, the project employs parallelizable
platforms such as multi-core CPUs/GPUs. Furthermore, complete automation will be
achieved by testing out a number of shape detection algorithms through the use
of neural networks and wavelet matching. The method has been tested on extensive
records from animal models and some human data.