* 1747010
* SBIR Phase I:  Tough polymer composite materials through iLAMB, or interlaminar modifications through master batching
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Bhishma Sedai, MITO Material Solutions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2018
* USD 224,988.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I Project objective is to overcome
weaknesses of current composite materials due to delamination and develop
composites with more than 100% improvement in interlaminar toughness. The
project aims to accelerate the innovation of epoxy/resin nanoadditives for
composite materials in order to solve this problem. Composites are expected to
be the fastest growing application segment in the global epoxy resin market,
with an estimated compounded annual growth rate of ~6% and an expected market
value of $14.5 billion by 2024. The key drivers in the market are the end-use
industries which include aerospace, automotive, transportation, and coatings.
There is a critical need to make these materials safer and more reliable by
increasing their low velocity impact resistance, and to increase the adhesion
between laminar layers. The product could have an obtainable market volume of
$36 million in the US alone by 2021.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit
of this project is in the development of new hybrid nanofillers based on
Graphene Oxide (GO) and Polyhedral Oligomeric Silsesquioxane (POSS). These
nanofillers can be added to epoxy/vinyl ester/polyester matrices through a
"Master Batch" process to enhance the interlaminar fracture toughness of
commercial composites. This increase in fracture toughness can be more than 100%
at extremely low addition levels (~0.2% by weight of the composite) without any
changes in current manufacturing processes. Nanofillers such as carbon nanotubes
and nanoclays are difficult to add to composite matrices because of their
tendency to agglomerate and result in poor dispersion, apart from major changes
in current manufacturing practices. Preliminary experiments have demonstrated
that it is possible to develop these hybrid nanofillers based on GO and POSS
that can be added to composite matrices with excellent dispersion in composite
industry standard solvents. The challenges of dispersion are overcome through
hybridization and Master Batching. Characterization of the cured Master Batches
as well as measurement of physical properties of sample composites will be
carried out to optimize the nanofiller content and the processing parameters.