* 1747222
* SBIR Phase I: Interface for connecting high temperature solar collectors to legacy thermal systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2018
* Arun Gupta, Skyven Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 06/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I Project will enable rural areas of the United States and
developing nations to leapfrog the need to build natural gas distribution
infrastructure. High temperature heat is required to manufacture and process
many day-to-day items, including food, clothing, and more. In regions of the
world that do not have natural gas infrastructure, factories produce heat by
burning petroleum-based fuel - fuel that must be trucked on-site. It gets
expensive. This project will develop technology to capture high temperature heat
directly from the sun at significantly lower costs than customers are already
paying for fuel. It has the potential to spur economic development in rural
areas in the US and other under-developed regions around the world by improving
access and reducing the cost of high-temperature heat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop plug-and-play interfaces and techniques to connect advanced
new fuel-less boiler technologies to existing / legacy thermal systems in
commercial and industrial facilities. Current techniques require costly
engineering and are prone to failure, forming a key barrier to the adoption of
new fuel-less heat sources. This project will develop modular, scalable, and
robust techniques to combine fuel-less boilers powered by the sun with
traditional boilers powered by fossil fuels. It will include development and
testing of both control systems and thermal balance-of-systems. The goal of the
project will be to demonstrate integration of an advanced renewable heat source
on a live industrial facility. This work is expected to reduce the cost of
deploying such technology by 50% or more.