* 1747769
* Phase I I/UCRC Carnegie Mellon University: Center for Big Learning CBL
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2018,07/31/2018
* Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Dmitri Perkins
* 07/31/2018
* USD 36,780.00

This project establishes the Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for
Big Learning (CBL). With substantial breakthroughs in deep learning, the
renaissance of machine intelligence is unfolding. The vision is to create
intelligence towards the intelligence-driven society. Through catalyzing the
fusion of diverse expertise from the consortium of faculty members, students,
industry partners, and federal agencies, CBL seeks to create state-of-the-art
deep learning methodologies and technologies and enable intelligent
applications, transforming broad domains, such as business, media, healthcare,
Internet-of-Things, and cybersecurity. This timely initiative creates a unique
platform for empowering our next-generation talents with real-world relevance
and significance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission is to pioneer novel deep
learning algorithms, intelligent systems, and novel applications through unified
and coordinated efforts in the CBL consortium via fusion of broad expertise from
our large number of center faculty members, students, industry partners, and
government agencies. The Carnegie-Mellon University site will focus on deep
learning algorithms and platforms and work with other sites on novel
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CBL is expected to have broad
transformative impacts in technologies, education, and the society. CBL seeks to
create pioneering research and applications to address a broad spectrum of real-
world challenges, making significant contributions and impacts to the deep
learning community, the industry and the society at large. The discoveries from
CBL will make significant contributions to promote products and industrial
services in general and CBL industry partners in particular. As the magnet of
deep learning research and applications, CBL offers an ideal platform to nurture
next-generation talents through world-class mentors from both academia and
industry, disseminate the cutting-edge technologies, and facilitate
industry/university collaborative research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The center
repository will be hosted at http://nsfcbl.org. The data, code, documents will
be well organized and maintained on the CBL server for the duration of the
center plus five years. The internal code repository will be managed by GitLab.
After the software packages are well documented and tested, they will be
released and managed by popular public servers, such as GitHub and Bitbucket.