* 1747702
* US-Japan Workshop on Advances in Organic/Inorganic Hybrid Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Frieder Jaekle, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2018
* USD 8,000.00

TECHNICAL AND NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

This award provides partial support for the 2018 US-Japan Workshop on Advances
in Organic/Inorganic Hybrid Materials. The workshop is co-organized by
researchers from both the US and Japan and will take place on the Newark Campus
of Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey from June 17 to 21, 2018.

The technical portion of the workshop will highlight major current advances and
also point to important future directions in the fast-growing field of hybrid
materials. The workshop will assemble ca. 25-30 individuals each from Japan and
the US who are on the forefront of the synthesis and characterization of hybrid
materials and their implementation in new application fields. The presentations
of the U.S. and Japanese speakers will be alternated and the talks organized so
that the topics are similar. The idea is to learn about commonalities that can
be expected to foster cooperative research. Sessions on the following specific
topical areas are envisioned: New Synthetic Approaches to Organic-Inorganic
Hybrid Materials; Conjugated Hybrid Materials for Optoelectronic Applications;
Nanomaterials and Nanocomposites; Materials and Device Applications; Self-
Assembly and Biomedical-Related Applications. Leading experts in the field from
Japan and the US will discuss the latest developments in each of these areas of
research.

One of the major aims of the workshop is to offer opportunities for technical
exchange of information and professional interactions between researchers from
Japan and the US. High profile scientists at varying career stages, ranging from
new investigators to highly established senior researchers, will have an
opportunity for detailed discussions on the frontiers of inorganic-organic
hybrid materials. Further, the format of the conference will encourage
international cooperation by pairing speakers from the US with colleagues from
Japan in focused sessions on topical areas of mutual interest. This workshop
will also serve as an important platform for allowing young scientists (i.e.,
untenured faculty, graduate students and postdoctoral fellows) to broaden their
professional network and establish new international collaborations.