* 1747734
* Planning IUCRC University of Arizona: Center of Stream Healthcare In Place (SHIP)
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Linda Powers, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 12/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

This planning grant award will be used to study the feasibility of establishing
a university-industry partnership in the area of healthcare-in-place. While the
primary focus will be on aging patients, pediatric chronic conditions are
endemic in American society yet largely unrecognized by healthcare providers.
The proposed Center to Stream Healthcare In Place (C2SHIP) would unite the best
minds in academic medicine with leaders in the biomedical industry to research
and develop intelligent monitoring and intervening wearable technologies, and in
particular will be focused on enabling and promoting aging in place,
personalized medicine, and smart management of chronic and non-communicable
disease through telecommunication, data mining, and comprehensive feedback. The
thrust of our research will be on the aging patient's central role and
responsibility in enabling an optimized healthcare
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our trans-disciplinary research will pursue
research and development in reconfigurable designs and system integration
centered on the aging/health "in place" concept: establishment of an environment
or mobile hub for patient-in-need within his/her own location facilitated by the
streaming of data to medical professionals at remote locations in real time
through the Internet of Things. This represents a crucial first step toward
characterizing abnormalities in environment and activity. Moreover, the proposed
C2SHIP will focus on the mitigation of physiological, environmental, and
psychological changes for real time management and intervention as well as
infuse new in place technologies into relevant user communities and
residences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed C2SHIP will investigate techniques
and mechanisms that can facilitate real time interventions for a number of
chronic diseases. The Center will not only advance the science of physiology,
aging and pediatric medicine but also accelerate both knowledge and intellectual
property transfer between academia and industry through our collaborative
partnerships. This will allow for the rapid development of new in place
technologies that can potentially transform health care delivery, reduce health
care costs related to care of chronic disease and preventable re-admissions, and
improve outcomes and quality of life for aging and chronically ill
patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data produced from this project will be deposited
in servers at the C2SHIP Center under password protection and kept for five
years, with sharing enabled through a commercial provider. No personal
identifiers will be recorded or retained by the researchers in any
form.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.