* 1747694
* Summit of Software Infrastructure for Managing and Processing Big Multimedia Data at the Internet Scale
* CSE,OAC
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Yung-Hsiang Lu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Stefan Robila
* 11/30/2018
* USD 15,000.00

Data from multiple sources of multiple media types (also known as multimedia
data) is the foundation of data-driven discoveries in science. The United States
needs to create a workforce trained in storing, analyzing and gaining insights
from multimedia data. This travel award will enable students to attend a one-
and-a-half-day summit on the topic of "Software Infrastructure for Managing and
Processing Big Multimedia Data at the Internet Scale", and co-located with IEEE
International Conference on Multimedia Information Processing and Retrieval held
on April 10-12 in Miami, Florida. This summit will include speeches, panels,
posters, and hands-on training for attendees. Participation in conferences such
as this summit is an extremely important part of a graduate student's research
and career development, because it provides him or her the opportunity for them
to learn about the field from panel and keynote talks, interact with peers and
senior researchers, and generally gain broad exposure to leading edge work in
multimedia computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Almost all disciplines of science
and engineering involve generation and analysis of multimedia data, with the
sources of data including laboratory experiments, unmanned aerial vehicles,
traffic and surveillance cameras, and social media posts. Multimedia data is
more than just big in volume; it is also multi-modal and mostly unstructured.
Storing, indexing, searching, integrating, processing and gaining insights from
the vast amounts of data have unprecedented challenges. In many cases, the data
must be analyzed immediately in order to prevent or respond to situations (such
as traffic collisions or natural disasters). In some cases, the data needs to be
archived to discover long-term trends. Even though significant progress has been
made in processing multimedia data, today's solutions are inadequate for
handling the data from millions of sources simultaneously. This summit will
include speeches, panels, posters, and hands-on training for attendees together
with discussions on software and systems infrastructure for processing
multimedia data, and on case studies on using multimedia data for emergency
response. The outcomes of the summit are (1) describe a roadmap for constructing
software infrastructure for analyzing multimedia data at Internet scale and (2)
develop training modules for using multimedia data for emergency response.