* 1747821
* RAPID: Ecological Reversal of Evolutionary Trends During a Climate Anomaly: Plasticity, Adaptation, and Integration of Environmental Change into Genomic and Organismal Architecture
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Michael Dawson, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2021
* USD 199,993.00

This project seeks to understand the factors that lead to dramatic changes in
the appearance of jellyfishes following the most recent extreme El Niño
perturbation on record. The project will then examine the consequences of these
changes in morphology for the jellyfish, its symbiont, and the prey of the
jellyfish. Intriguingly, the changes in appearance of the jellyfishes mirror
changes seen during the 15,000 years since the Last Glacial Maximum. The
temporary nature of the rare perturbation generates considerable urgency to
study this unanticipated natural event. Comparison of current perturbed and
subsequent "normal" conditions, and comparisons with an ancestor-like sister
population in the ocean, has the potential to rapidly advance understanding of
interactions between an organism's genotype and phenotype, and its environment
in both ecological and evolutionary contexts. The project will train a graduate
student in integrative biology, improve understanding of a socio-economically
important ecosystem, supporting decisions by local government resource managers,
and improve understanding of plasticity in jellyfish which may contribute to,
and shape, the consequences of jellyfish blooms. Results will be incorporated
into education and outreach materials for a new hybrid online general education
course. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ecophenotypic variation of Mastigias medusae that
is associated with dramatic changes in abiotic environment and population size
in Jellyfish Lake associated with a severe El Niño mirrors evolutionary trends
seen among populations inhabiting a suite of marine lakes and adjacent ocean
locations in Palau. This project will sample and describe key environmental and
organismal details of this extreme perturbation, enabling examination of how
environmental changes interact with differential expression and/or selection of
loci to amend functional phenotypic variation on ecological and evolutionary
time-scales. Methods include measurement of morphological and behavioral
phenotypes of Mastigias medusae at two time-points presenting each of two
characteristic morphologies; tissue sampling from those phenotypically distinct
medusae for genomic, epigenetic, and transcriptomic analyses; stable isotope
analyses; microbiome analyses; and characterization of abiotic and biotic
characteristics of the environment, including temperature, salinity, oxygen, pH,
water clarity, nutrients, chl a, bacterioplankton, phytoplankton, and
zooplankton. Comparable data will be collected in an ancestor-like sister
population (subspecies) from the adjacent ocean. These measurements will reveal
whether similar suites of loci are involved in plastic and in adaptive responses
to changing environments, i.e. whether there is support for the concept of
genetic assimilation in Mastigias. They will also inform the understanding of
organismal responses to gradual and rapid climate change globally, and will
generate novel hypotheses regarding variation in homologous structures across
the scyphozoan tree of life.