* 1747690
* Planning Grant: The Pennsylvania State University addition to the  Industry University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) for Membrane Science, Engineering and Technology (MAST)
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Michael Hickner, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

This Planning Grant proposal is focused on the establishment of a new Site in
the Center for Membrane Science, Engineering and Technology (MAST) at The
Pennsylvania State University. Membrane-based separations offer a number of
unique advantages compared to competing technologies including: lower energy
requirements, relative ease of scale-up, and room temperature operation. The
current market for membrane technology is expected to grow at 8.5% over the next
several years, reaching annual sales of $26 billion by 2019 with approximately
25% of that in the U.S. The Penn State Site will focus on applications of
membranes in the biopharmaceutical industry and for sustainability, addressing
key fundamental issues that limit the use of membranes in these areas. The
Planning Grant Workshop will be held in April 2018 on the Penn State campus,
providing opportunities for potential industry sponsors to learn about the plans
for the new Site, the proposed research efforts, and the experimental
capabilities in membrane science and materials characterization at Penn State.
The feedback obtained from this Workshop will form the basis for a follow-up
proposal to formally establish the Penn State Site, which will provide unique
educational opportunities for students to work on industry-sponsored projects in
membrane technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests funds to host a
Planning Grant Workshop in April 2018 to develop a new Site in the Center for
Membrane Science, Engineering and Technology (MAST) at The Pennsylvania State
University with a specific focus on membrane applications in the
biopharmaceutical industry and for sustainable energy. This Workshop will allow
prospective sponsors to learn about detailed plans for the Penn State Site,
including the proposed research thrusts and experimental capabilities, while
meeting with current industry partners, faculty, and graduate students in the
MAST Center. The feedback obtained from this Workshop will form the basis for a
formal proposal to establish the Penn State Site. The Penn State Site will
complement and expand the research portfolio in membrane science and technology
by addressing pre-competitive research challenges in bioprocessing and
sustainable energy generation. This includes issues associated with the use of
membrane technology in continuous bioprocessing and the development of cost-
effective membrane systems for harvesting energy from waste heat and naturally
occurring salinity gradients. The Penn State Site will provide an ideal
environment for training both undergraduates and graduate students, including
extensive interactions with leading researchers in industry and at the other
MAST Center Sites.