* 1747319
* SBIR Phase I:  Combined endorectal prostatic Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Biopsy Device to Enable Single Combined Procedures
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Robert Duffy DuFresne, OmnEcoil Instruments, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2018
* USD 224,996.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve the care of men with suspected
prostate cancer, by providing the benefits of tumor localization within the
prostate by state of the art endorectal multiparametric MRI combined with the
benefits of precision biopsy using MRI-targeted needle sampling as a single
patient-convenient procedure. The current standard approach to prostate cancer,
transrectal ultrasound guided systematic biopsy, requires 12 needle samples from
standard locations in the prostate with the hope of hitting any cancer that
might be present. This option is essentially playing a game of battleships with
the prostate, and is, unsurprisingly, inaccurate with high rates of
underdiagnosis and overdiagnosis. Many patients require repeated biopsy because
of these inaccuracies. By way of contrast, it is inconceivable that breast
cancer would be diagnosed by placing twelve needles at standard locations in the
breast, yet this has been the longstanding 'state-of-the-art' for prostate
cancer. With approximately one million prostate biopsies are performed annually
in the U.S., the market and clinical need is large and of major socioeconomic
importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will preliminarily
determine the technical and commercial feasibility of combining an endorectal
MRI coil with a transrectal multichannel array of biopsy needle guides into a
single device that would provide the ability to perform MRI for diagnosis and
targeted needle placement as a single integrated procedure. Such a device could
transform the current paradigm for prostate cancer diagnosis, providing greater
precision, personalization, and patient convenience. To determine technical
feasibility, the project plan is to fabricate and 3D print a proof-of-concept
device for initial simulation experiments and selection of the final coil
configuration, evaluate imaging performance of the device coil by measuring
signal to noise ratio on standard MR images in a human male pelvic phantom and
evaluate the fidelity of needle deployment by measurement of linear deviation
between actual and intended needle positioning in a phantom in transverse and
longitudinal directions. At all stages, continuous design and engineering
modifications will be made to ensure satisfactory technical performance.