* 1747432
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: State Violence and the Struggle for Life
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,12/31/2019
* Linda Zerilli, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 12/31/2019
* USD 18,900.00

This research addresses several significant questions in social science research
and political science in particular. First, it brings a political science
perspective to the issue of state and intimate violence by providing a detailed
analysis of the experiences of women and women-activists from a marginalized
group. Second, this research will contest the silences surrounding Black women
as key actors for understanding Black Politics. Such silences help to perpetuate
everyday assumptions about race, gender, violence and the public/private divide
with regards to political thinking, action, and justice. The research will
document new trends and demonstrate how, and why, gender and race are pivotal in
addressing the issue of state violence. In particular, this research will
broaden categories for data collection for state violence, which can incorporate
the importance of understanding how racially marginalized women experience and
understand state violence. This work can be a point of reference for creating
better international, national, and local responses that hold states and
institutions accountable for violence and injustice, which could therefore help
to create a more democratic and just society for all. In addition, the results
of this study will be shared with the two organizations with that provide the
basis of the fieldwork. In addition, the results of this study can help to
address the needs for distributive justice and support for Afro-descendant women
as well as for continued research on the topic of gendered anti-blackness and
state violence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anti-Black state violence is a pervasive
problem throughout the Americas. Emerging scholarship examining the gendered
dimensions of this phenomenon revisit the links between anti-Black state
violence and violence against women. This body of work draws on the long history
of work thought examining the ways that the state infiltrates, violates, and
controls black women's intimate spheres of the body, the home, and the family.
As such, this project examines the role of intimacy in contemporary
manifestations of anti-black violence and Black mobilizations. Drawing on
original ethnographic insights from Afro-Brazilian and Afro-Colombian women,
this dissertation posits three arguments. First, state violence invades intimate
spaces: the home and relationships--and is, therefore, a form of intimate
violence. Second, when Black women narrate these acts of violence, they develop
a new way of understanding the state: they show how the state is [re]constituted
by means of intimate violations. Thus while Black women's accounts unveil the
ways in which state violence is intimate, their voices and organizing also
demonstrate how these spaces are important sites for creating new forms of
knowledge and resistance. Third, Black women's experiences with anti-black
violence are often articulated and interpreted through a collective lens,
whereby Black women not only use a language of intimacy to describe experiences
with state violence, but also [re]claim domains of the intimate to empower
themselves, their families, and their communities. these result in a politic of
collective intimacy, which provides a way to resist state violence, hold
community and family members accountable, and envision justice beyond the
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.