* 1747671
* IUCRC Phase I Drexel University: Center for High Pressure Plasma Energy, Agriculture, and Biomedical Technologies (PEAB)
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Alexander Fridman, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 01/31/2024
* USD 766,000.00

Advances in the science of atmospheric pressure plasmas have enabled
breakthrough opportunities to improve our Nation's healthcare, economic
prosperity and defense. These science breakthroughs have resulted in the
development of new technologies in green energy, environmental remediation,
water treatment and cleaning, medicine, food processing, and agriculture. These
are the core fundamental areas of science and technology to be addressed by the
Center for High Pressure Plasma Energy, Agriculture, and Biomedical Technologies
(C-PEAB). Drexel University (DU), University of Michigan (UM), and George
Washington University (GWU), leading institutions in the scientific subject
area, are synergistically collaborating with each other and with their
industrial partners as the founding members of the C-PEAB. This effort will
support STEM education with focused recruitment of women and underrepresented
minorities, produce an interdisciplinary workforce, and integrate novel
breakthrough technologies with industry. While having long-term collaborations
in plasma science with GWU and UM, Drexel University's unique contribution to
the C-PEAB team is based upon DU?s pioneering research achievements in plasma
medicine and plasma agriculture as well as scientific and technological
experience in scaling up atmospheric pressure plasma devices from laboratory to
industrial scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Low Temperature non-equilibrium Plasma
(LTP) science is the base upon which many modern industries such as
microelectronics and micro-fabrication have been built. Current breakthroughs in
plasma-generating electronics have made it possible to widen the area of LTP
applications to atmospheric and higher pressures. These application areas are
the focus of the Center for High Pressure Plasma Energy, Agriculture, and
Biomedical Technologies (C-PEAB). The C-PEAB will translate science
breakthroughs in diagnostics, pulse power and modeling to optimizing industrial
applications in energy, environmental remediation, food safety and food
processing, and medical and bioengineering. C-PEAB will initially consist of a
three-site IUCRC between Drexel University (DU), University of Michigan (UM),
and George Washington University (GWU) with subsequent addition of new member
universities who have strong industry collaborations in high-pressure plasma
applications pertinent to the C-PEAB. While having long-term collaboration
experience in plasma science with GWU and UM, Drexel University site's unique
contribution to the C-PEAB team is especially based upon DU?s core expertise in
science and engineering of atmospheric and higher pressure (1) nanosecond and
sub-nanosecond pulsed dielectric barrier discharges, and (2) non-equilibrium
gliding arcs, stabilized in tornado flow.