* 1747902
* Meeting: Workshop on Plant Development and Drought Stress, to be held November 5-8, 2017 at Asilomar Conference Grounds in Pacific Grove, CA.
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* M. Kathryn Barton, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 08/31/2018
* USD 10,000.00

Part 1. Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will promote
interactions and information exchange among biologists using different
scientific approaches to resolve how plants grow and develop and those studying
how plants respond to drought stress. These interactions will take place at the
second Workshop on Plant Development and Drought Stress, to be held November
5-8, 2017 at Asilomar Conference Grounds in Pacific Grove, CA. This is a novel
meeting of two scientific communities that normally attend separate conferences.
Plant developmental biology is the study of how plants grow and produce
different structures, such as roots, leaves, flowers and seeds that are critical
to the economic value of crops. Plant development is regulated by many
environmental factors, including moisture availability. Drought is a serious
environmental stress that causes major crop loss. Plants adjust their
development in response to environmental factors such as drought stress to
improve their chances of survival and reproduction. Understanding the mechanisms
by which plant development is regulated in response to drought could help
produce crops better adapted to maintain productivity under moisture limitation.
This project involves a relatively small meeting in a secluded location,
producing an intimate atmosphere conducive to discussion of new ideas and
emerging concepts, as well as developing professional networks. In addition,
ample time will be devoted to presentations from early career, women and
underrepresented minority scientists. A meeting summary will be submitted to a
prominent scientific plant journal for dissemination to the wider scientific
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2. Technical
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an important and novel scientific
conference where the intersections of plant developmental biology and drought
stress responses are explored through talks, poster sessions, and intensive
scientific discussion. Leading researchers from academia, industry and
government agencies present cutting edge research directed towards a fundamental
understanding of how intrinsic and external signals regulate plant growth and
development, how plants respond to drought stress, ultimately leading to a
deeper understanding of how moisture status impacts development. This meeting
will cover broad areas of plant development and stress, including roots and
shoots, morphology, physiology, hormone biology, epigenetics and biomechanics.
Examples of successful translation of fundamental research into improved crop
performance will also be featured. The conference will promote education of
diverse scientists at all career levels (graduate students, postdoctoral
fellows, beginning and established investigators) from both the public and
private sectors. Presentations include invited speakers, poster presentations
and talks chosen from submitted abstracts. The conference will be advertised
widely and participation by underrepresented minority and female scientists will
be strongly encouraged. Conference results will be disseminated via abstract
books provided to meeting participants or by request, and through a written
summary of meeting highlights published in a leading plant scientific journal.