* 1747941
* A Workshop for Broadening Participation in the Economics Profession:  Proposal Writing and Grants Management
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Kaye Husbands Fealing, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2018
* USD 45,000.00

Abstract: A Workshop for Broadening Participation in the Economics Profession:
Proposal Writing and Grant Management&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;African Americans are
under-represented in the Economics profession relative to their population share
in the U.S. The participation rate of researchers from Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) in NSF funded research activities in economics
is even much lower than African American representation in the Economics
profession. In an era of increasing diversity of the U.S. workforce, broadening
participation in STEM research has become a necessity. Part of this low
participation rate can be attributed to lack of supply of quality proposals from
HBCU researchers. This proposed Workshop aims to bring researchers from HBCUs,
NSF Program Directors, HBCU Administrators and NSF Awardees together to develop
approaches to increase quality submission of grant applications from HBCUs. The
Workshop will provide a "hands on" experience in writing competitive research
grant applications and managing awards should one win award. Expected outcomes
of this Workshop include increased number of competitive proposals submitted to
NSF from HBCUs, increased collaboration among HBCU researchers and among HBC and
non-HBCU researchers, increased publications in refereed journals by HBCU
economics faculty, and ultimately a strong research infrastructure and culture
in HBCUs. Key aspects of the Workshop is the long term mentoring that will be
provided for new researchers, as well as the collaboration across researchers
that will develop. Involving HBCU Administrators will let them realize how time
consuming research is and therefore convince them provide time release for their
faculty to be able write competitive proposals. The results of this Workshop
will contribute to the development of a strong and diverse STEM scientific
community in the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;About 20 research-active HBCU
economists from the Southeastern U.S., NSF grant awardees, NSF Program Directors
from the Social Behavioral and Economics Directorate (SBE), and HBCU
Administrators will be invited to this Workshop. Prior NSF awardee will be
assigned as mentors to the HBCU faculty and NSF Program Officers will act as
resource persons at the Workshop. The focus of the Workshop will be on the
practical aspects of grant writing and grant management. The key to success of
this workshop is the requirement that each participant comes in with a draft
outline of a research project which s/he will work to refine at the workshop and
continue to work on refining with his/her mentor after the Workshop and
ultimately submit to the NSF for funding. If successful, the efforts can be
replicated not only in other regions but also in other disciplines with current
mentees acting as mentors in future efforts. To gauge the success of the
Workshop, the PIs will collect data on the research productivity of participants
before and after participation. For effective evaluation, the PIs will also
collect information on a control group in order to be able evaluate the
effectiveness or otherwise of the Workshop. This Workshop will contribute to the
development of a strong and diverse Economics profession in the U.S., thus
contributing the U.S.' leadership in economic science.