* 1747535
* EAGER: Exploratory Research on Deriving Flight Information from Drone Imagery for Safety Compliance
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Shawn Newsam, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 12/31/2020
* USD 205,373.00

Recreational drone use is increasing rapidly in the United States. The Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) has established safety regulations such as flying
too high, too fast, in restricted areas, etc. but there is no way to detect
violations on a large scale. Further, drone users are unaware of or unconcerned
about the regulations since they are self-enforced. Drone users upload large
amounts of imagery to the Internet including that from flights which violate the
safety regulations. This imagery is often the only evidence of the flights and
so an interesting research question is whether image analysis can be used to
detect violations from the flight imagery alone. The overarching goal of this
project is an automated method to identify specific instances of violations in
the large amounts of drone imagery available on the Internet. This would provide
valuable information regarding the extent to which the regulations are being
violated. It could also be used to pursue specific violators. The project will
be done in collaboration with the University of California Center of Excellence
on Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) Safety (http://uassafety.ucmerced.edu/). This
Center provides expertise, support, and training for regulatory compliance, risk
management, and the safe operation of UAS across the ten campus UC
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detecting whether a flight is above the 400 ft
limit specified by the FAA will serve as a proof-of-concept. A two-step process
will first estimate the spatial resolution (i.e., meters per pixel) of the
imagery and then use knowledge or estimates of the camera specifications to
compute the height. If successful, the proof-of-concept can be extended to other
violations such as flying too fast, above crowds, in poor visibility, etc.
Estimating the spatial resolution and height of overhead imagery are novel
problems, and the proposed approach is novel, challenging and risky. The project
stands to make significant gains. There is currently no way to detect violations
on a large scale and so this would be the first solution to this increasingly
important problem. And, a broad range of drone image analysis problems beyond
height estimation would benefit from knowing the spatial resolution. Results,
datasets, and other project artifacts will be made available through the project
website.