* 1747486
* Real-world language: Future directions in the science of communication and the communication of science
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2017,02/29/2020
* James Magnuson, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 02/29/2020
* USD 20,943.00

This award will support the organization of a two-day workshop on future
challenges in language science, with integrated discussion of science
communication (making language science research accessible to specialist peers,
scientists in other fields, and the general public). The workshop will take
place in Madison, WI, immediately following the 2018 Cognitive Science Society
annual meeting. Language science is an interdisciplinary area drawing on
theories and methods from linguistics, cognitive psychology, developmental
psychology, and artificial intelligence, among other fields. The primary goal is
basic scientific understanding of the human capacity for language and potential
longer-term impact on technology, education, and
health.Â &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Invited speakers will 1) provide critical reviews
of different theoretical perspectives, methodological approaches, and tools
(such as eye tracking, electroencephalography, or functional magnetic resonance
imaging); 2) focus on near- and long-term challenges facing language science; or
3) focus on science communication and education. In an effort to spark
discussion and collaboration, research interest groups will be formed that will
hold videoconference meetings in Fall, 2018. Plans include strategies for
promoting student participation and inclusion of women and members of under-
represented groups.