* 1747748
* Planning IUCRC Northeastern University: Center for Hardware and Embedded System Security and Trust (CHEST)
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Yunsi Fei, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 01/31/2020
* USD 15,000.00

Integrated circuit and embedded hardware devices are critical to most modern
military and industrial systems for defense, energy, healthcare, banking,
communication, transportation, and other sectors. These devices are more
vulnerable than ever to malicious tampering by untrusted entities, with threats
over a broad range of attack vectors. Malicious functionality can be added to
the devices during the design process, fabrication, or assembly, leading to
compromised systems, often without detection. This collaborative effort seeks to
further the national defense by developing novel methodologies and technologies
that enhance trust and security of these devices and their respective
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The to-be-planned Center is intended to enable
researchers and practitioners from diverse areas -- integrated circuits,
architecture, cryptography, system safety and resilience, etc. -- to position
device security as a coherent, collaborative discipline. It will be a hub for
industry-focused research and a repository for related data. It will foster
dialog to promote advances across disciplinary boundaries. The site will lead
collaborative efforts in security of cyber-physical and large-scale systems,
secure architecture and virtualization, and embedded system security and
privacy. It will adopt advanced machine-learning algorithms, and investigate
analysis and mitigation of side channels and covert channels in mobile systems,
Graphical Processing Units, and nano-devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center is
expected to influence the design, protection, and resilience of cyber physical
systems from vulnerabilities associated with device security and workforce
development needed for industry, government, and military. The Center will
disseminate research results and synthesized theories on device security through
both professional/scholarly activities and courses taught at the six sites. The
results should bring a significant return on investment, as they improve the
readiness of industry for emergent conditions and improve resilience to
frequencies, natures, and severities of threats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
collaborative group for the Industry &amp; University Collaborative Research for
Hardware and Embedded System Security and Trust is composed of George Mason
University, Northeastern University, University of Connecticut, University of
Texas at Dallas, University of Virginia, and Wright State University. The
collaborators host a website at
https://www.vdl.afrl.af.mil/programs/PG_CHEST_IUCRC with meeting materials,
program information, publications, etc. The website is made available
indefinitely or until the Center transitions to the next phase.