* 1747578
* Workshop: Designed Quantum Materials Workshop; To be Held at The National Institute of Standards and Technology, in Gaithersburg, MD January 23-24, 2018
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Wiley Kirk, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2019
* USD 16,032.00

The Designed Quantum Materials Workshop will play a key role in identifying new
directions for research on next generation electronic devices. It will promote
interactions between leading researchers, will explore new device concepts and
technologies and will focus on the technical challenges and barriers of
transitioning such research results into nanomanufacturing. The highlights of
the symposium will be accessible through a report on the workshop and its
findings that will be published in a readily accessible public
medium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides funds to support graduate
student and invited researcher participation, as well as conference organization
expenses in a workshop to be held January 23-24, 2018, at the National Institute
of Standards and Technology (NIST) in Gaithersburg, Maryland. The Designed
Quantum Materials Workshop will address the questions of precise placement of
dopants in semiconductors for better spin-orbit coupling, as well as the study
of two-dimensional (2D) properties and related nanomanufacturing aspects.
Approaches to be considered include (1) improved accuracy of dopant placement
for Hubbard model experiments; (2) study of designed 2D materials and
verification of various solid state physics models; (3) development of concepts
that generate technologically relevant nanomanufacturing approaches. New types
of fundamental physics studies and the possible development of new regimes of
metamaterials will be discussed and explored along these lines. These will also
be considered in terms of innovative technologies for the nanomanufacturing of
new devices and materials.