* 1747746
* Validation of the Strontium-Uranium Thermometer Against Instrumental Records of Ocean Temperature
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Anne Cohen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Larry Peterson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 33,234.00

Anthropogenic CO2 emissions are changing Earth's climate. Yet climate also
varies naturally on timescales of decades to millennia. Characterizing this
variability is critical to both quantifying the anthropogenic influence and
projecting future change. Sea surface temperature (SST) plays a major role in
climate yet the instrumental record is too short to enable a robust evaluation
of natural variability. Proxy data generated from coral skeletons have potential
to fill these gaps but generation of lengthy records requires use of dead
colonies that grew before the instrumental era, for which existing geochemical
SST proxies are not well-suited. A new thermometer, Sr-U, has been developed for
application to non-living corals but the calibration to SST requires testing.
This project seeks to validate Sr-U by reconstructing a record for the central
Red Sea and comparing against well-constrained observational SSTs for the
region. A successful outcome will benefit the scientific community by opening
the global archive of non-living corals for SST reconstructions. Improved SST
reconstructions will provide a target for the same numerical models used to
predict future oceanographic and climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coral-to-
coral geochemical variability is a major obstacle to SST reconstructions from
non-living corals and Sr-U is based on a robust understanding of the processes
that cause this variability. This project will generate Sr/Ca and U/Ca data for
the last 50 years from an existing Porites coral core sampled in the central Red
Sea and apply a calibration derived from Atlantic species to reconstruct the SST
record. Heavy ship traffic in the region means the pre-satellite observational
record is well-constrained. Additionally, Red Sea SSTs over the last 50 years
are characterized by decadal variability superimposed on a long-term warming
trend, and thus present an ideal test of the ability of Sr-U to capture both
variability and trends in an unknown coral. The goal is a proof-of-concept, to
demonstrate the universal application of Sr-U as a tool with which to
reconstruct accurate SST records using modern and fossil corals alike.