* 1747997
* EAGER: Developing Teaching Assistant Expertise with a Sensor-Based Learning System
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* John Zimmerman, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2020
* USD 348,000.00

While a college degree is essential for many jobs or career paths, many college
students receive a less than ideal educational experience. For years, research
has shown that moving away from large lectures and increasing student engagement
and participation significantly improves learning. However, most colleges still
rely on lectures where students passively receive information from professors,
and instructors continue to teach in the ways in which they themselves were
taught. This project addresses this large-scale societal problem of
understanding and supporting instructor learning by investigating how to support
teaching assistants (TAs) to acquire student-centered teaching skills before
they transition to faculty. This exploratory research project will investigate
the development of an advanced learning technology system that integrates
multimodal sensory data to deliver near real-time data on teaching practices.
The combined reflection and training system will provide rapid and frequent
feedback and instruction on good strategies to support student-centered teaching
beliefs and behaviors. In turn, the project will advance understanding of how
instructors engage with personal informatics to impact beliefs and behaviors
related to teacher professional development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
exploratory project, a learning system for TAs will be developed, consisting of
an interconnected set of modules that support them in acquiring student-centered
teaching practices through the provision of a dashboard with near-real-time
multimodal classroom data. The system draws upon technical and socio-technical
advances in sensing arrays, computer vision, intelligent environments, and
personal informatics, together with frameworks of professional development in
higher education. The project advances computing by expanding the capabilities
of state of the art multimodal sensing approaches to achieve non-invasive
sensing at classroom-scale. Through a series of design-based research studies
with TAs who are teaching STEM college courses, the project investigates: a) the
ways in which this system can present personal data to foster productive self-
doubt, b) how engagement with personal data leads to a motivation to change, and
c) how data-driven instruction can foster self-efficacy in teaching.