* 1747767
* Planning IUCRC University of Virginia: Center for Hardware and Embedded System Security and Trust (CHEST)
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2019
* James Lambert, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Perkins
* 01/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

Integrated circuit and embedded hardware devices are critical to most modern
military and industrial systems for defense, energy, healthcare, banking,
communication, transportation, and other sectors. These devices are more
vulnerable than ever to malicious tampering by untrusted entities, with threats
over a broad range of attack vectors. Malicious functionality can be added to
the devices during the design process, fabrication, or assembly, leading to
compromised systems, often without detection. This collaborative effort seeks to
further the national defense by developing novel methodologies and technologies
that enhance trust and security of these devices and their respective systems.

The research goal is to understand the risk and resilience of systems with
embedded devices through innovations to methodologies of data analytics and
systems engineering. Initial research topics include: Resource allocation to the
security of critical devices in large-scale systems, tracking emergent and
future conditions of the device supply chain, and system resilience to attacks
on networks of interconnected devices. The research identifies factors that
influence risk and resilience in the lifecycles and supply chains of the
devices, develops the associated performance metrics and models, and identifies
the key scenarios and extreme events.

The to-be-planned Center is expected to influence the design and operation of
industrial and military systems, focusing on the security vulnerabilities
associated with embedded devices. The ability of systems with embedded devices
to absorb disruptive shocks and recover with minimal loss of service is critical
to missions, resources, personnel safety, etc. The dissemination of these
results improves the resilience of these systems to a variety of emergent and
future conditions including technologies, environments, operator behaviors,
evolutions of requirements, resource availability, suppliers, etc., and develops
recommendations for industry, military, and government stakeholders.

The collaborative group for the Industry-University Cooperative Research Center
for Hardware and Embedded System Security and Trust is composed of George Mason
University, Northeastern University, University of Connecticut, University of
Texas at Dallas, University of Virginia, and Wright State University. The
collaborators host a website at
https://www.vdl.afrl.af.mil/programs/PG_CHEST_IUCRC with meeting materials,
program information, publications, etc. The website is made available
indefinitely or until the Center transitions to the next phase.