* 1747563
* Workshop II: Creating a guide for programmatic assessment, review, and improvement in undergraduate physics programs
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Theodore Hodapp, American Physical Society
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2018
* USD 45,259.00

In the United States there is a growing emphasis on accountability in higher
education, and departments are increasingly asked to set and assess learning
goals. At the same time, physics departments face several challenges spanning
from programmatic enrollments through the lack of diversity within the
discipline. To address these concerns, the American Physical Society (APS) has
identified a unique opportunity to develop meaningful assessments of physics
programs, which are already required of nearly every department, while
fulfilling their desire to improve the education of their students by
implementing known best practices. APS leadership has formed and formally
charged a nationally recognized task force of leaders in physics program
evaluation and revitalization to create a guide for programmatic assessment,
review, and improvement, and to undertake the training of departmental reviewers
and department chairs in using the guide. The guide will be an operational
document designed to be immediately useful to a department chair or faculty
member engaging in programmatic assessment, review, or improvement. This
workshop will allow the APS to lay the groundwork to ensure that the guide can
achieve national impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A workshop for the task force to
meet in person will be held in February 2018 in College Park, MD to revisit the
plan for the structure and content of the guide, adjust the plan as needed based
on what lessons have been learned from writing so far, plan the next steps, and
finalize a comprehensive plan for engaging community leaders in adopting and
shaping guide practices. Outcomes of this workshop will include specific written
sections for dissemination to the physics community, and a clearly articulated
framework of the guide and how departments can implement its practices.