* 1747426
* Convergence QL: Workshop Series: Cross- Sector Connections in Quantum Leap
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Evelyn Hu, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,498,298.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Quantum Information Science and Engineering
(QISE) has made remarkable progress, heralding promise for revolutionary new
technologies in quantum sensing, communication, computation and cryptography.
Recent advances bring the promise of QISE into marketable technologies with the
potential for a sustained and profound societal impact. A successful technology
leap requires investment in a trained workforce adept in the basic quantum
sciences as well as proficient in the necessary engineering fields, informed
about the broader issues of developing quantum science into marketable quantum
devices. This is an optimal time to explore new, more effective ways of coupling
academic and industrial research programs, promoting convergence of disciplines,
resources and sectors in this endeavor. This project addresses these issues by
developing a series of workshops constituting the QISE Network (QISE-NET): a
community of tightly integrated university-industry partners, focused on
leading-edge QISE projects. These associates comprise three-person teams of
university faculty, industrial researchers, and a graduate student serving as
the pivotal component of the group. QISE-NET serves as a model for a new
approach to graduate student education as well as truly collaborative
university-industry interactions, including the selection of projects, yearly
workshops, and student mentoring activities. The program creates new employment
opportunities for students along with company positions and start-up ventures.
This Project promotes Convergence by offering a way to educate, train and
nurture a cohort of industry-academia partnerships between the convergent
disciplines of Materials Science Theory, Materials Science Experiment, Device
Engineering, Physics, Chemistry, Computer Science, and Industrial
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;This activity
helps to create a distinctive and critically-needed intellectual infrastructure
for students studying the convergent QISE disciplines. By linking the talents,
resources and approaches of both the academic and industrial environment, QISE-
NET is able to create and leverage an intellectually broad community of
researchers to generate the new science, engineering and marketable QISE
technologies of the future. By demonstrating how students' academic work can be
enabled and broadened through access to the resources, systems and team-based
approaches available in industrial research laboratories, QISE-NET establishes
new models of university-industry collaboration, while providing a more cogent
program for graduate student education in QISE. Proposals are submitted through
a program website, and announced using broad electronic distribution through
academic and professional society organizations, as well as through corporate
network distribution. They are evaluated by an external advisory board
consisting of academic and industrial researchers spanning a broad range of
science and technology. Yearly workshops form the principal means of
communications among the various projects and serve to knit the network.
Participants share research results, and understand the different best practices
that produce effective interactions. An education specialist from a NSF center
conducts independent, anonymous assessments from the participants, and provides
a mechanism to improve the effectiveness of both the program and workshops. The
QISE-NET will generate outstanding, leading-edge scientific results with
applicability to new, marketable technologies, and serve to strengthen
collaborations between academia and industry. This Project promotes Convergence
by offering a way to educate, train and nurture a cohort of industry-academia
partnerships between the convergent disciplines of Materials Science Theory,
Materials Science Experiment, Device Engineering, Physics, Chemistry, Computer
Science, and Industrial Research.