* 1747377
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Anode Formulation for Improving Cycle Life of Lithium Metal Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Richard Wang, Cuberg, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 12/31/2018
* USD 224,950.00

This SBIR Phase I project will develop key components of a next-generation
lithium metal battery that greatly increases both energy density and safety
compared to the best lithium-ion batteries. Such a technology has the potential
to deliver significant societal value by improving the state-of-the-art in
battery markets such as implantable medical devices, electrified flight,
electric vehicles, and many others. In fact, improvements just in medical device
batteries may cause a step-change improvement in device design and delivery of
healthcare that could save tens of thousands of lives annually. This project
will increase opportunities for US-based manufacturing and create jobs by
leveraging existing domestic prototyping and manufacturing capabilities around
the country. Once material and process costs come down with scale, this
technology can also help to expedite mass-market adoption of electric vehicles,
consumer electronics, wearables, and other portable devices. The proposed
technology may eventually allow for the widespread adoption of sustainable
electrified transportation, reduce US dependence on foreign oil, significantly
reduce carbon emissions related to transportation, and build an edge for US-
based battery R&amp;D and manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project addresses the key unmet challenge for next-generation battery
chemistries based on lithium metal: highly reversible cycling (&gt; 500 cycles
with lithium plating efficiency &gt; 99.7%) with high charging current density
(&gt; 1 mA/cm^2). The objective of the proposed R&amp;D is to prove out a
concept around novel metallic anode formulation that can enable unprecedented
cycle life, lithium plating efficiency, and charging rate. Existing cell
prototypes with pure lithium metal anodes have already demonstrated stable
cycling and high specific energy at lower rates. However, inadequate lithium
plating efficiency at high charging rates limits the cycle life that can be
achieved in a commercial cell. Phase I research efforts will focus on two main
objectives: (i) improve reversibility and efficiency of the metallic anode at
high charge rates compared to pure lithium metal, and (ii) demonstrate the
performance benefits in a coin cell with commercially attractive design
parameters that delivers 500 cycles with minimal lithium loss at a high rate.
The ultimate goal of the Phase I research is to develop a high-performance lab
prototype, based on an optimized electrolyte and commercial cell components,
that will provide proof of feasibility for rapid commercialization in the target
market.