* 1747859
* Symposium:  Sensory feedback and animal locomotion: perspectives from biology and biorobotics, January 5, 2018, San Francisco, California
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Gary Gillis, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Emily Carrington
* 08/31/2018
* USD 15,550.00

The appendages animals use for locomotion, such as wings and limbs, perform dual
roles as sensors and propulsors. Timely and relevant feedback from the sensors
is critical to the locomotor performance of animals and is a key design feature
of robotic engineering. In order to advance the study of the role of sensory
feedback in animal locomotion, a symposium, entitled "Sensory feedback and
animal locomotion: perspectives from biology and biorobotics," will be held in
San Francisco, CA on January 5, 2018 at the Society for Comparative Biology and
Anatomy's (SICB) Annual Meeting. Through a diverse group of researchers, this
symposium will highlight the relevant sensory stimuli associated with animal
movement, the different strategies for encoding stimuli, and the intersection
between biology, engineering, and robotics. This gathering will catalyze new
interdisciplinary collaborations between biologists and engineers and identify
future research directions for the development of sensory control systems that
can be implemented in robotics. Additionally, this symposium will include a
mentorship program that enables six Native American undergraduate students to
attend their first scientific meeting. Six graduate students/postdocs, who also
belong to underrepresented groups in STEM, will act as mentors to the Native
American students. The mentorship program will ensure that this meeting is an
enriching experience for the undergraduates and will expose them to a variety of
scientific disciplines, prospective graduate school mentors, and scientific
career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The locomotor appendages of animals, from
insect wings to tetrapod limbs, perform dual roles as sensors and propulsors,
and sensory feedback is critical to the motor performance of animals. An
interdisciplinary symposium, "Sensory feedback and animal locomotion:
perspectives from biology and biorobotics," will be held at the Society for
Comparative Biology and Anatomy's (SICB) Annual Meeting. Robotic appendages that
are integrated with sensors will also rely on sensory feedback to adjust output
signals. While engineers often look to biology for solutions to problems
experienced in robotic movement, biologists too must engage with engineers to
utilize computer and robotic models to help answer questions on the role of
sensory feedback in generating effective movement. Through a group of scientists
spanning a range of disciplines and career stages, the symposium will
demonstrate biological principles for mechanosensory feedback of propulsor
movement that could be implemented in engineered devices and foster the
development of future research programs aimed to further integrate the fields of
engineering and robotics with more traditional biology. Further, a successful
mentorship program, in collaboration with the Native Explorers Program, will be
reestablished to bring Native American undergraduates to participate in their
first scientific meeting. Each Native American undergraduate will be paired with
a mentor to ensure an enriching and positive experience. This program will offer
a unique opportunity for Native American students that would otherwise not
experience interactions with a diverse group of researchers of different
experience levels, types of institutions, research disciplines and racial
backgrounds.