* 1747405
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Popular Roots of Counterrevolution
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2019
* Killian Clarke, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2019
* USD 18,900.00

This project considers the phenomenon of counterrevolution, examining how
counterrevolutionary challenges typically emerge and when they are most likely
to succeed in toppling a new revolutionary regime. Counterrevolutions represent
tremendously consequential political events; yet, as scholars are increasingly
recognizing, they have seldom been considered systematically in rigorous social
scientific accounts. This project therefore stands to make a substantial
contribution by developing and testing a theory of counterrevolution. It will
draw on cross-national data from the full universe of revolutions in the 20th
and 21st centuries, as well as interview and protest data from the case of
Egypt, which experienced a political revolution in 2011 and a counterrevolution
in 2013. Moreover, the project will generate several broader impacts. First, it
will build practical and actionable knowledge to help policymakers in supporting
peaceful transitions to democracy following revolutions and preventing nascent
democratic projects from being cut short by counterrevolutions. Second, it will
develop new resources and capacity for quantitative empirical research on the
Arab World, including by training two Arab research assistants in rigorous data
collection methods and by building a dataset of contentious events in Egypt.
Third, it will facilitate dialogue between Egypt's polarized political factions,
helping to build a foundation on which political reconciliation and a more
stable and inclusive governance system in Egypt might be
achieved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address two questions: Under
what conditions do revolutionary regimes come to be challenged by
counterrevolutions? And when do such counterrevolutionary challenges succeed? A
counterrevolution is defined as an effort in the aftermath of a successful
revolution to restore a version of the pre-revolutionary political regime.
Contrary to existing accounts of counterrevolution, which focus on the
unilateral actions of elites from the old regime, this dissertation proposes
that overthrowing revolution requires a popular base. Specifically, it is argued
that successful counterrevolutions are brought about by a coalition of coercive
forces from the old regime and disaffected reformists in the revolutionary
coalition itself, with the support of broad segments of society whose members
grow weary of revolutionary change. The research leverages quantitative and
qualitative research strategies at both the cross-national and sub-national
level. It first considers the case of Egypt, which experienced a political
revolution in 2011 and a counterrevolution in 2013. Using qualitative process
tracing of interview data and quantitative analysis of protest events in the
year preceding the counterrevolution, it examines the processes and mechanisms
that brought about counterrevolution in this paradigmatic case. The case-
specific research will be complemented with analysis of a quantitative dataset
that documents which successful revolutions through the 20th and 21st centuries
were challenged and overthrown by counterrevolutions. Finally, several shadow
cases of successful and unsuccessful counterrevolution will be
examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.