* 1747917
* EAGER:   Modeling Multiscale Control of Liver Regeneration
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Jan Hoek, Thomas Jefferson University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

Liver disease affects millions of individuals each year. Treatment for liver
disease often requires a liver transplant due to the inability of damaged liver
tissue to regenerate in many cases. A better understanding how liver tissue is
renewed and repaired will improve the ability to develop future interventions.
Understanding tissue physiology is often complicated by the fact that cells next
to each other do not necessarily respond the same manner. Emerging technologies
and analysis methods aimed at high-throughput molecular assays of hundreds-to-
thousands of single cells have enabled an unprecedented view of the
heterogeneity, hierarchy and complexity of cellular functional states.
Multiscale modeling is one tool that can aid in understanding the variation in
observable cellular behavior, so this research project is developing a novel
multiscale modeling framework that takes advantage of the in-depth information
on cellular function that can be obtained from these single cell data sets. This
modeling framework bridges from the molecular scale to the tissue scale to
enhance knowledge gained about physiology and pathophysiology. While the outputs
from this model will support improved understanding and manipulation of tissue
response to injury in the liver, it will likely be applicable to understanding
other tissues as well. The research team is integrating students of all levels,
from high school through graduate school, in this project in order to excite
them about scientific research and to provide them with professional development
opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central innovative idea of this project
is to realize the full potential of the novel single cell data sets by
developing models of cellular functional states and state transitions to bridge
the molecular and tissue scales. The team is developing the proposed multiscale
modeling framework in the context of understanding the control principles
governing the coordinated tissue response to injury. This approach involves
explicit accounting of cellular functional states of immune, stromal,
endothelial and epithelial cells, and putative molecular processes driving the
state transitions, with broad applicability to multiple tissue repair scenarios.
The team is focusing on the process of liver regeneration as an enabling testbed
in order to fully develop, fine tune and illustrate the multiscale modeling
approach for broader application and utility.