* 1747539
* EAGER: Development of a yeast synthetic reporter system to measure activity of transcription factor complexes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Ben Holt III, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 07/31/2020
* USD 299,991.00

In biology, it is often the case that relatively simple parts can be
interchangeably combined to achieve surprisingly complex outcomes. A well-known
example is the DNA code, which has only four unique nucleotides, but can be
combined to create all of the living complexity we see on planet earth. Another
example is the potentially endless combinations of proteins - small molecules
that often assemble into molecular machines - that are used to regulate
biological processes. Of particular interest to many scientists is how special
groups of proteins called transcription factors come together to regulate gene
expression. This is important because changes in gene expression, as controlled
by these transcription factors, underlie most responses to environmental change.
Numerous techniques, both in the test-tube and in living organisms, have been
developed to examine how transcription factors regulate gene expression, but
there remains a paucity of experimental systems that allow scientists to examine
how groups of interacting transcription factors assemble and function in living
cells. Therefore, this project will develop a cutting-edge system to allow
scientists to simultaneously express three (or more) proteins and address this
initial question - how do these relatively simple transcription factors work
together to result in complex changes of gene expression? In addition to
providing a valuable tool for the scientific community, the project will have
education and training impact for undergraduates who will be exposed to research
via a teaching module emphasizing planning, execution, and data analysis.
Graduate students and postdoctoral fellows will carry out the research, which
will provide them with the training opportunity and intellectual challenge of
developing a novel system for biological research. The project will also involve
a local high school student as part of the research team in each
summer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How multi-subunit transcription factors achieve
genomic-level substrate affinity and regulate gene expression is largely
unknown. Systems for studying transcription factor function often rely on in
vitro assays that can have the advantage of excellent resolution, but are highly
specialized and tend to require protein purification. Alternatively, a variety
of in vivo assays can provide either local or global binding patterns, but
typically suffer from low resolution. Here a novel in vivo yeast system - which
incorporates highly-specific hormone induction, a novel effector cassette, and a
luciferase reporter system - will be developed to examine the interactions
between multi-subunit transcription factors and their putative cis regulatory
elements. Once developed, the system will permit rapid and accurate evaluation
of how changes in any of the transcription factor subunits, or their cognate cis
regulatory elements, alter binding affinity and gene expression outputs. For
proof-of-concept studies, interactions between plant (Arabidopsis thaliana)
NUCLEAR FACTOR Y (NF-Y) and CONSTANS, CONSTANS-LIKE, and TIMING OF CAB (CCT)
transcription factors will be examined. Once proven, the modular nature of this
yeast system will make it readily adaptable for use by other labs.