* 1748816
* RAPID: Impacts of an Extreme Flood on River Channel Formation and Riparian Forests
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Jacob Bendix, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 08/31/2019
* USD 40,000.00

The project will address the complex ways in which extreme floods impact river
channel formation and stability and the structure and composition of related
riparian forests. Previous studies of flood effects on river systems have
focused on the history and causes of the flood, and their hydrology, with little
attention to the flood impacts on riparian forest structure and the consequences
of woody debris inputs on channel stability. Furthermore, the few studies that
do exist have been limited to mountainous or arid regions, and their findings of
limited applicability in more humid settings. More studies examining the
variation of flood disturbances among different regions and within watersheds
are needed to evaluate the long-term influence of floods on channel form,
sediment, and forest structure, and to help predict how flood impacts can be
managed in the future. The results of this study will help address U.S. Forest
Service concerns over future impacts of increased flooding trends on federal
facilities and the natural resources of national forests. The findings of this
study will be shared during a workshop with the U.S. Forest Service, Department
of Transportation, and surrounding communities. Besides benefits for natural
resource management, this project will provide educational opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students in fieldwork and data analysis through the
Ozarks Environmental and Water Resources Institute (OEWRI) at Missouri State
University.

The goal of this project is to describe and analyze how an extreme flood
(greater than a 100-year return interval) has contributed to riparian forest
mortality and wood recruitment along the river channel, and to identify which
variables are responsible for the spatial variations in those effects. The
research plan addresses five questions: (1) Was riparian tree mortality
systematically related to biological variables (e.g., species, size of trees,
pre-flood wood patterns)?; (2) Was mortality systematically related to hydro-
geomorphic variables (e.g., valley morphology, landform, flow depth)?; (3) How
much woody debris was generated and what tree or site characteristics affected
the likelihood of wood transportation versus accumulation?; (4) Do forest
disturbance and wood debris patterns vary with scale at different sites along a
gradient of increasing drainage area?; and (5) Can aerial imagery from
drones/UAVs and photogrammetry-based analysis be used to acquire accurate
quantitative data regarding tree mortality and wood accumulation? This study
combines field research with imagery analysis to evaluate the effects of the
largest flood on record on the North Fork River in the Missouri Ozarks. The
results will be combined with those from other regional studies to develop a
conceptual model of geomorphic-biotic response to extreme floods in a humid
forest environment. While this study focuses on the assessment of immediate
effects, it will offer insights into the spatial variability of those effects
and the direction of recovery which can be monitored over the next decade or
longer to gain a full understanding of the recovery process. The research will
inform fundamental understanding of fluvial geomorphic and biogeographic
processes.