* 1748365
* EAGER:GOALI: Bulk Intermetallics with well-defined active sites for selectivity control in selective hydrogenations
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Randall Meyer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 09/30/2020
* USD 234,211.00

This research project investigates a new class of heterogeneous catalysts for
the selective hydrogenation reactions of light hydrocarbons to higher-value
chemical intermediates of value to the petrochemical industry. Selectivity
refers to the ability of a catalyst to favor one product over another when
multiple products are possible. As such, it is possible to control selectivity
by changing the surface composition of a catalyst. This research project
investigates a class of inorganic solids, intermetallic compounds, that have
ordered assemblies of small metal clusters of various size and composition.
These intermetallic compounds have potential as highly selective catalysts for
important hydrocarbon hydrogenation reactions. Computational studies and
experiment studies are being combined to identify catalyst compositions that
display both high catalytic activity and high selectivity toward the desired
products.

Crystallographically well-defined intermetallic compounds are being utilized to
understand the impact of catalytically-active metal atom nuclearity on catalytic
selectivity. Intermetallic compounds are being synthesized with varying
compositions across the gamma-brass phase to control both nuclearity and the
number of clusters. Intermetallics of the form M-Zn (M = Pd, Cu and Ag) have
been carefully chosen since they contain contiguous cluster sizes of catalytic
metal from monomers to hexamers. M-Zn bulk intermetallics are being examined for
partial hydrogenation reactions of mixed feedstocks (alkyne plus alkene and
alkene plus aromatic). The results will demonstrate the impact of cluster size
on catalyst selectivity. The results can be used to identify selective cluster
sizes for hydrogenation that will then become targets for synthesis in a high
surface area nanoparticle form. The study is being conducted in collaboration
with an industrial partner (ExxonMobil) who provides access to synchrotron-based
X-ray absorption catalyst characterization tools, while also delivering
industrially-relevant guidance to the graduate students involved in the project.