* 1748188
* GOALI: Synergistic Computational, Experimental, and Thermoelectric Device-related Research for Multinary Chalcogenides with Earth-Abundant Constituents
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Lilia Woods, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 06/30/2023
* USD 527,803.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Reducing dependence on fossil fuels is a major
challenge. In addition, there is direct correlation between energy use and
economic development. Whether the focus is on reducing the depletion of natural
resources, expanding the diversity of energy production, reduction in climate
change, or achieving greater energy security, there is a growing need to use
energy in a smarter manner, as well as generating energy from renewable sources.
To this end, thermoelectricity, a solid-state scheme directly converting heat
into electricity, can play a key role. Thermoelectric devices are especially
attractive since they have no moving parts, are very reliable, ecologically
clean, and allow for a wide range of industrial to consumer applications. A
crucial aspect for commercial applications are materials with desired transport
properties to maximize the efficiency of energy production. This project uses a
synergistic approach, with computational, experimental, and device development
aspects, to investigate a new class of materials with applications in
thermoelectricity. These low-cost material systems have earth-abundant
constituents that can be synthesized in high yields, which is especially
attractive from both environmental and commercial perspectives. A fundamental
understanding of these new materials is also important, and allows for rapid and
effective development strategies for enhanced thermoelectric performance
benefiting industrial development of clean, low cost thermoelectric power
conversion devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: In this project, a
new class of multinary chalcogenides composed of earth-abundant constituents as
thermoelectric materials is being explored. Thermodynamic phase stability
calculations, electronic and phonon structure properties, and the governing
transport mechanisms are being investigated using first principles simulations.
Models for structure-property relations are being used for alloying and defect
engineering in the laboratory in order to obtain compositions with optimized
thermoelectric properties. Experimental synthesis and characterization serve as
validation in addition to input towards further iterations with an eye to
improving computational and theoretical models. Additional experimental
capabilities and device development are provided by the partnership with Marlow
Industries, Inc., a world leader in thermoelectric devices and applications.
This collaborative project provides an excellent platform for graduate student
engagement in the research, and outreach activities for high school students in
the local urban and surrounding rural areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.