* 1748375
* WORKSHOP:   Doctoral Consortium at HCOMP 2017
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Brent Hecht, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2018
* USD 21,870.00

This is funding to support participation of at least 8 promising doctoral
students from U.S. educational institutions at a Doctoral Consortium
(workshop)along with distinguished research faculty, to be held in conjunction
with the 5th AAAI Conference on Human Computation &amp; Crowdsourcing (HCOMP
2017), which will take place October 24-26 in Quebec City, Canada, and which is
sponsored by the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence.
HCOMP is the premier venue for disseminating the latest research findings on
crowdsourcing and human computation. While artificial intelligence (AI) and
human-computer interaction (HCI) represent traditional mainstays of this cross-
disciplinary conference, HCOMP believes strongly in inviting, fostering, and
promoting broad, interdisciplinary research. The diverse disciplines the field
draws upon, and contributes to, range from human-centered qualitative studies
and HCI design, to computer science and artificial intelligence, economics and
the social sciences, all the way to digital humanities, policy, and ethics. More
information about the conference is available online at
http://www.humancomputation.com/2017/. The Doctoral Consortium will be a
research-focused full day meeting that immediately precedes the conference, on
October 23. It will enhance the scientific workforce in this emerging research
area by nurturing a group of promising young investigators interested in human
computation and crowdsourcing. The award will also allow these young researchers
to attend the HCOMP 2017 conference, thereby allowing them: to interact with
other researchers and conference events; to learn of potential career paths
within academia and industry; to access an international network of researchers
who can support their professional development; and to observe the
interdisciplinary nature, diversity and interrelationships of research in human
computation. The Doctoral Consortium Chairs will select up to 6 additional
distinguished researchers to serve as faculty mentors; this group also will
serve as the review committee for student applications. Students will be
accepted based on a paper giving an overview of the student's dissertation
research, an explanation of why the student wants to participate in the Doctoral
Consortium, a CV, and a letter of support from the student's advisor. The
organizers will give preference to students who are most in need of mentoring
and joining a peer group. Moreover, the organizers will promote diversity among
the selected students by selecting no more than one or two students from any one
school, and by prioritizing the selection of women and underrepresented
minorities. In accordance with CISE policy, NSF funds will only be used to
support students from U.S.-based educational
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The full-day Doctoral Consortium will include
activities to guide the research of these promising young researchers. The
Consortium will allow participants to interact with established researchers and
with other students, through presentations, question-answer sessions, panel
discussions, and invited presentations. Each participant will give a short
presentation on their research and will receive feedback from at least one
faculty mentor and from fellow students. The feedback will be geared toward
helping the student participants understand and articulate how their research is
positioned relative to other work on human computation and crowdsourcing. The
feedback will also address whether the students' topics are adequately focused
for thesis research projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen and
applied, and whether their results are being appropriately analyzed and
presented. Activities led by the faculty will include a panel discussion to give
students more information about the process and lessons of research and life in
academia and industry. To further integrate the Doctoral Consortium participants
into the conference itself, students will have a chance to present their work as
posters in an interactive poster session and their papers will be posted online
on the workshop webpage. These activities will benefit the participants by
offering each fresh perspectives and comments on their work from researchers
outside their own institution, both from faculty and other students; providing a
supportive setting for mutual feedback on participants' current research and
guidance on future research directions; and enabling participants to form a
cohort of new researchers.