* 1748291
* Biomedical Engineering Society (BMES) 2018 Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering (CMBE) Conference; Ocean Reef Club in Key Largo, Florida; January 2-6, 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Nadeen Chahine, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 07/31/2018
* USD 20,000.00

This award will support travel awards for students, postdoctoral fellows, and
independent junior investigators (Rising Stars) for the 2018 Biomedical
Engineering Society (BMES)-Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering (CMBE)
Conference on January 2-6, 2018. The goal of this meeting is to foster
interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary collaboration and to integrate cutting-
edge discoveries in mechanobiology across multiple physiological systems and
length scales. The meeting is intended to address the key problem of
understanding how the field of mechanobiology can continue to transform our
understanding of pathophysiology as well as translate new discoveries in ways
that ultimately benefit human health. There are two specific aims associated
with this meeting: (1) Promote adoption of new technologies and strategies to
achieve transformative discoveries in mechanobiology and (2) Facilitate close
interaction of junior investigators, postdoctoral fellows, and graduate students
with leaders in this burgeoning sub-field of CMBE. Twelve graduate
students/postdoctoral fellows will be selected by the organizing committee to
receive Student/Fellow Awards and present short talks, which will be integrated
into the themed sessions. In addition, eight junior, independent faculty
investigators will be selected for the special 'Rising Star' awards and session,
which will take place on the first day of the meeting in order to showcase their
work.

The theme of the 2018 CMBE conference is 'Discovering the Keys: Transformative
and Translational Mechanobiology.' It's goal is to broaden the boundaries of our
current capabilities in mechanobiology through pursuit of fundamental research,
development of novel techniques and biological models, and translation of these
discoveries into real-world technology and medical applications. The conference
will introduce and integrate a diverse group of engineers and basic scientists
possessing clinical and/or entrepreneurial experience. Invited speakers and
keynotes have been encouraged to discuss how they bridge the gap between
fundamental research and translation in their specific fields. The CMBE field is
experiencing exponential growth, with the subfield of mechanobiology being a
significant driver. The 2018 Conference will bring together leaders in the field
of biology, medicine, and engineering to address how mechanobiology is being
applied innovatively in CMBE research and education.