* 1748123
* Co-Producing Sustainability:   Knowledge Co-Production, International Collaboration and Sustainable Development in the Arctic (Workshop)
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Andrey Petrov, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 07/31/2019
* USD 49,967.00

This award provides partial support for an international workshop on "Arctic
sustainable development and knowledge sharing" in September 2017 in Inari,
northern Finland. The goal of the workshop is to promote knowledge integration
and to improve understanding of the relationships between knowledge co-
production, international collaboration, and sustainable development in the
Arctic from science, policy, and community perspectives. The proposed workshop
would take place on September 18-20, 2017, immediately prior to the Arctic
Council (AC) Sustainable Development Working Group's (SDWG) meeting (September
21-22, 2017).  The workshop has been organized to take place prior to the
September SDWG meeting in order to facilitate the participation of SDWG member
states representatives, Arctic Council Observer organization representatives,
Permanent Participant representatives, as well as the AC science working group
members. By scheduling the workshop in this way, it will provide for broader
participation by key international policy makers, as well as scientists and
Indigenous scholars. In addition, this will provide for an economy of scale
since a number of the invited participants will already be supported by their
organizations to participate in the SDWG meeting.  The workshop will produce
publicly available materials, which could be used for educational and knowledge
dissemination purposes. These will include a final report documenting the
essence of the presentations and discussions and a summary for
policymakers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the Canadian Chairmanship of the AC,
at the 9th Ministerial Meeting in Iqaluit, 2015, the SDWG made recommendations
to the Senior Arctic Officials through the official delivery of the
"Recommendations for the Integration of Traditional and Local Knowledge into the
Work of the Arctic Council." In the two years since this event, the SDWG and AC
have debated how exactly to implement these recommendations. There is wide
recognition among the Arctic social science community, Indigenous and non-
indigenous scholars, that the new developing model of knowledge co-production in
science research could offer a model for assisting the AC in these efforts of
the integration of Traditional Knowledge into its work. This workshop would be
part of a broader effort between the Senior Arctic Officials of the Arctic
Council and the Permanent Participants to find common ground on how to
incorporate Traditional Knowledge into the proceedings of the Council.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important trend in Arctic sustainability research in
the last decade is the increasing integration of the local and Indigenous
knowledge as a key component of the Arctic sustainability knowledge system.
Knowledge co-production has become the state-of-the-art in Arctic, and Arctic
Indigenous scholars and communities are leading the way in developing co-
production methodologies and formulating holistic, integrated approaches to
understanding coupled and dynamic social-ecological systems. Engaging Indigenous
knowledge in scholarship and policymaking is a monumental task that requires
combined, collaborative efforts of Indigenous communities, social scientists and
policymakers. Building connections and bridges by creating international,
interdisciplinary knowledge exchange opportunities among all groups involved is
an important element of an interdisciplinary, integrated approach to sustainable
development in the Arctic.