* 1748692
* TWC: Small: Coding-based Mechanisms for Building Secure Cloud Storage Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2020
* Onur Ozan Koyluoglu, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 11/30/2020
* USD 338,183.00

A wide range of cloud services and applications operate on sensitive data such
as business, personal, and governmental information. This renders security and
privacy as the most critical concerns in the cloud era. The objective of this
project is to question the separation approach in the design of security and
reliability features of storage systems, and to investigate new, coding-based
security mechanisms based on a joint-design principle. The proposed program will
result in a myriad of outcomes. The solutions include effective ways of
thwarting cyber attacks, ensuring data availability, and establishing trust
between the parties of storage architectures. These infrastructures are the
backbones of several systems including cloud computing, peer-to-peer, and
content delivery networks. The proposed research together with its far-reaching
effects ensure the well-being of these critical infrastructures of the nation by
increasing their security and resilience - supporting business, consumer, and
military applications. The educational plan of the project, capitalizing on the
proposed perspective, aims to train students with principles of multiple fields
and their interactions, preparing them for leading-edge STEM positions.

The main directions of this project include a) designing codeword allocations to
resolve data connectivity challenges when system components fail, b) utilizing
secret keys stored at clients in encoding to reduce the cost of information
theoretic security, c) building data mixtures through interference alignment
principle to resolve privacy problems, and d) designing codes to facilitate
challenge-based cryptographic protocols for establishing trust mechanisms
between providers and clients. Revealing the benefits that can be leveraged from
such a coding-based security approach, this research addresses the challenges in
identifying appropriate metrics for data availability and security,
characterizing fundamental limits based on these models, and constructing
schemes that achieve optimal performance. The proposed effort is
interdisciplinary in nature, borrowing tools from coding theory, information
theory, cryptography, and networking, and will develop new techniques in these
fields.