* 1748058
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Interactive Dialog Agents for Social Language Development and Listening Comprehension
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Michael Neff, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 06/30/2020
* USD 104,818.00

Practicing oral language skills supports children's later ability to process
written text. Low socioeconomic status children receive lower levels of quality
home language input, which negatively affects language development. Many
children already suffer from a significant deficit in reading comprehension by
the time they begin formal education, a deficit they may never overcome. This
EArly Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will investigate improving
children's home language environment with pedagogical learning agents, animated
story characters and a child-like narrator who carry on a dialog with a child
while telling a story. Story characters will talk directly to the child, tell
the story from different perspectives, ask the child questions, phrase those
questions in different ways using different vocabulary, and thus engage the
child in understanding the story and improving their social language and
listening comprehension skills. Pedagogical learning agents are a cheap and
easily deployable technology that could readily be provided to children in any
socioeconomic group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop technology
for expressive interactive storytelling agents that model human conversational
storytelling with a high level of social engagement. This will require methods
to effectively manage a spoken dialog with a child, using speech recognition and
text-to-speech output. The project will scaffold from a deep computational
representation of narrative to generate different dialogs around the same story.
Novel algorithms for natural language generation will support asking different
types of questions at different story points and generation of story events with
first person and direct speech to allow the characters to talk. The humanoid
child narrator will model high immediacy nonverbal behaviors shown to increase
engagement and positive affect. The project's prototype will be informed by
regular evaluation by children at the UC Davis Reading and Academic Development
Center, as the project assesses the promise of this exploratory technology to
improve social language and comprehension skills.