* 1748091
* EAGER:  Investigation of a Next Generation Application Tool for Cybermanufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2022
* J. Cecil, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 02/28/2022
* USD 187,253.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project aims to create
and experiment with a smart phone app that enables access by non-experts to
manufacturing services. Currently, most design and engineering tools to
accomplish such tasks are expensive, difficult to learn and cumbersome to use.
These impediments have limited the availability of manufacturing services to
non-specialists, thereby limiting their creativity in product innovation. The
results from this research will give new insights into the requirements for the
evolution of a network-based manufacturing service delivery system to benefit
the U.S. economy, small and medium-sized manufacturers and society. High school
and university students and industry organizations will be engaged in
experimentation with the system and the establishment of a cyber community to
foster innovation. Other activities planned include demonstrations at high
schools, universities and technical conferences. This interdisciplinary project
will involve the manufacturing engineering, computer science and mechanical
engineering disciplines and will create new learning modules to introduce
students in those disciplines to concepts involving use of virtual reality tools
and environments to create 3D-based interactive
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research involves the design, creation
and validation of a next generation cybermanufacturing software to allow users
from a cross-section of backgrounds to design and build parts interactively
using a virtual reality environment. A core functionality will be accessibility
and simplicity in modifying a given design. Unlike cumbersome computer-aided
design (CAD) tools, this smart phone-based app will allow users to interact
intuitively in a 3D environment, where they can modify existing designs using a
touch screen interface on a smart phone or tablet; a base set of designs will be
provided for making consumer and household items. The interface will operate on
an android platform, be made available to the public, and encourage non-expert
users to easily access manufacturing services.