* 1748019
* CAREER: Quantitative Viral Metagenomics for Water Quality Assessment
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Kyle Bibby, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

PI Name: Bibby&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1653356 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current
monitoring and regulatory approaches for microbial water quality, relying on the
Fecal Indicator Bacteria (FIB), insufficiently protect public health due to a
poor representation of viruses. Direct measurement of viral pathogens by
conventional means is often incomplete due to the diversity of viral pathogens
(&gt;200) that may be in the environment. In addition, due to a historical
reliance on FIB, there is relatively little knowledge regarding viral pathogen
presence and diversity in wastewater. The PI plans to develop quantitative viral
metagenomics, sequencing of viral DNA/RNA, for viral water quality monitoring.
The proposed technical developments will significantly advance not only water
quality monitoring but also viral pathogen detection in other settings (e.g.,
food safety). The proposed efforts in viral water quality assessment will also
offer an educational development opportunity for students (high school through
graduate school), water quality professionals, and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Specific technical goals include developing a
rapid viral isolation and concentration approach and an improved methodology to
remove free nucleic acids from non-viable viruses, an open-source bioinformatics
pipeline to quantitatively identify viral pathogens from DNA sequence data, and
a national survey of viral pathogen diversity in sewage. These developments may
lead to new methods for monitoring microbial water quality as well as a
methodology for viral water quality monitoring to elucidate the presence and
diversity of viral pathogens in the water environment. Specifically, current
metagenomics methods are applied non-quantitatively (e.g., on a relative
abundance basis) and annotation accuracy is unverified; viral concentration
methods are too slow for practical application and current methods for free DNA
removal are inconsistent. Finally, little is known about viral pathogen
diversity and dynamics in wastewater impacted systems. Application of viral
metagenomics will help to inform investigations into the ecology of disease.
Each task represents a discrete advance with applications beyond water quality
in public health, microbiology, and bioinformatics. Additionally, bioinformatics
tasks will be applicable to any sequencing platform and will be released as an
open-access bioinformatic tool for use by researchers worldwide. Enabling
quantitative and target-independent virus detection will facilitate improved
water quality management, reducing overall human health impacts and informing
infrastructure upgrades. Specific educational goals include a hands-on
educational module for high school students to characterize microbial water
quality, research experiences for high school and undergraduate students,
expanding a current interactive exhibit established by the project PI at the
Carnegie Science Center, and annual viral water quality webinars to be conducted
through the Water Environment and Reuse Foundation. This effort will result in
the release of an open-source bioinformatics viral annotation tool and an
educational module for the high school classroom, extending the impact of
technical and educational developments beyond the immediate project scope.