* 1748771
* EAGER:   Predicting Domain-level Reading Comprehension Difficulty to Support Adult Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Ani Nenkova, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2019
* USD 172,196.00

Regardless of their level of education, participants in the modern workforce are
expected to be flexible in their ability to read and learn in new, often
technical domains, including scientific subfields, medicine, policy, and care.
Remarkably, however, there is little, if any, technological support for such
learning, which often is dynamic and requires reading texts as needed rather
than in an ordered curriculum as in classroom learning. This Early Grant for
Exploratory Research addresses the need for technological support for adult
learning in technical domains by exploring the feasibility of simulating the
behavior of an expert reader in identifying important content and drawing
inferences to connect rich background knowledge and the text at hand. Readers
will be provided access to pilot implementations of the inferences and
importance judgements of the simulated expert, to focus their attention and
strengthen their comprehension of the text.

This development of exploratory models of expert reader behavior relies on
techniques for characterizing text vocabulary into technical and plain language
by contrasting word occurrence statistics in the domain and in general text such
as in a random sample of telephone conversations or news. It will also explore
the adaptation of techniques for definition mining and for deriving prototypical
event sequences and shallow ontologies from large volume of typical domain text.