* 1748843
* RESEARCH-PGR: Enhancer discovery and design in agriculturally important crop plants
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Edward Buckler, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 12/31/2022
* USD 3,294,261.00

With climate change threatening global food security, this team will use its
expertise in technology development, plant gene regulation and genomics to
provide essential tools to make crops better able to withstand environmental
stresses. Patterns of gene expression that dictate plant responses to the
environment and changes during development are directed by DNA sequences called
transcriptional enhancers. In plants, fewer than 20 plant enhancers have ever
been characterized yet understanding them is crucial for crop engineering and
breeding. Using novel, genome-scale technology, this team will discover large
numbers of transcriptional enhancers in the cereal crops maize, sorghum, rice
and wheat, particularly those driving gene expression in response to heat and
cold stress. The team will then compare heat- or cold-specific enhancers among
these species and among different varieties of each species, determine what
differences among them are associated with differences in plant performance
under heat and cold stress, and identify the protein factors that bind to these
enhancers to influence gene expression. After validating the function of these
enhancer sequences in heat and cold tolerance, beneficial natural variants of
them will be identified for crop improvement efforts. In addition, the team will
introduce mutations into these candidates to try and improve them and carry out
massively parallel functional assays of enhancer fragments to develop a toolkit
of synthetic enhancers with defined strengths and specificities for future crop
engineering. This project broadly impacts plant research, crop engineering and
breeding; it also impacts the education of future plant genome scholars through
targeted outreach efforts, including summer research internships for
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will apply a novel
combination of ATAC- and STARR-seq to discover large numbers of regulatory
elements that actively drive transcription in maize and sorghum. Limited studies
in rice and wheat will allow for species-level comparisons. The team will focus
on transcriptional enhancers, in particular enhancers that drive gene regulation
in response to heat and cold stress. With enhancer sequences in hand, the team
will characterize condition-specific enhancers that are conserved or diverged
between maize and sorghum, determine phenotype-associated enhancer variation,
and identify the transcription factors binding these enhancers through motif
searches. In-depth comparisons of sorghum and maize enhancers will yield
insights into genome evolution after genome duplication in addition to insights
into sorghum's greater stress tolerance. The team will also carry out
mutagenesis and massively parallel functional assays of enhancer fragments in
order to computationally derive synthetic enhancers of defined strength and
specificity for crop engineering. Securing food supplies through crop
engineering holds immense public interest and the pursuit of this goal enables
this team to effectively reach out to diverse groups and students. The outreach
program, a distributed network of undergraduate plant genomics scholars, builds
on the success of existing programs at partner sites by providing additional
funding for four students. Participants will be able to join the program for a
second year at another site to acquire new skills and to experience a different
research environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.