* 1748840
* NSF Engineering Education and Centers: Stewarding a Community of Scholars, Leaders, and Innovators
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2017,12/31/2023
* Damon Tull, American Society For Engineering Education
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 12/31/2023
* USD 3,525,054.00

This project will assemble grantees and other relevant stakeholders who are part
of the National Science Foundation's Engineering Education and Centers (EEC)
division ecosystem to foster collaboration and create communities. EEC generally
has 350 active awards at any one time, with grantees - known as Principal
Investigators, or PIs - spread across the country at different institutions.
Because PIs often work "siloed" from other people involved with EEC-funded
activities, there is limited ability to share best practices, collaborate, and
learn from mistakes and successes of other PIs. This award supports three
Grantee Conferences held for the Engineering Education, Broadening Participation
in Engineering and Engineering Workforce Development clusters, two Centers and
Networks Cluster Meetings, and three Thematic Meetings on (a) research
opportunities for under-participating institutions, (b) the effects of socio-
demographic trends on the national engineering workforce, and (c) participation
of people with visible and invisible disabilities in engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, ASEE has convened special
meetings focusing on topics such as increasing participation of ethnic, gender,
and sexual minorities in engineering, and transitioning veterans into
engineering careers, among others. These thematic meetings have engaged thought
leaders and influential stakeholders, informing the broader community about
opportunities to advance these areas to further the education of engineering
professionals. Meetings such as the ones proposed here are organized
specifically to share knowledge and create strong networks between and among
PIs, with facilitated communication given face-to-face interaction and
collaboration (e.g., 2012 CBET Grantee Conference; CMMI 2012 Grantee Conference,
2014 STEP Grantees Meeting, 2014 ERC Meeting, 2015 CPS PI Meeting). ASEE is
uniquely positioned to support and connect the EEC community, leveraging its
reach and influence to accelerate innovation, dissemination, and adoption of
best practices in engineering research, instruction, and diversity and
inclusion. Meetings such as those proposed gather interested parties to engage
in purposeful networking opportunities to (a) foster knowledge-sharing; (b)
cultivate personal and professional relationships, collaborations, and
partnerships; (c) inform participants about state-of-the-art and ongoing efforts
in the field, and (d) generate insights and knowledge that inform the broader
community about current trends via reports, briefs, articles, and online
resources. Digital copies of meeting summary reports will be shared with all
meeting attendees, and will be made available on the meeting website and
publicized via American Society for Engineering Education (ASEE) channels (e.g.,
First Bell, Connections).