* 1748198
* MATDAT18:  Materials and Data Science Hackathon
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2018
* Sanguthevar Rajasekaran, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2018
* USD 148,810.00

The Division of Materials Research, the Division of Information and Intelligent
Systems, and the Division of Mathematical Sciences contribute funds to this
award. It supports the organization of a "data hackathon" in which
interdisciplinary teams, each composed of both materials researchers and data
scientists, will work together to apply advanced data science methods to address
important, challenging problems in the intrinsically interdisciplinary field of
materials research. The goal of this hackathon is to spark new collaborations in
which important, challenging problems in materials science are addressed in
novel ways by leading methods in data science.

The exponential increase in materials data and in available computing power has
made it possible to generate and analyze large amounts of materials data.
Initiatives such as the Materials Project have created publicly accessible
databases containing the structure and properties of tens of thousands of
materials. In addition to these general-purpose resources, individual research
groups are generating large data sets for more specific materials research
problems. One of the leading challenges in materials science and engineering is
determining how to best make use of this abundance of materials data in the
process to design and discover new materials with desired properties and
accelerate their deployment in existing technologies and innovate new
technologies. Despite the considerable progress that has been made in the
application of data analytics and machine learning to materials science in
recent years, there is still a fundamental problem in that most experts in
materials science and engineering are not experts in data science, and data
scientists are not experts in materials research. This "data hackathon" activity
is aimed to bring the materials research community and the data science
community together to attack significant problems where a data-centric approach
may be able to make progress and to stimulate collaboration among the
communities.

This "data hackathon" will be fundamentally interdisciplinary by construction.
Small groups of researchers representing both data and materials sciences will
work face-to-face for several days on substantial materials problems. It is
hoped that materials researchers are exposed to cutting-edge statistics and
machine-learning techniques, and data scientist are motivated to develop new
methods to analyze the novel data streams produced by materials researchers. The
participant application process will also emphasize inclusion of junior
researchers and under-represented groups.