* 1748135
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Environmental Variability at Dryland Ecotones
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Yiqi Luo, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2018
* USD 23,434.00

Arid and semi-arid ecosystems cover more-than 40% of the land surface on Earth
and are expanding in their global extent. These ecosystems are expected to
experience changes associated with increases in average annual temperatures and
increases in the variability of precipitation. However, science currently lacks
both the data and understanding to link consequences of average temperatures and
precipitation variance over space, time, and levels of biological organization
from individual organisms to whole ecosystems. In 2015, one of the oscillations
that control large-scale weather patterns, the Pacific Decadal Oscillation,
switched from a cool / dry phase to a warm / wet phase. That switch suggests
that during the next 2 decades the American southwest will experience an
increase in annual precipitation. Ecological responses during the anticipated
transition to a wetter period will provide important opportunities to increase
scientific understanding of the impacts of variation in precipitation on dryland
ecology, including species traits, species diversity and interactions, and
ecosystem processes. By unifying these diverse subfields the researchers will be
poised to obtain new insights into the mechanisms that link ecological response
to environmental variance across scales. This EAGER proposal will support
education and outreach activities at all levels of learning, reaching Native
American and Hispanic communities. The research team will maintain ties with
land managers that can use the data from this research in making management
decisions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The EAGER research will include the collection
of continuous data on meteorology, plant species biomass, and counts of
grasshopper, small mammal, and bee species. The research team will assemble
existing and newly collected data into a Trait Database, continue experiments
involving removals of foundation plant species, and carry out biome-specific
experiments involving fires, biocrust disturbance, and chronic nitrogen
deposition. The data will be used in forward modeling with the Terrestrial
Ecosystem Model (TECO) and an Ecotone Model (WAVE) as well as a Consumer
Stochastic Dynamic Program where the models will function as tools for data
analysis and integration as well as tools to explore parameter space not
represented in the experiments. This complex project that combines observational
and experimental data with models to generate novel forecasts for dryland
ecology is risky, however, the proposed activities should advance the frontiers
of ecology by developing and testing new theory on the ecological consequences
of climate variance.