* 1748203
* The Emergence of Human Complex Abilities
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Paola Villa, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2020
* USD 29,461.00

This research concerns early human culture and the implications of early bone
tools for assessing human cognitive abilities. Worked bone tools are considered
among the important features characterizing modern human behavior. In Europe
complex bone technologies are characteristics of the Upper Paleolithic which
began about 40,000 years ago. Bone tools were made with techniques specifically
adapted to bone materials such as scraping, grinding and polishing and a wide
range of shapes and functions (split-base points, bone handles, spear-throwers,
points, harpoons). The bone technology of earlier "pre-modern" humans is said to
be simpler and involving a lower degree of conceptualization than Upper
Paleolithic tools. Limb bones used as hammers and scrapers for the manufacture
of stone tools are known from European sites as old as 500, 000 years ago. Just
a few pieces show evidence of shaping by flaking and fully shaped tools are even
rarer. The goal of this research is to understand in greater detail the
processes by which they were made. This research will not only further basic
knowledge regarding the human past but also further international scientific
collaboration. The research involves close collaboration by members of an
international team.

Multiple tools made by flaking elephant long bones of symmetrical shape have
been described in four sites in Latium (Italy) dated between 400,000 and 300,000
years ago. The manufacturing technique used was the same technique used in
knapping stone artifacts. This transfer of techniques from stones to bone is
taken as an indication that pre-modern humans were incapable of creative
thinking. An important aspect of early bone technology is about the criteria
used to correctly identify tools since various natural processes can produce
mimics of man-made tools. This project will carry out a technological and
taphonomic analysis of all the bone and stone tools from the assemblage of
Castel di Guido dated to about 400,000 years ago. Many pieces classed as tools
present only a limited amount of modification that is not distinctive enough to
remove doubts about their intentionality. Analysis will be directed to the
elimination of ambiguities in the identification of flaked bone artifacts by
using features characteristic of stone artifacts. The fact that recent advances
in dating suggest that the four sites in Latium are closer in time than expected
invite a question: do these occurrences of flaked bone artifacts so common in
the Latium region represent a genuine regional tradition, reflecting a set of
socially transmitted habits between groups in the same region? This would run
counter to the conventional idea that pre-modern culture was static and
homogeneous over its large geographic extent and long periods.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.