* 1748265
* Measuring the melt rate of glacier ice with underwater noise
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Grant Deane, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Colene Haffke
* 09/30/2020
* USD 299,853.00

The development of a novel measurement of glacier ice melt rate is proposed
using the underwater noise generated by bubbles bursting from the ice as it
melts. The motivation for this work lies in the critical role melting plays in
ice-ocean interactions in polar regions, and consequent sea level rise, combined
with the great difficulty currently encountered when making direct or indirect
measurements of ice melting. Glacier ice contains bubbles of air, trapped by
falling snow and compressed over time by increasing pressure due to the
accumulation of overlying ice. The explosive release of gas trapped within the
bubbles as ice melts at the front of the glacier radiates an intense pulse of
sound into the water, making glacial bays and fjords some of the noisiest places
on the planet. Because bubble release rate increases with increasing ice melt
rate, it should be possible to use bubble-generated noise to quantify melt rate.
This project will contribute to STEM workforce development by providing support
for the training of a post-doctoral associate. It will continue existing
international collaborations with colleagues in Poland and Singapore. Outreach
will occur through contributions to an innovative, planned exhibit at the Birch
Aquarium ? Expedition Earth! Finally, a successful project will be an initial
step in the development of a potentially transformative remote sensing technique
for observing glacier-ocean interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will utilize a two-pronged effort to initiate development of an acoustic
methodology for observing the melt rate of marine-terminating glaciers: direct
measurement of the vertical distribution of noise sources on a terminus with a
hydrophone array and recording the melting noise from large numbers of blocks of
ice whose physical properties have been measured. An approach for the analytical
analysis of the field measurements and initial development of an inversion
technique is based on earlier work modeling noise radiated from bubbles in
breaking waves. Data will be collected in front of a small group of glaciers
terminating into a single fjord to address the following questions that
presently limit the usefulness of acoustic data:&lt;br/&gt;1. What is the
density, mean internal pressure and distributions of radii of bubbles in
randomly selected samples of glacier ice, and how do these distributions
correlate with ice density, which is a proxy for ice depth?&lt;br/&gt;2. How
does the bubble source spectrum vary with hydrostatic pressure, bubble radius,
internal gas pressure, and water temperature?&lt;br/&gt;3. What is the
variability in the distributions of bubble properties between glaciers, and what
are the minimal set of ice property measurements required to generalize the
method from one to many glaciers? That is, what variables must be measured on a
glacier-by-glacier basis to make the technique work across many glaciers?