* 1748541
* EAGER:   Uncertainty-aware Planning for Robot Navigation in Human Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Stephen Guy, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* David Miller
* 08/31/2020
* USD 170,303.00

Robots are increasingly being integrated into society, from service robots to
autonomous cars. To be both safe and efficient, however, they need to better
understand how people navigate in unstructured environments and plan paths that
take people's own paths into consideration. The planning methods developed in
this project will generate robot paths that satisfy the dual goals of minimizing
the robot's risks of collision with people while simultaneously minimizing its
expected task completion time. Unique to this work, the robot dynamically
estimates how predictable pedestrians are behaving at any point in time and
adapts its plans accordingly, automatically taking safer, more conservative,
paths when in less predictable situations, and emphasizing efficiency when the
situation is more predictable. The ability for robots to autonomously plan and
execute safe, efficient paths in human environments will improve their ability
to operate in collaboration with humans, especially in crowded situations, such
as in factories, schools, hospitals, or malls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
navigation method developed follows a sense-plan-predict-act loop where robot
plans are computed by finding medium-to-long term trajectories that avoid
collision with an expected future distribution of likely obstacle states. The
goals of this work split into two tasks: The first improves existing pedestrian
path-modeling techniques by augmenting the predictions with estimates of
uncertainty. This is accomplished through an iterative maximum-likelihood
framework. The second task finds robot trajectories that minimize a path-cost
function, accounting for both control and collision costs, while respecting
robot dynamics. This is done using an iterative, gradient-based trajectory
optimization approach. The resulting navigation approach is evaluated in both
simulation and on real pedestrian data.