* 1748685
* Developing an Industry-Inspired Academic Research Center to Address the Opportunities Created by the QUANTUM LEAP Big Challenge
* ENG,EEC
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2018
* Anthony Boccanfuso, University Industry Demonstration Partnership
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 10/31/2018
* USD 49,947.00

Developing an Industry-Inspired Academic Research Center to Address the
Opportunities Created by the QUANTUM LEAP Big Challenge Workshop is a high
impact, results oriented event that explores the private sector?s interest in
partnering with academic institutions in the recently identified NSF Quantum
Leap Big Challenge priority area. The workshop will bring together a strategic
set of academic and corporate researchers, technology strategists, and thought
leaders who possess the required skills and complementary experiences to (a)
effectively evaluate the research and commercialization opportunities presented
by the NSF Quantum Leap Big Challenge and (b) identify effective approaches to
garner substantive industry engagement resulting in the creation of an industry-
inspired academic research center. Quantum Leap, advances quantum technologies
of the future: quantum communication, quantum computing, quantum sensors,
quantum simulators, and potentially others. The powerful language provided by
quantum mechanics almost a century ago becomes the foundation upon which to
build new industries. This process, sometimes called "the second quantum
revolution", is marked by the development of practical and marketable solutions
for quantum technologies. To ensure that the Big Ideas initiative has impact,
NSF must work with universities as its traditional audience and encourage active
collaboration with industry to transform the discoveries created at universities
into meaningful products to benefit society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Strategic
Issues track will identify leading technology development issues, listing the
top major fields within second-generation quantum technology and the Quantum
Leap challenge that most interest industry and ideally, motivate them to share
their most pressing research needs in areas such as quantum communication or
computing. The Tactical Issues track will identify various issues with creating
a compelling NSF program that is structured to maximize industry engagement and
investment and deliver longer term impact by addressing the highest priority
needs. To achieve these goals, several proven techniques will be employed. a)
Survey Instrument: Workshop attendance is limited to ensure for a productive
discussion; however, additional voices can provide insights into the workshop?s
strategic and tactical issues. The UIDP will employ a web based survey to allow
for broader information gathering; the results will be shared with attendees in
advance of the actual workshop and use these survey results to shape the
discussions.&lt;br/&gt;Technical thrust prioritization. Through the Big Issues
initiative, NSF seeks to identify where to invest its resources to have the most
impact. This workshop provides the NSF a vehicle for gathering specific
recommendations in the Quantum Leap arena, and the UIDP proposes using the
Heilmeier Catechism to initiate these discussions on the technical priority
areas. Finally, this workshop will produce a report that identifies priority
research and commercialization thrusts within the Quantum Leap big challenge and
identifies strategies for organizing an industry-inspired, academic research
center(s) (involving multiple universities) that will attract meaningful
external support ? from industry and government ? and be focused on concrete
commercially and societally relevant goals. Ideally, the participating companies
will also share insights into their high priority technical challenges and use
the envisioned center to pursue answers to these matters.