* 1748862
* CAREER: VIRAL SYMBIOSIS AND THE EVOLUTION OF BIOLOGICAL COMPLEXITY
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Gaelen Burke, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 06/30/2024
* USD 977,341.00

Microbes and their hosts engage in complex interactions that have influenced the
evolution and success of almost all life on earth. Interactions can be both
beneficial (symbiotic) or harmful (pathogenic). Understanding how different
types of interactions are formed will advance understanding of animal immunity
and disease. This award investigates how the same virus is beneficial to wasps
but causes harm to flies. This award will help in improving science, technology,
engineering and math (STEM) education and educator development. Researchers will
work closely with teachers in local schools and provide a new resource for their
professional development. Laboratory research opportunities will be provided to
diverse students and results shared with local students and the
public.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The evolution of symbiosis between two entities
from completely different domains of life is a phenomenon of major importance in
the evolution of life on this planet. Parasitoid wasps are insects whose young
feed upon and kill other insects and are a "natural laboratory" for the
acquisition of symbionts from several different types of viruses. Symbiotic
viruses deliver to hosts genes that directly benefit developing wasps by
suppressing the host's immune response against the wasps. There is a need to
examine more examples of this phenomenon in nature. Studying genetic and
phenotypic bases of independent pathogen-to-symbiont transitions will reveal key
changes that enable successful and stable beneficial viral symbioses of animals.
This project will identify common threads and key differences in the convergent
evolution of viruses that have transitioned to a beneficial role. The research
focus is on DlEPV, the entomopoxvirus carried by the wasp species
Diachasmimorpha longicaudata, which is pathogenic in flies, yet has no negative
effects upon wasps. This research will combine experimental and genomics
techniques to 1) characterize DlEPV's pathogenic mechanisms between wasps and
flies, 2) determine mechanisms that control viral replication in wasps, and 3)
determine mechanisms that promote viral parasitism in flies. The educational and
outreach components of the award will improve science education and increase
scientific literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.