* 1748780
* Vision and Change for Geoscience Undergraduate Education: Report and Toolkit
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Sharon Mosher, American Geological Institute
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2021
* USD 155,403.00

Significant changes in geoscience research and geoscience career opportunities
have occurred over the past two decades, and for the most part, undergraduate
geoscience curricula and programs have not kept up with these changes. Thus,
students from many colleges and universities leave undergraduate programs
without the necessary educational products to successfully engage in geoscience
employment or for attending graduate school. As a result of the multi-year
effort on the Future of Undergraduate Geoscience Education (Futures), the skills
competencies and concepts that students need to be successful in the current and
future workforce have been defined and agreed on by both the academic and
employer components of the geoscience community. In addition to developing a
consensus, the Futures effort investigated best practices for imparting these
core needs to students and implementing changes within geoscience departments
across the country. The current project will develop a Vision and Change
document and toolkit for the geosciences that encapsulates all of the results
and outcomes from the Futures effort. Department heads, chairs, and other
administrators, faculty, students and employers will have access to the document
and toolkit to guide systematic changes in geoscience education at the
undergraduate level in the United States. The education of undergraduate
students in departments that successfully evolve their programs will be greatly
enhanced, and those students will be better prepared for graduate school and/or
future employment. The experiential learning recommended by the wider geoscience
academic and employment community is also most conducive to learning by
underrepresented groups and to their future success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Vision and Change document will make the case for the critical need for
institutional change and provide guidance on best practices for achieving these
changes for departments of different sizes and institution types. The current
project will produce a suite of information products to be used as a tool set
for deans, department chairs, and faculty in assessing their existing curriculum
and guiding the priorities and strategies for modernizing their program to meet
current and emerging needs. The Vision and Change document and associated
products will provide critical data on the skills, concepts and competencies
needed for undergraduate geoscience education and on effective strategies for
updating undergraduate curricula and programs and in identifying common
obstacles or roadblocks and solutions. Results from previous pilot studies at
different institution types and faculty levels will be presented to help
departments identify the approaches that would be most beneficial to them.
Preparing students to be successful future geoscientists requires a solid
understanding of current and future workforce needs and the evolution of
curricula and programs to keep in step with the changes in geoscience research
and technology. Fomenting change in departments, particularly with respect to
undergraduate curricula, can be a challenge and being able to design successful
strategies for changing undergraduate programs in different types of
institutions will be a significant advancement. The Vision and Change document
will be a catalyst for change and provide a roadmap for proven pathways to
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.