* 1748459
* EAGER: SHF: Three-Dimensional Electronics Integration Facilitated by Molecular Assembly
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Thomas LaBean, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2019
* USD 222,321.00

For the production of electronic devices like computers and smart phones,
conventional lithographic techniques provide error-free circuits, but their
development in critical directions is limited by their inherently two-
dimensional nature. On the other hand, biological structures are inherently
three-dimensional, however their error-prone self-assembly procedures require
biological systems to utilize error-tolerant architectures. This project will
mimic biology using materials that self-assemble by molecular recognition for
programmed fabrication of electronic devices. Such fabrication methods could
potentially generate revolutionary technology in information processing,
computer, and communications applications. This research could increase the
speed and energy efficiency of some computations and decrease the cost of their
production. The project will provide interdisciplinary research training at the
graduate, undergraduate, and postdoc levels. Participation by under-represented
groups will be pursued and encouraged at all levels including through Project
SEED for high school students.

By applying techniques of affinity peptide-based assembly and structural DNA
nanotechnology to create bioinspired materials with macro-scale dimensions and
nano- scale feature resolution, this project will generate unique,
electronically-active, materials with integral networks that are expected to
display interesting non-linear behaviors. These materials have potential for use
in novel three-dimensionally integrated circuits with extremely-high
connectivity that are predicted to display useful electrical behaviors and will
be developed for computation, communications, signal processing, and control
applications.