* 1748518
* EAGER:  High-performance Optical-phonon-based Terahertz Sources Operating at Room Temperature
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Peter Qiang Liu, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2018
* USD 85,350.00

Title: High-performance Optical-phonon-based Terahertz Sources Operating at Room
Temperature&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The mid-
infrared (MIR) to terahertz (THz) spectral range has its unique scientific and
technological significance, as it hosts the strongest and fingerprint-like
absorption lines of countless molecular species, making it the ideal spectral
range for developing sensing technologies with superior selectivity and
sensitivity for a broad range of applications. Quantum cascade lasers (QCLs) are
currently the preferred light sources for many applications in this spectral
range, thanks to their compactness, convenient operation and high output power.
However, in the THz region the performance of QCLs is still not sufficient for
various real-world applications. THz QCLs have much lower performance than MIR
QCLs, and the highest operating temperature of THz QCLs is still limited to
~200K. Furthermore, currently no QCL can operate within the 5 THz to 11THz
range. In this exploratory project, we plan to develop a new type of compact,
high-performance and room-temperature operating THz sources to cover this "gap"
spectral range. The proposed devices are based on an untested but promising new
operation principle, and the successful demonstration of such devices will bring
transformative impacts to the research field of THz sources and enable various
applications. Therefore, the proposed research is suitable for the NSF EAGER
program. This project will allow graduate and undergraduate students to actively
participate in cutting-edge research, and acquire the knowledge, skills,
experiences and broad perspectives necessary for their future leadership in
scientific research and technology development on the competitive global stage.
Combining research with education and outreach activities will also be a focus
of our work, aiming at benefiting students of all age-groups and backgrounds,
including those from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to systematically explore
how to realize a new type of THz sources based on a fundamentally different
device operation principle. The device operation principle consists of two key
processes: (1) generating optical phonons by resonant inter-subband transitions
in multiple-quantum-wells (MQWs), and (2) transferring the energy from the
generated optical phonons to resonant THz antennae which then emit photons into
free space. As the device operation principle is not sensitive to temperature,
such THz sources should operate well at room temperature and above. Designs of
the MQWs and the THz antennae will be optimized to make both processes
efficient, leading to a high overall energy conversion efficiency which is
potentially orders of magnitude higher than that of typical THz QCLs. Moreover,
such THz sources have a surface-emitting configuration, so the output power
scales up with the device area. The proposed research may also allow us to gain
new and/or deeper insights into the interesting and complex physics underlying
the interplay between inter-subband transitions in MQWs, optical phonons and
electromagnetic resonances of photonic structures. Interactions involving all
three excitations have not been systematically studied. A better understanding
of the underlying physics will guide us to improve the device design, and may
inspire us to pursue new possibilities of more advanced devices.