* 1748107
* Conference: No Boundaries: Groups in Algebra, Geometry, and Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Dan Margalit, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 08/31/2018
* USD 30,000.00

The conference titled "No Boundaries: Groups in Algebra, Geometry, and Topology"
will be held October 27-29, 2017 at the University of Chicago. No Boundaries:
Groups in Algebra, Geometry, and Topology is a conference that highlights the
significant impact of the field of geometric group theory on several related
mathematical fields. The conference also aims to promote further fundamental
discoveries in geometric group theory and the related fields. This conference
will expose attendees to the highest caliber of mathematics, presented by some
of the field's best expositors. Through the recorded videos, mathematicians at a
wide variety of institutions will gain valuable exposure to these ideas. The
organizers expect that the conference will serve as inspiration for a new
generation of researchers to develop both depth and breadth in their work.

The aims of the conference are to highlight current mathematical advances at the
various interfaces of geometric group theory, low-dimensional topology,
representation theory, dynamics, number theory, and algebraic geometry; examples
include the development of the theory of representation stability and the
resolution of many long-standing conjectures in the theory of 3-manifold
topology and the theory of mapping class group groups. There will be plenary
lectures by top experts in a variety of related fields. The conference will have
several sessions of lightning talks, affording junior researchers a high-profile
stage in which to present their results, and ample time to discuss their work
with experts during breaks. The conference will also feature a problem session,
the output of which will shape the direction of research in these areas for
years to come. Ore information can be fund at the conference website
http://people.math.gatech.edu/~dmargalit7/noboundaries/index.shtml