* 1748131
* RR:  EAGER Collaborative Research:  Building Dynamic Research Communities in Global Legal Studies
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Daniel Brinks, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 08/31/2021
* USD 112,225.00

Comparative and international legal approaches provide the foundation for future
scientific innovation. Complex legal frameworks are increasingly offered as the
solution to the most pressing issues of our time. The issues transcend borders,
levels of governance, and areas of policy expertise demanding coordination,
collaboration, and convergence to create sustainable institutional solutions to
these pressing societal needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project pilots a new
model for collaborative and convergent research communities in law and social
sciences. The project aims to form the critical connections, commitments, and
institutionalization to ensure a transformative change in how research on
comparative and international law is designed and implemented, and how the
findings and data from the research are disseminated. To date, lack of
transparency, limited accountability, poorly-sustained graduate mentorship, and
an absence of a commonly-accepted platform for data sharing have led to a
fragmented field and a large number of single-use data projects. In turn, this
has hampered the ability to sustain research agendas resolving salient legal
questions. The project develops three collaborative components: data
infrastructure, Idea Labs, and an Annual Research Workshop. Together, these
institutional innovations will ensure the reproducibility, replicability, and
generalizability of data in the field of law and social sciences, and they will
create a new multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary collaborative team model
that is better equipped to embrace the complexity and scope of global legal
challenges.