* 1748650
* EAGER: Exploring Neuromorphic and Spintronic Behaviors in Ternary Transition Metal Dichalcogenide Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Patrick Vora, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 07/31/2020
* USD 150,000.00

Nontechnical Description: Improving computational technology requires packing
increasingly large numbers of transistors into smaller volumes. New approaches
are needed as the achievable transistor density is reaching fundamental limits
and the energy requirements for computing continue to grow. Next-generation
technologies must therefore offer enhanced performance with reduced energy
consumption. This project focuses on addressing the challenge of sustainable
computing by developing materials capable of neuromorphic and spintronic
computing behaviors. Neuromorphic computation mimics the brain by networking
solid-state analogues of the neuron, which in turn provides hardware learning
capabilities with low energy costs. Spintronics is a radically different field
where computing occurs by shifting electron spin rather than charge, yielding
speed boosts and improved efficiency over charge-based technology. This research
team seeks to develop a material capable of combining these approaches by
optimized alloying of transitional metal dichalcogenides, a class of atomically-
thin materials, to create a new spintronic material that could mimic the
biological neuron. The alloys investigated in the project could serve as the
foundation of a neuromorphic-spintronic network that would fundamentally
transform computing by combining the benefits of each technology. The research
effort includes graduate, undergraduate and high school researchers in these
studies and will promote interdisciplinary materials research while mentoring
students at the Mason Innovation eXchange.

Technical Description: 2D transition metal dichalcogenides offer versatile
electronic and structural properties based upon the choice of transition metal
and chalcogen atoms, making them attractive for next-generation computation
technologies. New behaviors can be engineered into these materials by developing
ternary alloys, which in turn can enable unconventional device concepts. This
project combines the intrinsic versatility of transition metal dichalcogenides
with alloy engineering to address the challenge of sustainable computing
technology by creating a material that can support both spintronic and
neuromorphic behaviors. The primary objectives of this research are: 1) explore
the phase diagram of a ternary transition metal dichalcogenide alloy to identify
the composition optimal for achieving on-demand structural phase transitions; 2)
evaluate the optical and electronic properties of the alloys to understand the
impact of chalcogen substitution on spintronic functionality; and 3) trigger
structural phase transitions in the alloy using heat, strain, or charge, and
confirm the spintronic properties survive multiple switching cycles.
Demonstrating these essential behaviors aims to prove the hypothesis that
ternary transition metal dichalcogenide alloys are suitable for the future
development of a combined neuromorphic-spintronic network.