* 1748400
* MassTeach: A Statewide Strategy to Increase STEM Teacher Diversity at Scale
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Charles Kaminski, Massachusetts Department of Higher Education
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,449,976.00

MassTeach is a Robert Noyce Scholarship Track 1 project. In Massachusetts, the
community college student population is the most diverse higher education
student body, including underrepresented minorities, low income, and first
generation students. As such it provides an untapped recruitment pool for
potential teachers who can better understand the experiences of similarly
diverse K-12 student populations who are enrolled in Massachusetts' local high
needs school districts. MassTeach will build upon Massachusetts' newly
implemented Associate-to-Bachelor's degree transfer pathways to create a
seamless 2-to 4 year STEM teacher pathway in multiple STEM disciplines and
leverage other statewide student support strategies to diversify the teacher
workforce. Three goals animate the MassTeach project. First, it seeks to
increase the number of highly qualified teachers in STEM classrooms who are
teaching within their licensure area in high demand subject areas. Second, the
project team aims to diversify the teacher workforce in Massachusetts to better
reflect student demographics and close the diversity gap. Third, MassTeach will
increase teacher retention thereby reducing the percentage of low-income
students taught by first-year teachers in high need districts. Additionally,
this program will be scaled throughout the entire public higher education system
in Massachusetts by the conclusion of the grant. Through the funding period,
MassTeach will place over fifty teachers in secondary STEM subject classrooms by
2023 and will have over 100 college juniors and seniors in the pipeline to
become certified STEM teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Massachusetts
Department of Higher Education will collaborate with three community college-
state university partners as pilot sites during the first two years of this
grant. Berkshire Community College and Massachusetts College of Liberal Arts
will partner with Pittsfield Public Schools, and Holyoke Community College.
Westfield State University will partner with Springfield Public Schools.
Quinsigamond Community College and Worcester State University will partner with
Worcester Public Schools. A primary focus of these partnerships include
recruiting potential Scholars and placing them in STEM classroom teaching
assignments in partnering districts' schools after graduation. MassTeach will
share best practices learned from the pilot sites and scale the MassTeach
program to the other twelve community colleges and the four state universities
with teacher education programs in the final three years of the project, as well
as with the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education.
MassTeach will be evaluated on its ability to (1) provide an efficient and
transparent transfer process, (2) recruit and retain program participants from
community colleges, (3) place and retain MassTeach Scholars, and (4) scale the
program across the Commonwealth. As a result of this project, MassTeach will
inform the local and national teacher preparation community of a robust strategy
to create a sustainable, system-wide scaled response to diversify the STEM
teacher pipeline through a 2-to-4 year public higher education pathway that
places STEM graduates to teach in K-12 classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.