* 1748911
* Disambiguating networks and factors that promote social transmission of information in rats
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Marie Monfils, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 12/31/2021
* USD 472,297.00

Everyday life abounds with information from a multitude of sources. But how do
individuals discern important information from that which can or should be
disregarded? Most of the research on learning in humans and other animals has
focused on models in which information is acquired via first-hand experience.
Direct exposure to an event, however, is not the only way that individuals
gather knowledge or form memories. Evidence suggests that humans and other
primates can develop fear associations from a social context, by observing or
interacting with others. For example, a person may have an intense fear of
snakes despite having never come across a live snake. In today's society, the
likelihood of witnessing traumatic episodes and indirectly acquiring fear is
magnified by the omnipresence of technology and constant access to the news and
social media. Like humans, rats are very social animals and learn to infer
information about their environment through their interactions with other rats.
The PI's laboratory has recently developed a procedure by which rats acquire
fear through social transmission (a model called fear conditioning by proxy).
Fear conditioning by proxy provides a sensitive means of examining how social
information is transferred between individuals. A different model, social
transmission of food preference, allows the investigators to examine the
transmission of appetitive or rewarding information. By executing the two
different and complementary paradigms in parallel (fear conditioning by proxy
and social transmission of food preference), the investigators will be able to
isolate factors that selectively underlie social transmission of information
from those which are specific to a given paradigm. This is important, because
identifying the social and mechanistic factors contribute to how people acquire
fear could also lead to interventions that extinguish or diminish fears that are
socially acquired.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the project is to
identify the social factors and neural mechanisms that foster transmission of
information between members of a species, and determine what accounts for the
broad variability in individuals' propensity to learn via social transmission.
First, the investigators will identify factors (e.g., dominance status, kinship)
that promote social transmission of information using two complementary
behavioral paradigms: fear conditioning by proxy and social transmission of food
preference. Second, the investigators will disambiguate the neural networks that
are unique to social transmission of information, and those that are shared with
learning through direct experience, using a sophisticated technique that allows
selective labeling of cells involved in a given task at a specific time. Third,
the investigators will test their prediction that a specific population of cells
in the lateral hypothalamus accounts for individual differences in fear
conditioning by proxy and social transmission of food preference. This project
combines sophisticated and thorough behavioral tests, as well as complementary
cellular and anatomical methods to address the neural mechanisms that drive
behavioral differences. A strength of these techniques is that they will provide
high spatial and temporal resolution, while allowing for on-going sampling of
behavior, to understand how knowledge is transferred between
individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.