* 1748950
* Exploring cybersecurity and forensics of Virtual Reality systems and their impact on cybersecurity education
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Ibrahim Baggili, University of New Haven
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2020
* USD 179,409.00

Virtual Reality (VR) is a medium that has the potential to transform everyday
lives. It immerses the user into a full, 360-degree virtual environment,
obscuring the user's view of physical space. VR is an emerging technology but is
already present in many modern applications, including engineering, military,
healthcare, education, real estate, tourism, social networking, games, retail,
and live events. In 2016, 89 million VR headsets were sold worldwide accompanied
by substantial investments in VR technology; however, there is almost no
cybersecurity education or research exploration of such systems. The goal of
this project is to investigate educational approaches to security issues of VR
systems in the intersection of cybersecurity and forensics. The proposed
curriculum will be supported by lectures and labs and will be disseminated for
wider adoption to spark scientific and workforce readiness related to
cybersecurity and forensics of VR technology. A significant part of the project
will be conducted by student researchers. The learning modules will be used at
the University of New Haven, immediately affecting 60 students, and will be
disseminated to wider audience through a partnership with almost 400 non-profit,
academic, and government partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is the first
attempt to create educational material for cybersecurity aspect of VR systems,
an emerging topic in cybersecurity. Although there are many university programs
focusing on Human Computer Interaction, and some on VR developer programs,
currently there is no curriculum material covering the security and forensics of
VR systems. VR presents opportunities for new types of adversary attacks such as
the Man In the Room (MIR) attack, which may place an adversary into a simulated
space. If this were the case, would we be able to reconstruct the digital
evidence that can tell us what happened? As for the hardware units developed for
VR usage: are they secure or can they be exploited? Is it possible for an
adversary remotely determine a user's physical location or remotely turn on a
user's front mounted camera? These are important security questions that need to
be addressed while educating future VR developers.