* 1748407
* Symposium on Recent Advances in Integrated Computational and Experimental Methods for Additive Manufacturing; Golden, Colorado; September 6-8, 2017
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2018
* Amy Clarke, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2018
* USD 10,028.00

Additive manufacturing (AM) holds the promise of revolutionizing current
paradigms in engineering design, manufacturing, and material and structural
performance. Full realization of the potential of AM requires significant
advances in both the process and performance modeling of additively manufactured
materials and structures. The modeling and simulation of AM processes is
multidisciplinary in nature, involving multiple physics as well as multiple time
and space scales, thus requiring interdisciplinary research efforts. The goal of
the Symposium on Recent Advances in Integrated Computational and Experimental
Methods for Additive Manufacturing is to bring together researchers from the
computational mechanics and materials science research communities involved in
advancing the state-of-the-art in process modeling of additively manufactured
(AM) materials and structures. A theme of the conference will be integration of
computational modeling and experiment, leveraging the unique manufacturing
aspects of AM, to improve overall modeling predictivity and to enable process
optimization. This award supports travel and registration to enable students,
postdocs, and early career professionals to attend this workshop and engage in
discussions with leading experts in additive manufacturing - an emerging,
transformational manufacturing technology - to equip the next-generation
materials workforce.

A primary goal of this symposium is to educate and equip the next generation of
materials scientists and engineers with the tools they require to be successful
in the manufacturing landscape of tomorrow. The use of Integrated Computational
Materials Engineering (ICME) concepts to reach the goals of advanced
manufacturing is becoming integral to the design and manufacture of structural
materials. The support provided for registration and travel will be used to
broaden the availability of this conference to include students, postdocs and
young professionals, with a particular focus on enhancing diversity by
encouraging women and underrepresented minorities to attend. The symposium scope
aligns with national initiatives to promote advanced manufacturing, including
the Materials Genome Initiative (MGI). By applying the principles of MGI to
advanced manufacturing processes such as AM, the materials community can better
integrate computation, experiments, and digital data to build a materials
knowledge-base that will allow materials to be designed and implemented via
ICME.