* 1748615
* EAGER:  New User-Centered Design Techniques for Building Assistive Technology for Children who are Presymbolic Communicators
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Anthony Hornof, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 07/31/2023
* USD 149,997.00

The project develops new user-centered design techniques for use by speech
language pathologists and assistive technology specialists to engage parents of
children with severe cognitive and communication impairments in the design,
assembly, training, and evaluation of customized assistive technology. The
target users are young "presymbolic communicators", which includes children who
have no functional speech and no use of augmentative and alternative
communication (AAC) devices, but who have idiosyncratic gestures, movements, and
vocalizations that family members can understand. The population includes, for
example, individuals with severe cerebral palsy, Down syndrome, and Rett
syndrome. The project provides such individuals with their first usable and
adopted piece of assistive technology; and provides assistive technology
practitioners, family members, and caregivers with an easily-replicated protocol
and toolkit for developing and deploying AAC solutions on their own. The project
engages graduate and undergraduate students in research and practice that solves
specific real-world problems, and builds scientific theory that is badly needed
in the field of assistive technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
establishes a new interdisciplinary approach to the design and deployment of
assistive technology and AAC solutions. The approach integrates human-computer
interaction (HCI) and communication disorder sciences (CDS), specifically the
HCI-based approach of user-centered design with CDS-based approach of
establishing and evaluating communication protocols. For example, consistent
with CDS approaches, parents and children are engaged in a clinical setting to
collect screening and evaluation data; and consistent with HCI approaches,
families are engaged in participatory design sessions in their homes to fully
explore ideas for new AAC devices. Through this multi-faceted user engagement,
the project is developing fundamentally new (a) user-centered design processes
to collaborate with parents and children to arrive at the precise child-device
interaction that will work for a child with profound intellectual impairments,
and (b) software and hardware toolkits to rapidly explore a wide range of
customized user interactions to engage these presymbolic communicators.