* 1748986
* Epigenetic Influences Supporting Developmental Change in Spinal Cord Plasticity and Motor Behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2022
* Michele Brumley, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 04/30/2022
* USD 571,640.00

This project will address how the environment regulates and contributes to motor
behavior and plasticity of the developing spinal cord. It will enhance basic
understanding of the importance of early-life experiences, and underlying
mechanisms that limit or enhance neurobehavioral function. Neurobehavioral
function involves the integrated output and action of the nervous system (i.e.,
behavior). This project will promote training and learning by involving student
researchers (e.g., first-generation, and non-traditional college students) in
the project; doing so will help improve STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Epigenetics, or environment-driven changes in
gene activity, is an important mechanism that underlies brain plasticity.
However, little is known about how the environment contributes to plasticity of
the spinal cord. This project examines developmental and environment-induced
epigenetic changes in the spinal cord, as related to motor behavior. It
identifies and describes an important mechanism of behavioral development and
spinal cord plasticity, which is important for identification of people at-risk
for neurobehavioral dysfunction. DNA methylation of the Bdnf (brain-derived
neurotrophic factor) gene in the spinal cord will be investigated during
postnatal development in rats. Following open-field behavioral testing, DNA
methylation in the spinal cord will be measured using bisulfite DNA sequence
analysis. The relationship between epigenetic activity in the spinal cord and
motor behavior will be examined in developing rats during the postnatal period
as well as in response to changes in maternal caregiving. It is expected that
spinal cord Bdnf methylation levels will be directly associated with changes in
motor behavior. This project will contribute to understanding of basic
principles and processes underlying behavioral development and mechanisms of
spinal cord plasticity, and determine the extent to which DNA methylation of the
Bdnf gene is a mechanism of central nervous system
plasticity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.