* 1748316
* Does Access to Computing Education Improve Equity? Identifying Promising Practices and Existing Barriers for Broadening Participation among Underrepresented Students in California
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Alexis Martin, Level Playing Field Institute
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2021
* USD 603,105.00

Does Access to Computing Education Improve Equity? To address the
underrepresentation of women and people of color in computing education and
careers, national, state, and local efforts have ramped up to expand access to
computer science education at the secondary school level and provide the skills
all students need to participate in the technology-driven economy. This study
examines the relationship between the expansion of access to computing education
course offerings and the enrollment, success, and persistence in computing
course sequences among underrepresented students across the state of California.
This study examines whether current broadening participation in computing
initiatives are improving racial and gender equity in computing at the high
school level. The work informs strategies for effectively improving computing
education outcomes among underrepresented people of color and women of all kinds
and broadening the talent pool of the future U.S. computing
workforce.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This study focuses in California, examining
statewide data trends and data across three school districts that have
implemented computer science course expansion efforts-- Oakland, Los Angeles and
San Francisco. This multiyear longitudinal study of computing course
availability, student enrollment/participation, student success, and persistence
in computing courses: (a) Identifies successful interventions and existing
challenges in broadening participation and closing equity gaps in computing, and
(b) Identifies the demographic, academic, and curricular factors that are
predictive of short- and long-term computing outcomes across student
populations. This work informs, refines, and improves ongoing district and
state-level computer science expansion plans through an intentional process of
continual improvement, and produces empirical and theoretical findings to inform
efforts to broaden participation in K-12 computing education.