* 1748363
* EAGER:   Carbon-Free and Binder-Free Cathode Configurations for High-Energy Lithium-Sulfur Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Leela Arava, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 02/28/2019
* USD 149,541.00

Advances in battery technology have been the driving force for the development
of new electric vehicles and renewable energy storage systems for the electric
grid. New chemistries are needed that are superior to current battery systems
for both performance and cost. Among the various alternatives, lithium-sulfur
(Li/S) chemistries are the most promising next-generation energy storage
technologies, as they lead to advantages such as high theoretical energy
density, wide range of operational temperature, and low cost. However,
fundamental research is needed on Li/S batteries to address issues including
short cycle life, poor coulombic efficiency and self-discharge. The primary goal
of this EAGER project is to introduce electrocatalytic porous current collectors
in the Li/S battery, which will fundamentally alter electrochemical properties
and overcome many current shortcomings. The critical insight gained can be
applied to a broad range of materials and energy related research fields such as
solar cells, redox flow batteries and fuel cells. The educational and outreach
activities associated with the project include active participation of
undergraduates from underrepresented groups in the research program and hands-on
experiences to high school students through Wayne State's Mobile Energy Lab
program. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this fundamental research project is
to address low charging efficiency and short cycle life issues of Li/S
batteries. The approach used is to confine the dissolved intermediate
polysulfides within the cathode of the cell. The research is based on the
hypothesis that the polysulfide-shuttle process in the Li/S cell can be
controlled by using electrocatalysis driven kinetics and surface adsorption
chemistries. The objective is to confine the dissolved intermediate polysulfides
within the cathode of the cell while enhancing the intermediate's utilization
and reaction rate using engineered porous catalytic current collectors with the
electrocatalysts integrated in it. The PI will investigate the following
proposed roles of the electrocatalyst: (i) adsorb dissolved intermediate
polysulfides on the catalyst surface to prevent polysulfide shuttle process;
(ii) accelerate the reaction kinetics for transforming intermediate polysulfides
to lower order polysulfides; and (iii) convert end product of discharge process
back to solid sulfur during the charge process to improve cycle life. This EAGER
project introduces a new concept of electrocatalytic mitigation that could
define a novel pathway towards designing carbon-free electrode configurations
with outstanding electrochemical properties.