* 1748774
* I-Corps: Shifting Robots for Disaster Rescue, Monitoring, and Education
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Alice Agogino, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 03/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/ commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to reduce
loss of life in disaster rescue on rough terrain. Disaster rescue can endanger
the lives of both the victims and the first responders, with the Red Cross
reporting 400 deaths in disaster rescue in the past 20 years. More than half of
the casualties were volunteers who entered unchartered risky environments.
Future deaths could be prevented by utilizing semi-autonomous technology to
explore the regions of disasters, provide surveillance to inform first
responders, and assist in the rescue of victims until human first responders can
arrive. By dropping the proposed shape-shifting robots from aerial vehicles,
these mobile robots could explore previously difficult to reach areas for
effective emergency response. This proposed technology will also have broader
impact in use for scientific monitoring and surveillance as well as for
educational applications for K-12 students, teachers, parents, roboticists and
hobbyists. With the potential to have large impact (with over 3 million
potential teachers; 1 million teachers alone in secondary schools), robot kits
could be marketed for educational applications, especially for schools trying to
meet the Next Generation Science Standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact/ commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to reduce loss of life
in disaster rescue on rough terrain. Disaster rescue can endanger the lives of
both the victims and the first responders, with the Red Cross reporting 400
deaths in disaster rescue in the past 20 years. More than half of the casualties
were volunteers who entered unchartered risky environments. Future deaths could
be prevented by utilizing semi-autonomous technology to explore the regions of
disasters, provide surveillance to inform first responders, and assist in the
rescue of victims until human first responders can arrive. By dropping the
proposed shape-shifting robots from aerial vehicles, these mobile robots could
explore previously difficult to reach areas for effective emergency response.
This proposed technology will also have broader impact in use for scientific
monitoring and surveillance as well as for educational applications for K-12
students, teachers, parents, roboticists and hobbyists. With the potential to
have large impact (with over 3 million potential teachers; 1 million teachers
alone in secondary schools), robot kits could be marketed for educational
applications, especially for schools trying to meet the Next Generation Science
Standards.