* 1748625
* Predator control of carrion resources and associated ecological heterogeneity
* BIO,DEB
* 08/20/2017,08/31/2023
* Joseph Bump, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2023
* USD 839,506.00

The roles that apex predators play in ecosystems are still debated among
researchers and wildlife managers. This project will examine a novel role for
these predators, which is their ability to generate hotspots of biological
activity by controlling carrion resources. Understanding the diverse functions
of apex predators will contribute to sustainable wilderness management, directly
enhancing citizen enjoyment and appreciation of wilderness and wildlife for
recreation. The project will also advance public awareness of the importance of
apex predators, improving societal awareness of wilderness and wildlife
preservation. Efforts to maintain carrion resources will help to sustain other
species and ecosystem health. The investigators will work with wildlife managers
in US National Parks to develop educational maps for outreach and
interpretation. Animal remains and scavenger activity created at carcass sites
are visually captivating to students of all ages. Investigators will partner
with the Western Upper Peninsula Michigan Center for Science, Mathematics and
Environmental Education to create a regional remote camera lending depot and
lesson plans for recording biological activity at carcass sites. These
activities will engage K-12 educators and students in the field of carrion
ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carrion occurs in all biomes. It represents a
bottleneck in the vital flow of energy and limiting nutrients with profound
ecological and evolutionary consequences. Carrion constitutes a critical
resource for a variety of communities and it strongly affects scavenger guilds,
the maintenance of biodiversity, and fundamental ecological processes. This
research will investigate the poorly understood role of predation in controlling
carrion resources, shaping carcass distributions, and generating a shifting
mosaic of biogeochemical and community activity. Two interrelated sets of
questions will be addressed across four terrestrial ecosystems: 1) How do
carrion-derived effects vary across multiple ecosystems and across a diversity
of predator-prey communities? And 2) How does predation influence carrion
distribution across space and time? Experiments and field studies will reveal
above and belowground carrion effects across key biomes. This understanding will
be coupled with spatial records of carcasses to examine predator control of
carrion resources across multiple scales. Data from experiments, field studies
and carcass records will be incorporated into spatial models to examine
predator-carrion dynamics and predation controls over carrion resource flow
compared to die-offs. The focal systems span a range of ecosystems and predator-
prey diversity, and will yield both general patterns and identify distinct
differences in predator control of carrion resources across biomes. In examining
predator control of carrion resources, this work addresses both the fundamental
focus in ecology on mechanisms of trophic control of community and ecosystem
structure and explores a novel concept that can add to a comprehensive view of
the ecological role of predators.