* 1748199
* HSI Conference: Hispanic-focused STEM Ideas for Inspiration and Innovation
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Michael Pullin, Nova Southeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Walker
* 08/31/2018
* USD 91,292.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) Dear Colleague Letter NSF 17-092:
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education in Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs)
calls for projects to support conferences that will identify the most critical
challenges and opportunities regarding undergraduate science, technology
engineering and mathematics (STEM) education at HSIs, and potential actionable
solutions that fall within NSF's mission, policies, and practices. In response
to this call Nova Southeastern University is partnering with Broward College,
Miami-Dade College, and Excelencia in Education to host the "Hispanic-focused
STEM Ideas for Inspiration and Innovation (HSI3) Conference" in Ft. Lauderdale,
FL, in December 2017. Conference topics are intentionally designed to motivate
HSI faculty, staff and administrators from across the nation to develop and
transform high-quality ideas into inventive actionable solutions to be submitted
to the new NSF HSI grant program and other funding sources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference agenda will focus on two-year/four-year
STEM pathways and collaboration involving HSIs including undergraduate STEM
research and industry experiences and identifying and leveraging resources.
Partnering among a 4-year institution and two long-standing community college
HSIs ensures that both lower division and upper division perspectives will be
reflected in every aspect of the conference, from participant marketing to
presentation content, to Work Session discussions. Formal presentations, coupled
with numerous opportunities for participants to engage with each other during
Work Sessions and more informal networking breaks and meals, allows participants
structured and unstructured time to consider inter-related common challenges,
best practices, and to influence the development of innovative ideas that can be
implemented institutionally through new or enhanced two-year/four-year
partnerships. Innovative ideas and inspired collaborations will continue to
evolve after the conference via the HSI STEM listserv/mailing list that Nova
Southeastern University will create and maintain.