* 1748285
* EAGER: Societies as learning communities: building the foundations for an empirical approach to the formation of collective memories
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Alin Coman, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2019
* USD 256,745.00

The overarching goal of the proposed work is to conduct proof-of-concept studies
for how processes associated with individual learning can contribute to
understanding the dynamics associated with the acquisition and maintenance of
collective memories in communities/groups. These memories serve as a foundation
on which individuals base their identities, beliefs, and behaviors. Despite
their importance, there is limited experimental research into how collective
memories are formed because of conceptual and technical challenges. First, these
memories are dynamically changed in interactions among individuals, which makes
their measurement complex. Second, real-world communities are typically larger
than the small groups one could study in lab settings. In this project,
investigator Alin Coman and his research team, from Princeton University, aim to
build the foundation for the empirical exploration of the formation of
collective memories in lab-created networked communities. They will build on
psychological research on learning according to which once information is
encoded, its memory is not sealed; rather, it experiences a transformation that
involves a multitude of processes underlying learning, including strengthening,
suppression, differentiation, and decay. In doing so, the project will
contribute to the basic science of learning by providing an experimental
framework that bridges between well-established cognitive mechanisms associated
with learning at an individual level and large-scale social outcomes at a
community level (i.e., collective memory). Ultimately, the findings will reveal
how learning principles widely explored in psychology attenuate and facilitate
the formation of collective memories. The advances that will be made from this
project will be of interest to public health officials interested in
disseminating accurate information to the public, to educators who aim to
maximize knowledge acquisition in their classrooms, and to organizations
interested in facilitating optimal coordination by strategically impacting the
degree of information sharing among its members. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project uses insights from cognitive psychology, social psychology, and network
science to explore the formation of collective memories in lab-created
communities. It weaves together two strands of relevant research: (1)
experimentally-based psychological research on the effect of communication on
learning and memory and (2) studies of the propagation of influence through
social networks. This cross-disciplinary fertilization is made possible by
integrating relevant research at different levels of analysis: linking
individual cognition and memory, then establishing how dyadic-level interaction
changes memory representations, and then investigating how these dyadic-level
effects propagate through social networks. Lab-created communities of 20 members
will be assembled in which individuals will interact with one another according
to a sequence of networked conversations. These free-flowing interactions will
occur in a computer-mediated fashion in SoPHIE (Software Platform for Human
Interaction Experiments), a software platform with features developed by the PI
for the purposes of this research program. The focus will be on how
conversations: (a) strengthen and induce forgetting in pre-existing individual
memories of community members and (b) how they facilitate the learning of new
information. Analyses will reveal how memory updating following conversational
remembering circumscribes the formation of collective memories across the
community. This research program constitutes a meaningful shift in how
interdisciplinary approaches offer a bridge between individual-level cognitive
phenomena and large-scale social outcomes. It would speak to cognitive
scientists interested in exploring how the cognitive processes involved in
learning have emergent properties at a collective level, and to sociologists who
want to understand how cognition interacts with structural features of social
networks to shape collective-level outcomes.