* 1748106
* EAGER: Deterministic Placement of Qubits in Cavities for Strongly Coupled Quantum Repeaters
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2017,01/31/2020
* Evelyn Hu, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 01/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

This EAGER project on Deterministic Placement of Qubits in Cavities for
Strongly-Coupled Quantum Repeaters studies ways of optimally placing qubits
within specially engineered environments (cavities) that will allow us to store,
amplify and control the release of information contained by the qubit. Qubits,
corresponding to quantum mechanical states, are the fundamental units of
information in system where the rules of quantum mechanics explicitly govern the
exchange, storage and transmission of information. Qubits within quantum systems
hold great promise for faster, more secure processing and transmission of
complex information, but there are profound, fundamental challenges that limit
the longevity, storage and signal strength of qubit information. The use of
specially-designed cavities can result in substantial amplification of qubit
optical signals, allow storage of qubit information and provide a means of
controlled transmission of the qubit information: such strongly coupled qubit-
cavity systems can provide an important building block of larger-scale quantum
information systems. A major challenge here lies in the optimal placement of the
qubit within the cavity: the efficacy of the cavity can fall off dramatically
with misalignments of only several atomic lattice distances. The research
proposed here uses a semiconductor platform, developing sensitive means of fine-
tuning the placement of atomic-scale qubits within the cavity, and using the
amplified signals from the qubit-cavity system itself to guide the process. The
knowledge gained from this research can have a profound and wide-ranging impact
on a variety of qubit-cavity systems, bringing us much closer to achieving
robust, scalable quantum information systems on a semiconductor "chip".

Technical Description: The proposed EAGER project on Deterministic Placement of
Qubits in Cavities for Strongly-Coupled Quantum Repeaters will build on exciting
results observed in prior experiments involving Silicon Vacancies in 4H-SiC
nanobridge cavities. These experiments suggest the possibility of
deterministically placing defect-based qubits in spatial overlap with the maxima
of the electromagnetic fields (modes) of the cavity, one of the greatest
challenges in achieving strong coupling of qubit and cavity. The work of this
project develops and tests a number of strategies to achieve better control over
the diffusive motion of these defect-based qubits. To understand and interpret
the placement process, a detailed understanding is required of the energy
landscape of the qubit, and its sensitivity to thermal, electronic and strain
variations; thus a collaborative effort between experiment and theory is
mandatory for success. Therefore, the proposed work closely couples experiments,
complemented and guided by theoretical simulations. The research team evaluates
thermal control of the diffusion process, as well as the more localized and
potentially better-controlled radiation enhanced diffusion processes. The team
also explores the possibility of a self-aligned process, using the high field
(modal) region of the cavity itself. Achieving the correct spatial overlap of
qubit to the maximum field in a cavity is perhaps the greatest challenge to
attaining strong coupling. Therefore, the studies proposed here will have a
significant, wide-spread impact on creating scalable quantum information
systems, across a broad spectral range. The resulting strongly coupled qubit-
cavity devices can serve as effective quantum repeaters that link information
from discrete, spatially-separated qubits across a network. Moreover, the
collaborative and closely-coupled interaction between theory and experiment
represented by this team provides a richer and more complete research and
education environment, as well as setting benchmarks for how such challenging
problems can and should be addressed.