* 1748904
* I-Corps: Rapid Manufacturing for High Efficiency Heat Exchangers
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2017,03/31/2018
* Matthew Lynall, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 03/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be to
enable more efficient production of heat exchanger-like components (featuring
complex internal geometries) that are currently time intensive and costly to
manufacture. The project has its origins in fully 3D printed rocket engine
research. The project provides a solution for the mass production of liquid
rocket engines so that launching infrastructure to space will happen more
frequently. In order to meet the backlog from rising demand, the space industry
needs a more rapid rate of rocket launches to deliver infrastructure (such as
satellites) into space. Engine manufacturing technology has stifled launch
vehicle production, which in turn has restricted the ability to meet demand in
the launch vehicle industries. Providing a rapid production technique to
fabricate large quantities of high efficiency rocket engines will allow launch
costs and production time to be reduced significantly. The commercial impact of
rapidly producing complex heat exchangers will also allow industries to iterate
on designs and decrease total cost for production units in industrial
applications. Manufacturing high efficiency heat exchangers allows for decreased
component size production which can decrease total mass for complex systems.
Industrial applications for high efficiency heat exchangers exist in the jet
engine manufacturing, thermal power plant, and large-scale refinery
manufacturing industries.

This I-Corps project improves upon conventional engine manufacturing methods and
even new additive manufacturing methods by using a proprietary technology to
quickly produce fully regeneratively cooled engines. The technology is a
physical fabrication and assembly process for the hardest-to-manufacture engine
components that can decrease production time by 90% and cost by 80%,
respectively, compared to current methods. Two fully 3D printed rocket engines
have been fabricated and tested. One of the 3D printed rocket engines was
launched on a sounding rocket e created to serve as a flight article and
validate the work to date. The third-generation engine will improve upon
conventional 3D metal printing deficiencies of high porosity, numerous post
processing steps, and scalability in both volume and size production. The team
will work to address and account for the deficiencies with conventional 3D metal
printing to allow for mass production of complex heat exchangers.