* 1748415
* Support of 15th Annual Conference on the Foundations of Nanoscience (FNANO 2018)
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* John Reif, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 12/31/2018
* USD 12,000.00

This proposal is for travel support for students at the Conference on The
Foundations of Nanoscience meeting (FNANO), Snowbird, Utah from April 16-19,
2018. FNANO was established by the International Society for Nanoscale Science,
Computation, and Engineering in 2004 as a venue for the wide range of
researchers interested in various aspects of self-assembly as it relates to
nanoscience and nanotechnology. The meeting features 12 tracks covering recent
work in different types of self-assembled architectures and devices, at scales
ranging from nano-scale to meso-scale. Methodologies include both experimental
as well as theoretical approaches. The conference spans traditional disciplines
including chemistry, biochemistry, physics, computer science, mathematics, and
various engineering disciplines. The emphasis is on basic, rather than applied
research. Last year's meeting attracted 189 registered participants. The 15th
Conference on Foundations of Nanoscience in 2018 will have a mixture of invited
talks by distinguished nanoscientists as well as contributed posters and open
discussion periods to enhance attendee interaction with the goal of creating
vibrant intellectual community in the area of self-assembly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is for travel support for students at the
Conference on Foundations of Nanoscience in 2018. The travel support will be
open and evenly divided among all students (undergrad, grad and Postdoc) giving
accepted posters or talks. This project, for travel support for students at the
Conference, will provide a substantial multidisciplinary impact to nanoscience,
biochemistry and chemistry, which will profit from the introduction of key
methodologies derived from mainstream computer science, such as mathematical
modeling, software engineering, algorithms and modular design methodologies.