* 1748849
* Collaborative Research: Soil temperature, mycorrhizal association and tree nutrition as determinants of divergent changes in tree growth and abundance in arctic Alaska.
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Patrick Sullivan, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 05/31/2023
* USD 936,150.00

Vegetation change has been widespread in the Arctic in recent decades, with
implications for carbon storage, surface energy exchange, and local wildlife
habitat. Most studies of patterns and processes responsible for vegetation
change have focused on deciduous shrubs, which have shown increases in abundance
throughout much of the Arctic. Fewer studies have examined changes in tree
abundance at the interface between arctic tundra and the boreal forest. This
project will take advantage of historical aerial images collected throughout the
Brooks Range during the 1950s and 1970s to provide a comprehensive census of
changes in tree abundance in recent decades in northern Alaska. Investigators
will also test hypotheses about whether differences in nutrition, colder soils,
and more widespread permafrost explain why trees in the western Brooks Range
have increased their growth in response to recent warming, while those in the
eastern Brooks Range have not. In addition, the investigators plan extensive
education and outreach activities in rural and urban Alaska. Rural efforts will
include visiting classrooms in Kotzebue High School to share research results,
providing opportunities for Kotzebue High School students to join the research
team in the field, arrainging to be interviewed by local public radio stations,
and delivering public lectures at National Park Service headquarters in several
local villages. In Anchorage, the investigators plan to equip a public high
school in Anchorage with supples needed to conduct tree-ring research, train
students in standard methods, and help them design a study to link white spruce
tree ring data in their backyards to long term climate records.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The relative abundance of forest and tundra has important
implications for surface energy exchange, carbon cycling, wildlife habitat and
the availability of subsistence resources at high latitudes. The northern limit
of the boreal forest in Alaska is formed within the Brooks Range. The eastern
Brooks Range is an area well known to dendrochronologists as an epicenter of
divergent tree growth responses to climate warming. Divergence refers to the
deterioration of historically strong positive correlations between temperature
and tree growth. The recognition that divergence has been widespread in the
circumboreal has undermined confidence in paleoclimate reconstructions and
created uncertainty in projections of vegetation-climate feedbacks. While
divergence is a well-known phenomenon, its implications for changes in tree
abundance and shifts in treeline position remain unknown. Recent findings in
four watersheds along a west to east gradient in the Brooks Range suggest
colder, more permafrost-affected soils limit tree access to soil nutrients and
may be the cause of divergence in the eastern Brooks Range. In this study,
investigators will expand the spatial extent of this previous work to examine
the causes and consequences of divergence in the Brooks Range. They will combine
repeat aerial photography with tree-ring analysis and detailed measurements of
tree microclimates, mycorrhizal associations, nutrient relations, and
reproductive effort in 25 Brooks Range watersheds to yield broad-scale
mechanistic insights into controls on tree growth and changes in tree abundance
in a changing climate. They will test the hypothesis that positive growth
responses to warming and increased tree abundance will prevail in the western
Brooks Range and in habitats with warmer soils, while neutral growth responses
to warming and stagnant treelines will be common in the eastern Brooks Range and
in areas with cold soils.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.