* 1748190
* BRAIN EAGER:  Novel Viral Vectors for Neuroscience Research
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2020
* Todd Roberts, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 10/31/2020
* USD 299,998.00

The pace of scientific discovery is often dictated by the development of new
tools and techniques that bring into focus previously imperceptible aspects of
the matter under investigation. In the study of the brain, the development of
new labeling methods, such as the Golgi stain in the 1870s or genetic expression
of fluorescent proteins in the 1990s, continues to revolutionize our ability to
better understand the organization of the brain and study how networks in the
brain function to support behavior, learning and memory. The aim of this
research is to identify and develop a novel set of genetic tools that allow
brain researchers to label and manipulate brain circuits with increasing
sophistication. In this project, expertise of virologists and neuroscientists is
paired in order to design new, cutting-edge approaches for studying and
manipulating brain circuits. These novel tools provide important methods for
mapping the intricate connections between nerve cells that support learning and
behavior. To facilitate broad adoption of the new, virus-based approaches, the
tools generated through this research are made freely available to the
scientific community, and on-line resources are constructed to help the research
community search and request all the tools and protocols developed under this
project.

Viruses have evolved over millions of years to evade detection and thrive in
vertebrate hosts. Building on the evolutionary diversity of vertebrate viruses,
this research examines the use of several, previously untested, viral species
for neuroscience research. This innovative, high-risk project establishes a
unique research partnership between virologists and neuroscientists, in order to
identify new viral vectors for labeling and expressing molecular tools in large
populations of neurons. The broader impacts of this proposal are many-fold.
First, this research leads to the development of new viral tools for labeling
and genetically manipulating neurons in diverse animal models. Second, by
studying a diverse set of viruses in both birds and rodents, this research leads
to a better understanding of virus-host interactions and how they can and should
be considered when selecting and designing viral tools for neuroscience
research. This research therefore provides valuable new information and tools
for neuroscientists and virologists. Third, all genetic and viral tools
generated through this research are made freely available to the research
community. Fourth, an on-line resource describing results of all tested viruses
is being generated in order to help guide other research labs when selecting and
testing new viral tools.