* 1748902
* I-Corps: Multimodal Image Perception System
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2017,04/30/2019
* Matthew Lynall, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 04/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to allow
individuals who are blind and visually impaired (BVI) to perceive images better
than they currently can. Current technologies are insufficient since they only
provide very little data to the user through tactile methods. Through the
Multimodal image perception system (MIPS), students who are BVI will be able to
perceive images through alternate sensory channels such as haptic, sound and
tactile feedback. This would enable them to be active participants in
exploration of STEM subjects such as biology or chemistry which rely heavily on
understanding images. The use of this system would also allow individuals with
BVI to overcome the stigma and fear of pursuing STEM majors as college students.
Moreover, according to surveys by the Department of Education individuals with
STEM majors often had higher paying jobs as compared to non-STEM majors. The use
of the MIPS may promote their participation in STEM fields, which would allow
individuals with BVI to pursue higher paying careers and promote diversification
of the workforce by making individuals with BVI more economically competitive.

This I-Corps project will contribute to addressing the improvement in the
education for individuals who are blind and visually impaired (BVI). Experiments
have been conducted with individuals with BVI to compare their understanding of
images with the multimodal image perception system (MIPS), and with conventional
systems such as tactile images. Through these experiments, it has been
identified that the individuals who are blind have a better accuracy and
understanding of images using the MIPS as compared to using the tactile images.
Through the I-Corps program, the team will further investigate the most critical
needs of the end users and determine the most optimal path towards
commercializing the technology to allow it to be used by educators around the
country to improve their students' understanding of STEM fields.