* 1748262
* Community College and University Partnerships as Catalysts for Promoting Materials Science Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2018
* J. Ardie Butch Dillen, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 02/28/2018
* USD 15,190.00

This project will support an educational symposium on "Community College and
University Partnerships as Catalysts for Promoting Materials Science Education"
at the 2017 Materials Research Society Conference. This symposium will be held
concurrently with technical sessions and will provide an overview of materials
science education as a function of current partnerships among community
colleges, secondary schools, universities, professional societies and
businesses. The event will also promote discussions among materials scientists
and engineers, teachers, faculty and administrators representing secondary and
higher education institutions. The symposium will focus on partnership
strategies and best practices currently in use to motivate and provide guidance
for current and future materials scientists and engineers. Through these
discussions, attendees will gain insight into the integration of partnership
elements such as funding, human and equipment resources, institutional
commitments, teacher and faculty interactions, and development of academic
pathways to build student interest. At the conclusion, a closing session will be
held to summarize strategies, recommendations and outline a series of meetings
to discuss next steps for those who have an interest in moving forward with
exploring partnerships.