* 1748573
* EAGER: Comparative Study of Critical Zones of Intensively Managed Loess Landscapes in China and United States
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Hangsheng Lin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

Midwestern United States and Western China are among the largest food producing
regions of the world, and they have been extensively modified for this purpose
through human activities. Although they have different geologic history, they
share a common attribute as both are overlain by wind deposited soil, also
called loess. The glacial legacy in the U.S. was created in relatively flat
landscape that has historically supported long residence times of water, organic
matter, and chemical constituents. This has been significantly altered to
support industrial agriculture. On the other hand, the loess plateau in China
exhibits sharp gradients resulting in small residence times and rapid transport
of water and sediment. While the primary challenge in the U.S. has been to drain
the landscape through tile drain and channelization to make it suitable for
agriculture, the loess plateau faces the opposite challenge of constraining the
flow of water and sediment. The objective of the proposed work is to develop a
predictive understanding of the dynamics of Chinese Loess Plateau (CLP) under
anthropogenic impacts, and compare and contrast them to that in intensively
managed landscapes (IML) in the Midwestern U.S. Both IML and CLP are in critical
food production regions of the U.S. and China, respectively, and have
experienced intensive human alternations. The joint study of CLP and IML, using
Critical Zone Observatories (CZOs) in the respective environments, proposed here
in collaboration with the Institute of Earth Environment, Chinese Academy of
Science (IEE/CAS) in Xi'an, will foster collaboration and joint exploration of
loess systems with very different geologic and human impact histories. The
project will support a graduate student who will develop a unique understanding
and appreciation of the contrasting landscapes in the U.S. and
China.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IML in the U.S. Midwest has been transformed
from a primarily transformation-dominated system, characterized by long
residence times of water, carbon, and nutrients, to a transport-dominated system
characterized by fast movement of water, sediment, carbon, and nutrients through
the landscapes and tile-drains into receiving water bodies. Such a transformer-
to-transporter framework through land use conversion is applicable to low-
gradient landscapes in temperate climate such as those in North America and
northern Europe that have been sculpted through glaciation. In contrast, this
study hypotheses that the Chinese loess plateau is experiencing a transporter-
to-transformer conversion in the highly dissected landscapes, with semi-arid to
semi-humid climate, due to the large scale government led effort to reduce
erosion by reclaiming agricultural land on hillslopes for re-vegetation and
filling valleys to create land for agriculture that are less prone to erosion.
This land use conversion, which has historically functioned as transporter, to
transformer by increasing residence time through human action is prominent in
many parts of the CLP. In both the IML and the CLP CZOs, the landscapes are
maintained out of equilibrium through human infrastructure and energy input to
achieve societal goals. &lt;br/&gt;The exploration of the near-surface
environment through the establishment of Critical Zone observatories is becoming
wide spread across the globe. This provides tremendous opportunities for using
place-based studies to draw generalized conclusion and develop principles that
are broadly applicable, and also establish distinguishing characteristics of
local behavior. IMLCZO is unique in understanding the impact of human
modification in the Critical Zone, particularly in the loess surficial
environment developed over the last 10,000 years to 500,000 years in the United
States. In contrast, the Chinese loess plateau has formed over 20 million years
and has dramatically different landscape, such as dissected landscape caused by
high erosion. However, this landscape is also under significant human influence
and is actively being re-sculpted to sustain agriculture, reduce erosion, and
conserve natural vegetation. A comparative study between the two environments
will allow to advance science by developing generalized principles that better
support sustainable practices.