* 1748764
* EAGER: A Python Program Analysis Infrastructure to Facilitate Better Data Processing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Xiangyu Zhang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2019
* USD 147,000.00

Python is the third most popular programming language, after C and Java,  and
the most widely used language in Machine Learning and Data Science. Applications
in Python are prone to human errors as much as those in other languages, or
maybe more so due to the dynamic nature of Python. Therefore, tools to analyze,
test, verify, and optimize Python applications are in a pressing need. Such
tools are lagging or non-existent for Python. The root cause is the lack of
infrastructure to support building practical and effective tools, which entails
addressing the dynamic features of Python, such as dynamic typing, dynamic code
loading/execution, and pervasive invocations to external library functions
implemented in other languages.   This project aims to explore the feasibility
of building a Python program analysis infrastructure by developing two sample
tools that rely upon a common set of infrastructural capabilities including the
instrumentation, static analysis and symbolic analysis capabilities. The two
sample tools are a data provenance tracking tool for machine learning
applications and a bug finding tool to detect data format inconsistencies, which
are the most dominant type of bugs in data processing. The provenance tool will
demonstrate the importance of static analysis and program instrumentation, and
the bug finding tool will demonstrate the importance of symbolic analysis. Both
tools will illustrate the great benefits that can be brought to data scientists
by advanced tools. In addition, they will illustrate that the aforementioned
capabilities cannot be simply ported from existing infrastructures for other
languages such as C and Java. The infrastructure will meet the pressing need of
comprehensive tool building support for Python. A lot of cutting-edge
synergistic research will be enabled across the CISE research community to serve
data application programmers, data scientists and even end users.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.