* 1748266
* Wildfire Impacts on Air Quality and Nighttime Brown Carbon Formation
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Robert Yokelson, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2023
* USD 533,533.00

This project is part of a larger field campaign, the Western Wildfire Experiment
for Cloud Chemistry, Aerosol Absorption and Nitrogen (WE-CAN), designed to
characterize the emissions and evolution of western U.S. wildfire plumes. The
larger field campaign consists of an aircraft study based out of Boise ID
focused on scientific questions related to fixed nitrogen, absorbing aerosols,
cloud activation and chemistry in wildfire plumes. This project is focused on
ground-based measurements, in conjunction with the aircraft flights, to assess
wildfire emissions of non-methane organic gases and to evaluate the optical
properties of aerosols emitted by wildfires. Results from this effort will
provide data and information for more accurately modeling biomass burning
emissions to the atmosphere and for potentially reducing exposures to harmful
pollutants that result from wildfires.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ground-based
effort will be focused mainly on the nearby impacts of smoke chemistry in rural
valleys near Boise both night and day. The project includes a 6-week ground-
based field deployment during the summertime in 2018. Comprehensive air quality
and atmospheric chemistry data will be collected for CO2, CO, NOx, NH3, VOCs,
oxidants, PM, tracers, O3, NO3, IVOC, SVOC, black carbon (BC), and brown carbon
(BrC). In addition to supplementing the aircraft data, this data will be used to
calculate smoldering/flaming ratios and emission factors for nighttime open
burning. There are also plans to explore, and quantify to the degree possible,
the secondary source of BrC in nighttime aging of smoke. The data collected in
this research will be used to improve the representation of nighttime smoke
emissions, and especially that of BrC, for fire modeling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF-funded WE-CAN field campaign is part of a more
comprehensive team effort that is co-funded by NOAA (the NOAA project is named
FIREX) and NASA (the NASA project is named FIREChem). The NSF campaign will take
place in the summer of 2018 and the NOAA and NASA campaigns are planned for the
summer of 2019.