* 1748531
* Scholars Award:  An Ethnography of an Emerging Technological Community
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2017,02/28/2019
* Lisa Messeri, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2019
* USD 172,027.00

This project will investigate a community of innovation that is devoted to
building virtual reality (VR) devices and experiences. The aim of this research
is to track the conversations and activities of this technological community at
the nexus of industry, entertainment and research. The results of this research
will deepen our understanding of the formation and growth of innovation
communities. It will address how knowledge flows across institutions, and how
technologies are shaping places and selves. The findings of this project will be
of interest to policy makers, designers, innovators, businesses, entertainment
industry and educators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is an ethnography of
an innovation community and will be conducted through participant observation
and interviews. The project will be based at the confluence of academic
institutions, technology companies, and the entertainment business. The
questions structuring the ethnography include: 1) what are the goals and
narratives of this community of innovation; (2) how do the interactions between
bodies and VR technologies create novel kinds of places that are simultaneously
virtual and physical; and (3) how does the language the VR community uses to
describe the technology invite a rethinking of human sociality? In focusing
specifically on female led research and ventures, this ethnography will further
highlight the role of women in STEM and tell the story of an emerging technology
from a perspective often absent in such conversations.