* 1748793
* Workshop on Self-Driving Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,10/31/2019
* Nicholas Feamster, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 10/31/2019
* USD 49,999.00

This workshop brings together leading researchers from a range of disciplines
across computer science to define a new research agenda in network measurement
and data analytics with the goal of exploring how to design networks that manage
themselves. These experts will explore taking advantage of advances in
disciplines including machine learning, distributed systems, and formal methods
to address growing requirements and constraints of modern networking
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of the proliferation of applications
and services that now run over the Internet ranging from video streaming to
Internet-connected smart home devices to augmented reality---the expectations
for the performance, reliability, and security of our communications networks
are greater than ever, as the number and diversity of applications that run on
top of the network continue to proliferate, and as the volume of traffic on the
network continues to grow. To meet these expectations, network operators work
tirelessly to continuously collect troves of heterogeneous data from the
network, analyze this data to infer characteristics about the network, and
decide whether to change the network's configuration in response to network
conditions (e.g., a shift in traffic demand or a cyber attack). Today, these
three steps are decoupled: operators perform them separately, on different
timescales, often in a slow or manual fashion that relies on intuition, as
opposed to data, analysis, and inference. The vision for this workshop is that
networks might one day be able to largely manage themselves through a
combination of query-driven network measurement, automated inference techniques,
and programmatic control. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The research
agenda lends itself to research problems that will foster advances in computer
science, including the following areas: 1. Distributed systems that optimize the
use of limited resources for complex tasks, including support for multiple
simultaneous queries; New architectures to support programmable measurement in
hardware; Algorithms that partition a network analytics query across a
centralized stream processor and the distributed switches and network
middleboxes. 2. New measurement techniques (beyond "ping" and "traceroute") that
leverage the capabilities of P4-capable data planes (e.g., in-band telemetry);
Software/hardware co-design for better network measurements; Clean-slate,
problem-driven designs for new network measurement tools that might tackle
problems in network measurement that have proved evasive (e.g., application
quality of experience); Measurement of unified compute, storage, and networking
infrastructure, including monitoring of container-based systems 3. Machine
Learning and new algorithms for automated troubleshooting and "what-if" scenario
evaluation; Development of parsimonious models that could be implemented (at
least partially) at line rate on switch hardware; Prediction and inference over
non-stationary datasets to changing traffic patterns. 4. Security and privacy
through scalable algorithms and systems for detecting a broad range of attacks,
from denial of service to data exfiltration; Better ways to monitor application
performance without having to perform man-in-the-middle attacks on traffic.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Results from this workshop will be
broadly distributed so that researchers in all of the areas noted above will
benefit from the discussions, conclusions and recommendations resulting from the
workshop. Research inspired by the workshop could have broad societal impacts by
helping network operators envision how to integrate measurement, data analysis,
and configuration decisions and move toward automated network control.