* 1748674
* I-Corps: Biodegradable Airway Stent for Tracheal Stenosis Management
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2018
* Prashant Kumta, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 06/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this ICorps project is to prevent
complications developing from the use of non-degradable permanent implants and
ultimately reduce redo/replacement procedures in the healthcare field. The
introduction of a novel family of biodegradable medical implants meets this
intention. There is a sizeable market for biodegradable devices to treat various
health conditions and address issues from existing therapeutics. The global
biodegradable stent market is expected to grow significantly over the next ten
years. Mortality from heart diseases and cancer is projected to increase through
the year 2020. However, with appropriate minimally-invasive intervention, the
number of deaths can potentially be reduced significantly. The high cost of
follow-up procedures due to insertion of permanent stents urges healthcare
industry to seek better alternatives. The ultimate goal is to boost the position
of the United States as a leader in the global absorbable device
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project focuses on a biomaterial, a
novel biodegradable magnesium based alloy that can be used to design and develop
the biodegradable medical devices. Magnesium is already present in the human
body and simply degrades safely from the stents over time. The invention
provides a material composition for medical device like stents. The invented
material exhibits high ductility and corrosion resistance acceptable for all
medical devices requiring plasticity and ductility exceeding that of
conventional magnesium alloys. Many disease complications in adults constrict or
block a passage within the body, causing symptoms and wellness deterioration.
Although surgical correction is preferred when technically feasible and
permitted by the clinical status of patient, stenting is often a reliable
alternative. Recent research has indicated that innovative technology platform
points to safe and cost-effective biodegradable metallic stents, and will solve
the problems caused by existing stents made of permanent materials like
silicone, nitinol and polymers.