* 1748012
* EAGER:   Cloud Microphysics Measurements Using Unmanned Aircraft Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Matthew Van Den Broeke, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 51,466.00

Small unmanned aircraft systems offer unique possibilities in areas of
atmospheric research. One of the compelling uses for these systems is to fill in
gaps in measurements in places where it is too expensive or too dangerous for
other aircraft to regularly sample. This award will provide funding for a proof-
of-concept system to measure cloud properties. The overall concept behind the
work is that UAS measurements of precipitation and cloud particles will help to
better inform weather models and improve radar observations, with an end goal of
improving weather forecasts for the benefit of society. Several students will be
trained and the instruments will be used in outreach
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is for the acquisition, development,
and testing of instrumentation that will be used to enhance studies of cloud and
precipitation physics. Three new instruments will be incorporated onto a small
unmanned aircraft system (SUAS): 1) a condensation particle counter for the
measurement of the number count of cloud condensation nuclei in the vicinity of
convective clouds, 2) a disdrometer for the drop size distribution of liquid
hydrometeors, and 3) a liquid water content sensor for the estimation of the
third moment of the drop size distribution. The main tasks include initial
testing of the instruments, the development of methods to get each sensor
airborne, and then up to 12 deployments in varying types of cloud and
precipitation events. The in-situ measurements of cloud properties can be used
to elucidate microphysical processes within precipitation systems, to provide
validation for radar observations and modeling studies, and to develop new
methods of estimating radar variables at low levels for cloud models.