* 1748756
* Depicting Innovation in Information Technology
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2017,11/30/2020
* Jon Eisenberg, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 11/30/2020
* USD 471,824.00

The very success of the industry sectors that produce information technology
(IT) and the pervasiveness&lt;br/&gt;of IT products and services in daily life
can obscure the interacting roles that industry, government,
and&lt;br/&gt;academia play in conducting IT research and translating results
into new products, services, and&lt;br/&gt;industries. This project will update
earlier illustrations of such phenomena such as how much
industry&lt;br/&gt;builds on government-funded university research, the long
incubation periods sometimes needed for&lt;br/&gt;research to be translated into
major industry activities, the steady work and funding required to get
from&lt;br/&gt;initial exploration to large-scale commercial deployment, the
interdependencies between research&lt;br/&gt;advances in different subfields,
and the complex nature of the IT research "ecosystem." This project
will&lt;br/&gt;also build on earlier work by adding updated examples of research
investments and impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine committee will update the "tire
tracks"&lt;br/&gt;figure published in CSTB's 2012 report Continuing Innovation
in Information Technology. Drawing on a&lt;br/&gt;literature review, input from
experts, and suggestions solicited from the relevant communities, it
will&lt;br/&gt;identify emerging research areas and significant new industries,
products, and firms. Using a graphical&lt;br/&gt;approach similar to that used
in 2012, it will depict the interconnections across research areas and
with&lt;br/&gt;the creation and evolution of IT industry sectors. It will
illustrate the roles of industry, academia, and&lt;br/&gt;government in
computing innovation and the development of IT products, services, and
industries and&lt;br/&gt;consider if and how these roles may have evolved since
the last report. In addition to presenting&lt;br/&gt;established computing
research areas and industry sectors, it will also consider emerging candidates
in&lt;br/&gt;both categories. A National Academies report will be prepared
containing the figure together with a&lt;br/&gt;review of lessons learned about
the structure and nature of information technology research and
its&lt;br/&gt;impacts. Two derivative products will be prepared: (1) a brochure
containing the figure and a summary of&lt;br/&gt;the report's analysis and (2) a
Web interactive infographic that links the figure to more detail on
selected&lt;br/&gt;topics and connections drawn from earlier Academies work and
other sources.