* 1748290
* Collaborative Research: Examination of Sites on the Georgia Bight Coastline
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Matthew Sanger, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2023
* USD 65,484.00

More than fifty shell rings - large circular deposits of shellfish, artifacts,
and other food remains surrounding broad, open plazas - can be found along the
southeastern U.S. coast. Dating to the Late Archaic (circa 5,000 - 3,500 cal
B.P.), these sites appear across roughly 2,500 km of shoreline between South
Carolina and Mississippi and contain exceptionally well-preserved evidence of
the first large-scale settlements in the region, though they are now gravely
threatened by rising sea levels. With support from the National Science
Foundation, Drs. Matt Sanger of Binghamton University, Victor Thompson of the
University of Georgia, and Thad Bissett of Northern Kentucky University will
investigate these sites by focusing on how previously mobile Late Archaic
peoples adapted to a changing landscape (e.g., fluctuating sea levels) and built
larger, more complex, and increasingly diverse societies. In seeking to settle
long-standing disagreements over the function of shell rings, this project will
generate new data and new models that will be of interest a broad range of
archaeologists, anthropologists, and other researchers studying the earliest
stages of large-scale human settlement, both in the U.S. and in other parts of
the world. Comparative analysis across the thirteen sites selected for this
study will help resolve a decades-long debate over whether shell rings were
ritual gathering points, year-round villages, or a mix of the two. Likewise,
this work will also look at factors behind the development of such large Late
Archaic communities - namely, whether they were driven by incipient sedentism,
religious communality, expansive exchange systems, localized adaptations, or
shared encounters on a daily or intermittent basis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Few
shell rings have been studied systematically using comparable standards and
methods, which has made it impossible to create dependable models for how or why
the Late Archaic ring builders developed larger and more expansive societies in
these places. This project seeks to create a robust, dependable corpus of data
on shell rings by establishing shared standards of fieldwork and laboratory
analysis that will be applied across all shell ring sites. The collaborative
team will conduct geophysical surveys, excavations, and radiometric and isotopic
analyses at thirteen key sites along the Georgia Bight. In addition to testing,
refining, and disseminating best practices for current and future archaeologists
interested in studying shell rings, this work will create a comparative dataset
capable of answering critical questions about how the function of these sites
may have varied over time and across space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.