* 1748621
* CAREER: Dense Phases in Neutron Stars
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Veronica Dexheimer, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 09/30/2023
* USD 549,998.00

With the exception of black holes, neutron stars are the densest objects in the
Universe. Inside these objects, exotic particles such as hyperons and deconfined
quarks that do not exist in a stable form anywhere else in the universe can be
created. This project proposes an in-depth investigation of new kinds of matter
inside neutron stars as well as the effects of incredibly strong magnetic
fields, many orders of magnitude larger than the one present inside the Sun, on
these phases of matter. The results of this research will be used by the
astrophysics community to search for clear signals of stable exotic matter in
neutrinos bursts and gravitational waves. The project involves the training of
high school, undergraduate and graduate students in astrophysics research, and
includes a series of seminars open for the community that highlights the role of
female astrophysicists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will pursue an
extension of a realistic description of hadronic and quark phases in the core of
neutron stars to include magnetic fields together with finite temperature
effects. This will enable effects of strong magnetic fields to be studied in
different regions of stars, not only for cold neutron stars but also for proto-
neutron stars. For the latter case, this project will also study the effects of
neutrinos and entropy per particle on the structure of phase transitions. With
these ingredients in hand, complete data tables will be built from a realistic
equation of state to be used by others in dynamical simulations of supernova
explosions, compact binary mergers, and neutron star cooling, to answer a
fundamental question in astrophysics: Do exotic degrees of freedom play a role
in the above phenomena? Having the first extensive data table built from a
single realistic description will be extremely useful and allow for more
accurate dynamical calculations of astrophysical phenomena. The students
involved in the project will make meaningful contributions to state-of-the-art
research. Finally, this project will support a series of seminars open for the
community that highlights the role of female
astrophysicists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.