* 1748376
* Workshop: Multilingualism, Contact and Documenting Endangered Languages
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Lenore Grenoble, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 08/31/2021
* USD 39,343.00

Many of the world's languages are understudied and under-described, and we are
facing the loss of a great many of them over the course of this century, a
situation more generally known as language endangerment. Linguists are currently
interested in documenting, describing and analyzing them while there are still
speakers who know the languages. The documentation of endangered languages has
to date primarily focused on the creation of monolingual documentary corpora,
and yet it is well-known that language endangerment is primarily due to shift in
the face of language contact, and not due to catastrophic weather, natural
disaster or war. This grant supports a workshop to train linguists in
documenting language contact and multilingualism, with special focus on
endangered languages. The workshop will bring together specialists in the field
who have both experience and are using innovative methods, to provide a forum
for training and discussion of issues, methodologies, and best practices.
Broader impacts include wider development and dissemination of cutting edge
methodologies in language documentation, presentations of current research by
early career faculty, and the ability to accommodate a significant audience
likely to include graduate students and other participants. A particular
practical application in better knowledge of multilingual settings is in speech
technology, with direct benefits to society as a whole. The communities of
speakers of these languages will also benefit from a better understanding of how
they use more than one language in their daily
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will be held in conjunction
with the Annual Meeting of the Linguistic Society of America (the professional
society of linguists in the US) in 2019 in New York City, so as to be accessible
to a wide range of linguists and students. Linguists need to document language
contact in process, to better understand the linguistic processes that take
place in the course of language shift, the kinds of language changes that occur,
to provide insights into directionality and rates of change, and the roles of
linguistic and extra-linguistic factors involved in language shift. Improving
scientific methods of documentation has long-term benefits for linguists,
anthropologists, other academics and endangered language communities. To improve
these methods requires some retraining and refocusing of goals, and one step
toward this is a workshop that enables active engagement of the linguistic
community in the formulation of these goals. The workshop will result not only
in new methodologies for documenting language contact, but will critically help
to reshape the kinds of research questions that we presently ask. It will have
three basic parts: (1) consideration of the state of multilingualism in
endangered language ecologies; (2) a focus on tools and methods for
transcribing, annotating, analyzing and presenting multilingual corpora; and (3)
the use of experimental methods in documenting and studying language contact in
process.