* 1748197
* Collaborative Research:  Campus Compute Cooperative (CCC) Planning Grant Proposal
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Shantenu Jha, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2019
* USD 10,000.00

The idea of sharing resources between institutions is not new and has been
relatively successful in a few instances and largely unsuccessful in many cases.
This proposal elaborates a plan to construct the Campus Compute Cooperative
(CCC), a shared cyberinfrastructure as well as a social fabric; both
computational resources and support staff expertise will be pooled and shared.
The CCC will: i) connect and federate campus physical infrastructures; ii) use
market-based mechanisms for resource allocation and quality of service to avoid
the tragedy of the commons; iii) leverage InCommon and local identity management
systems to provide integrated cross-institution authentication and access
control of resources; iv) facilitate secure data and storage sharing between
institutions and research labs; v) offer "cloud bursting" to member
institutions; and, vi) provide paid-for, differentiated quality of service.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of on-demand, pay-per-use (cloud) resources on
society has been huge. Making the most of limited resources is critical to the
success of the nation's research enterprise. By rationally and securely sharing
the limited computational and human resources available for research the CCC
will both accelerate discovery and provide a research cyberinfrastructure with
better cost/benefit.