* 1748578
* RAPID:  Novel Experimental Quantification of Energetic Electron Properties During Ionospheric Modification
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Lara Waldrop, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 08/31/2019
* USD 25,861.00

This one-year RAPID project is aimed at providing unprecedented empirical
constraints on the energy distribution of electrons generated during high-power
ionospheric modification as a means of advancing understanding of electron
acceleration processes. High-power, high-frequency (HF) radio wave transmitters
are an important tool for the experimental investigation of fundamental plasma
physics in the terrestrial ionosphere. Three HF heating facilities (HAARP,
EISCAT, and Arecibo Observatory) have demonstrated the ability to induce
overhead plasma densities approaching those created by solar photoionization,
thereby enabling empirical studies of energetic electron production,
acceleration and transport. Despite numerous experiments over the past several
decades, however, the physical mechanisms responsible for electron acceleration
during ionospheric modification remain unsettled. In order to tackle this
problem, this project adopts a novel approach that involves the combination of
plasma-line and ion-line detection by the Arecibo Observatory incoherent scatter
radar (ISR). This is the most sensitive instrument of its kind, together with
passive measurement of optical airglow emitted by Oxygen atoms at 844.6 nm and
630.0 nm. The research campaign will utilize nearly all of the facility and the
PI-owned optical instrumentation on site at the Arecibo Observatory and at the
nearby Culebra island in an unprecedentedly coordinated effort. Unlike past
investigations of electron acceleration during ionospheric modification, the
research analysis during this project will incorporate coincident empirical
estimates of thermospheric Oxygen density, which the PI will derive from
calibrated measurements of the Oxygen 844.6 nm emission line brightness. This
research effort will be led by an early-career, female PI. The research agenda
of this RAPID project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in
discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary research

The results from the intended research effort to obtain unprecedented empirical
constraints on energetic electron acceleration during ionospheric modification
will have far-reaching impact on fundamental theories governing the physics of
weakly magnetized plasmas. Future investigations of electron energy loss from
pitch angle scattering in the plasmasphere, for example, will benefit from the
results of this work. Although advancing ionospheric plasma physics is the
primary focus of the effort, the careful experimental design by the PI will also
yield crucial constraints on the rate of Oxygen 844.6 nm emission line
excitation via O+ radiative recombination. Moreover, the intended implementation
of astronomical calibration at this near-infrared wavelength as well as at the
Oxygen 630.0 nm emission line will provide a long-awaited means of cross-
calibrating the facility calibration sources for future campaigns. Finally, the
new Oxygen 844.6 nm emission line photometer can easily be configured to conduct
routine passive measurements for community use. Even in the absence of HF
ionospheric heating, the calibrated Oxygen 844.6 nm emission line data provide a
means for Thermospheric Oxygen sensing. This capability, which currently is not
possible at any other ISR facility, enables crucial investigations of ion-
neutral coupling which are needed to advance physics-based models of the upper
atmosphere. .