* 1748023
* Plant Signaling: Molecular Pathways and Network Integration
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Thale Jarvis, Keystone Symposia on Molecular and Cellular Biology
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 12/31/2018
* USD 8,400.00

The ability of plants to change in response to changing environmental conditions
is the result of signals and indicators that are sensed by the plant, and then
responded to through a complex web of signaling components. We have recently
begun to understand many of the parts of this system, but understanding how the
whole system works, and how the plant might respond to multiple signals, has so
far eluded us. This meeting will bring together scientists from a wide range of
fields, including chemistry, molecular biology, genetics and computer science,
so that they can interact and develop collaborations that will allow them to
advance plant sciences in ways that are very important for our national economy
and food supply. One of the focuses of this meeting will be to provide an
opportunity for young investigators to share their work and to develop
collaborations in this highly interdisciplinary field.

Phenotypic plasticity is the quintessential characteristic of plant development
and adaptation under fluctuating environments, and is the result of numerous
signal sources (extra-, intra- and intercellular) being sensed, integrated and
interpreted by a plethora of signaling components which are interacting in a
highly-coordinated manner. Recent advances in molecular and synthetic biology,
chemistry and computational approaches have greatly facilitated the discovery of
novel signaling pathways as well as providing detailed molecular mechanisms for
key components of the existing signaling pathway. However, many have yet to be
discovered. This meeting will bring together a diverse community of scientists
to interact, collaborate and share novel ideas and will encapsulate the most
recent advances in this field, from single molecule chemistry to large-scale
network analysis, with an emphasis on research areas such as growth and
development, environmental responses and biological interactions in both model
and non-model plant species. Ultimately, unraveling the complexity of plant
signaling networks will be an important step forward in securing food production
in today's rapidly changing environment. The meeting will showcase the
contributions of trainees and new investigators and provide an opportunity for
career development, fostering networking and initiation of collaborations. It is
anticipated that this meeting will provide educational benefits including
acquainting trainees and investigators new to field with the state-of-the-art
science; and providing critical scientific feedback and career development for
trainees and new investigators, including opportunities both to see successful
scientists presenting cutting-edge science and to network with prospective
mentors and others who might contribute to their scientific and professional
development.