* 1748259
* Workshop: Core Knowledge and Skills for Effective Use of Advanced Computation and Data in Materials and Manufacturing; 2018 TMS Annual Meeting; Phoenix, Arizona; March 11-15, 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Justin Scott, Minerals Metals & Materials Society
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 09/30/2018
* USD 83,125.00

Advanced computation and data science tools have the potential to transform
fundamental research, enhancing researchers' productivity and catalyzing new
discoveries that enable greater economic prosperity and national security and a
higher quality of life. This award supports a one day workshop to define core
knowledge and competencies essential to the use of advanced computation and
emerging data-enabled methods in fundamental materials and manufacturing
research. The workshop will convene leading researchers in materials science and
engineering, manufacturing, mechanical engineering, computer science,
mathematics and statistics to collaborate and develop a roadmap that will be
widely disseminated to the community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting will
produce a framework for enabling the broader engineering community to more fully
realize the benefits of emerging information technology in their fundamental
research. The roadmap provides a foundation for enhanced education and training
activities, empowering both current researchers and the future science and
engineering workforce. By highlighting and catalyzing opportunities for enhanced
research productivity, the workshop will benefit researchers, educators,
designers, manufacturers and others interested in advanced materials and
manufacturing research and will spur the development of new curricula.