* 1748695
* EAGER:  SusChEM:  Developing Temporal Compartmentalization Tools in Yeast to Enhance the Bioproduction of Phytosterols
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Yanran Li, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 03/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

Plant steroids are complex, naturally occurring molecules that have a wide
variety of pharmaceutical and agricultural applications; however, they are
usually found in quite small amounts in plants, and they are difficult to
synthesize chemically. This research project investigates ways to engineer
yeasts to produce these molecules. To accomplish this goal, it is necessary to
introduce into the yeast the ability to perform the targeted degradation of
specific proteins. The researchers on this project are employing advanced
biochemical methods in order to realize this alteration in the yeast. This
research project include specific activities for high school students and for
undergraduate students from a local community college, which will help in
developing a highly trained technical workforce for the biotechnology industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project provides a foundation for the
development of programmable temporal regulation machinery for complex
heterologous plant pathways in yeast. Such machinery employs yeast endogenous
temporal compartmentalization strategies and an inducible protein degradation
system associated with the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Introducing complex plant
pathways into microbial hosts including yeast has been highly challenging,
mainly due to 1) the high burden from the expression of large numbers of plant
enzymes; and 2) the lack of efficient coordination among the many heterologous
enzymatic steps. A plant biosynthetic platform is required to incorporate and
validate the proposed temporal regulation strategy, as is a targeted protein
degradation (TPD) approach. The biosynthetic pathway of the plant steroid
hormone brassinosteroids (BRs) is being verified and established in yeast, which
will enable the downstream establishment of the proposed temporal regulation
strategies. In addition, the feasibility of introducing TPD in the proposed
temporal regulation strategy is being evaluated.