* 1748631
* RAPID:  Reconnaissance of Twin Landslides and Tsunami of 17 June 2017 in Greenland
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2018
* Hermann Fritz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2018
* USD 39,692.00

A 17 June 2017 landslide-generated tsunami impacted a large fjord system in the
northern part of western Greenland. This Grants for Rapid Response Research
(RAPID) award supports the US participation in the reconnaissance survey of the
twin landslides and tsunami. The team will coordinate the reconnaissance
activities with the Government of Greenland, and follow protocols of the
Geotechnical Extreme Events Reconnaissance (GEER) and the International Tsunami
Survey Team (UNESCO). This event represents a unique research opportunity since
two adjacent landslides were active with different outcomes. The eastern of the
two landslides plunged 1 km into the Karrat Fjord and generated a tsunami in the
Uummannaq fjord system. The landslide-generated tsunami washed 4 victims and
several houses into the fjord at Nuugaatsiaq, about 30 km from the landslide.
Eyewitnesses at Nuugaatsiaq and Illorsuit recorded the tsunami inundation on
video. The active western landslide features a back scarp and large cracks, and
therefore remains a hazard in Karrat Fjord, and has led to extended evacuations
of a few native villages. The reconnaissance survey team supported on this award
will collect high quality oblique aerial photogrammetry (OAP) of the landslide,
scarp, and debris avalanche track as well as ground based tsunami inundation
measurements in Karrat Fjord. The field observations will allow the research
community to infer the predictive capability of different landslide and tsunami
models. Tsunami eyewitness videos will be calibrated in situ to extract time
series of flow depth and velocity. The obtained field data will be analyzed
closely with the existing laboratory landslide tsunami data collected by past
experimental projects. The primary project deliverable will be a comprehensive
multi-scale, geo-referenced database of landslide parameters, tsunami damage,
and flood zone characteristics combined with numerical model results. Education
and outreach lectures and briefings will be given at native villages surveyed
and to eyewitnesses interviewed. The Greenland landslide-generated tsunami
highlights coastal hazards to communities not commonly exposed to earthquake
generated tsunamis.

Post disaster reconnaissance following major natural and man-induced events has
yielded significant new insights into both the characteristics of the events and
the performance of natural and man-made infrastructure subjected to these
catastrophic events. The benefits of conducting these well-coordinated, well-
executed landslide source and tsunami reconnaissance activities include early
collection of perishable data and the establishment of multi-factor databases of
information that form the basis for detailed long-term follow-on and mostly
modeling based investigations. Through this study, researchers may be able to
understand the unusual death toll of 4 people in the Arctic within days of the
summer solstice. This event represents a unique opportunity as one landslide
plunged into Karrat Fjord, while another neighboring one remains an active
hazard. This will lead to post disaster observations of one landslide generated
tsunami and potentially before disaster baseline data of a second one. Both
landslide volumes will be estimated with oblique aerial photogrammetry (OAP).
The spreading of the debris avalanche volume down the "Sturzbahn" will provide a
landslide benchmark in comparison with the granular landslide spreading in
physical models. The tsunami sources and magnitudes of historic tsunamis will be
revisited in light of recent landslide and glaciological events. Collecting high
quality inundation measurements will allow the community to infer the predictive
capability of different models and evaluate their potential uses for inundation
mapping and operational forecasts. Datasets and analytical tools generated by
this research will be made available on the NSF-supported NHERI DesignSafe-
CI.org web portal. This study will provide important information to local
authorities as they are considering landslide monitoring and tsunami warning
systems or permanent relocation of the evacuated villages. It will also provide
a significant international experience for the U.S. students involved in the
reconnaissance.