* 1748161
* EAGER: MEMS Co-Steered Optical and Acoustic Dual Modal Communication and Ranging Devices for Underwater Vehicles
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Jun Zou, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 02/29/2020
* USD 202,779.00

Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUVs) are very important tools for many
applications, including infrastructure inspection and maintenance, search and
rescue, environmental monitoring, maritime archaeology, oil drilling and
pipeline inspection, and defense. However, a significant and fundamental
challenge faced by today?s AUVs is communication and perception in the
underwater environment. Traditional devices are bulky and have low spatial
resolution in ranging/mapping tasks. Acoustic communication is slow in speed.
Laser-based communication can achieve high speed, but requires direct light of
sight. Therefore, there is no effective way to tightly coordinate a group of
AUVs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop a
miniaturized dual-modal Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS)-based Sound
Navigation And Ranging (sonar) and Light Detection And Ranging (LiDAR) combo
device, named as oPtical and Acoustic communication and Ranging (PAIR) device.
The PAIR device functions as both a dual band network adapter and a combination
of sonar and LiDAR but with a much smaller footprint and better signal
registration. Enabled by the use of a novel MEMS scanning mirror and ultrasound
transducer&lt;br/&gt;with unique mechanical and optical properties previously
demonstrated, the PAIR devices can simultaneously transmit and receive both
sound and laser signals in a co-centered and co-directional fashion.