* 1748045
* EAGER: The Effects of Robots on the Economy
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Robert Seamans, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 08/31/2019
* USD 100,738.00

This project provides funding for the first data to be systematically collected
on the annual expenditures on robots by American manufacturing establishments.
Robot technology has advanced rapidly in a number of areas, and the cost of
using robots has declined. As a result, more and more U.S. businesses are using
robots for a wide range of tasks, which has led to speculation about whether
robots will replace workers, or have other impacts on our economy and society.
The data collected by this project will help researchers to investigate how
expenditures on robots affect a wide range of economic outcomes and help policy
makers to assess possible policy responses.

Existing surveys rely instead on national or industry level counts of robot
shipments. This project collects establishment level data on robot expenditures
from an additional question added to the Annual Survey of Manufacturers (ASM).
The ASM samples approximately 50,000 manufacturing establishments annually, and
the population of approximately 300,000 manufacturing establishments every five
years. This project will use establishment-level data on robot expenditures to
study the effect of robot expenditures on the number and wages of workers at
these establishments, establishment-level revenues, and other establishment-
level measures of productivity. The data will also be aggregated to local and
regional levels to study how expenditures on robots affect regional economies,
including regional-level measures of manufacturing value-added, labor force
participation, and unemployment, among others. Moreover, as the data will be
collected via a recurring annual survey, it is possible to study robot
expenditures trends, within-establishment effects of robot expenditures on
establishment-level outcomes, and longer-term effects of robot expenditures on
labor, productivity, and regional economies.