* 1748339
* EAGER:  MOCVD Growth of beta-(Al,In,Ga)2O3 for Transistor Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Manijeh Razeghi, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 08/31/2019
* USD 150,000.00

EAGER: MOCVD Growth of a new wide-bandgap oxide semiconductor for Transistor
Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical: Ga2O3 is a
new wide-bandgap oxide semiconductor material which is anticipated to allow a 10
to 100x improvement in transistor power density over current high performance
silicon carbide transistors. The development of Ga2O3 for transistor
applications will allow an unprecedented level of performance in applications
that require high total continuous-wave power and efficiency. Solidstate
lighting and solar energy harvesting are two areas that will directly benefit
from the development of this technology. High power density transistors are used
to efficiently convert the direct current (DC) voltage generated by solar panels
into alternating current (AC) power that can be feed into the existing grid.
Similarly, high power density transistors are used to control the DC current
used to drive the light emitting diodes using in solid state lighting. There are
also applications for very these high power density transistors in the direct
current (DC) power transmission lines that join different electrical grids
across the globe. In order to achieve these results the proposed fundamental
study of (Al,In,Ga)2O3 materials for transistor applications is highly needed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The objective of this proposal is to study the
metal organic chemical vapor deposition growth of â-Ga2O3 and related compounds
such as â-(AlxGa1-x)2O3, â-(InxGa1-x)2O3, and â-(AlxInyGa1-x-y)2O3. This group
has extensive experience in the growth of III-Nitrides'a similar wide bandgap
material system and has recently shown promising results by applying that
experience to the growth of Ga2O3. We are proposing to undertake a 2 year
comprehensive study of the material growth. In addition to this fundamental
study we will also apply the material improvements to the development of
transistors based on this material system. The core elements of this project
are: (1) development of a fundamental understanding of the metal organic
chemical vapor deposition growth of â-(Al,In,Gay)2O3; (2) Demonstrating
effective doping of this wide bandgap material; (3) Demonstration of the ability
to realize high quality hetero-interfaces; (4) Using the doping and hetero-
interface engineering to realize high mobility layers; and, (5) using all of
that to demonstrate high performance transistors. The principal investigator's
background is extremely well matched to the proposed research, and all the
required resources and expertise are available.