* 1748167
* EAGER: Developing Deformity-Specific Computational Models for Evaluating Novel Surgical Interventions for Treating Scoliosis in Pediatric Subjects
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Sriram Balasubramanian, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

Spinal and rib cage deformities that result from scoliosis (curvature of the
spine) in adolescents can have devastating consequences, including severe
restrictions in mobility, pain, and problems with lung function. While spinal
fusion surgery is the gold-standard for correcting scoliotic spine deformity,
patient outcomes are generally poor as the fusion does not support the continued
growth of the spine that is expected in this population. There is currently a
lack of both adolescent cadaveric scoliotic spine specimens and computational
models of the scoliotic spine, which severely limits the systematic engineering
of improved surgical and device interventions for treating scoliosis. This
project is developing and validating computer models of the adolescent,
scoliotic spine and rib cage and then demonstrating the feasibility of such
deformity-specific models in the medical device design process by optimizing
novel spine deformity correction systems from Globus Medical, Inc. The scoliotic
deformity-specific computer models will serve as predictive tools to reliably
guide the design, placement, timing and method of surgical intervention. The
modeling and simulation tools developed in this study will significantly reduce
the time needed to design, test and implement investigational deformity
correction devices, which will subsequently improve the quality of life for
individuals with scoliosis. In addition to the research collaboration, this
project is integrating undergraduate and graduate student training into the
research project and providing them with opportunities for interaction and
internships with a medical device company.

This research project is pursuing three specific objectives to accomplish the
overall goal of developing and validating a model of the adolescent, scoliotic
spine. 1) This project is creating a finite element model template of the normal
10-year-old thoracolumbar spine (with pelvis) and rib cage and validating this
model using in vitro kinematic data from biomechanical testing of adult
cadaveric specimens. 2) The research team is developing a deformity-specific
thoracolumbar spine (with pelvis) and rib cage finite element model for the
Lenke 1AN curve type and validating this model using in vivo spine range of
motion data previously collected from adolescents with scoliosis. 3) In
collaboration with Globus Medical, Inc., the research team is conducting a
feasibility study to apply the validated deformity-specific model for the design
and placement optimizations of conventional scoliosis implants and a novel,
growth-friendly spine deformity correction system. Upon completion of the
proposed objectives, the foundation will be laid to effectively integrate
medical image processing, computational modeling, and device design and testing
for scoliosis treatment.