* 1748945
* CAREER:  A role for local adaptation in shaping species coexistence mechanisms
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Adam Siepielski, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2024
* USD 882,921.00

A big question in ecology is: "How do species that need the same resources avoid
driving each other to extinction?" The answer to that question will shed light
on why the world is home to so many different species and how we might prevent
their extinction. This project explores the question in a relatively new way:
through the lens of evolution. The research makes use of an insect model study
system - damselflies, which are colorful insect predators similar to
dragonflies. Rather than assuming that a species of damselfly is the same no
matter what lake it is from, the researcher will attempt to show that
damselflies from different lakes are different in how they are built and what
they need, and that those differences have big effects on other species of
damselflies from the same lakes. The project will also provide meaningful
research and teaching opportunities to both undergraduate and graduate students.
The researcher will conduct a formal assessment of his mentoring activities to
help understand how gaps between scientists and educators are unintentionally
created and what we can do to bridge those gaps. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spatially
replicated experiments will assess variation among damselfly communities in
fitness differences between competing species, which could cause competitive
exclusion, and the stabilizing niche differences that prevent exclusion and
favor coexistence. Reciprocal transplant experiments will determine whether and
how local adaptation affects fitness differences and/or stabilizing effects.
Additional experiments using a unique biogeographic pattern will establish
whether coexistence evolves as a consequence of competitors co-evolving to
reduce competition, or whether competitors have adapted independently to
ecological niches where they co-occur. Results from the experimental studies
will be combined with measures of environmental factors to determine which
features of the environment shape fitness differences and
stabilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.