* 1748663
* RI:  EAGER:  Collaborative Research:  Adaptive Heads-up Displays for Simultaneous Interpretation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Hal Daume, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* D.  Langendoen
* 12/31/2019
* USD 150,000.00

Interpretation, the task of translating speech from one language to another, is
an important tool in facilitating communication in multi-lingual settings such
as international meetings, travel, or diplomacy. However, simultaneous
interpretation, during which the results must be produced as the speaker is
speaking, is an extremely difficult task requiring a high level of experience
and training. In particular, simultaneous interpreters often find certain
content such as technical terms, names of people and organizations, and numbers
particularly hard to translate correctly. This Early Grant for Exploratory
Research project aims to create automatic interpretation assistants that will
help interpreters with this difficult-to-translate content by recognizing this
content in the original language, and displaying translations on a heads-up
display (similar to teleprompter) for interpreters to use if they wish. This
will make simultaneous interpretation more effective and accessible, making
conversations across languages and cultures more natural, more common, and more
effective and joining communities and cultures across the world in trade,
cooperation, and friendship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Creating these systems is a
technically challenging problem and has not previously been attempted. One
challenge is that simultaneous interpretation is already a cognitively taxing
task, and any interface must not unduly increase the cognitive load on the
interpreter by being too intrusive. Reducing this cognitive load requires an
interface that can decide when to provide translation suggestions and when to
refrain from doing so. To achieve this goal, this project will develop methods
that are robust to speech recognition errors, and learn what to display by
observing the interpreters' interpretation results. The utility of the proposed
framework will be evaluated with respect to how much it improves the ability of
interpreters to produce fluent, accurate interpretation results, as well as the
cognitive load the additional interface imposes on them.