* 1748579
* EAGER: Towards Sustainable Carbon-Negative Chemical Manufacturing by Creating Synergy between Carbon Dioxide Utilization and Biorefinery
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Hongfei Lin, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 08/31/2019
* USD 111,999.00

The development of economically viable techniques for manufacturing carbon-
negative fuels and commodity chemicals from atmospheric carbon dioxide and
renewable energy is a grand challenge with important societal and environmental
sustainability implications. This research project explores the synergy between
carbon dioxide utilization and biorefining operations for producing a particular
class of chemicals, formates. Carbon dioxide is released from biorefining
operations, so this "biogenic" carbon dioxide is being explored as a feedstock.
The research project project aims to systematically explore and model the
process chemistry of integrated carbon dioxide capture and conversion into
formates. In addition to disseminating the results of this research to a broader
audience via publications and presentations, the researchers will recruit
undergraduate from the Pacific Northwest Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation program (PNW LSAMP). The mission of LSAMP is to increase pathways
to college for underrepresented minorities. The research group also commits to
offering two summer internships for community college students to do research
associated with this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this
research project is to investigate the reactivity of carbonate ions, formed by
capturing carbon dioxide with amines or ammonia in aqueous ethanol solutions,
for the production of formates by catalytic hydrogenation. The research project
focuses on studying the process chemistry and reaction mechanism of the
integrated carbon dioxide capture and hydrogenation process, in which ethyl
carbonate ions are the key intermediates for the highly selective production of
formates in amine-bioethanol-water solvents at near ambient temperatures. The
mechanism of the formation of ethyl carbonate ions during the carbon dioxide
capture process is being elucidated through theoretical and experimental
studies. The structure-activity relationship of carbon supported palladium nano-
catalysts is being explored using advanced experimental tools, such as in-situ
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and Fourier-transform infrared
spectroscopy. In particular, the influence of the surface facets of palladium
nanocrystals on the activation of biocarbonate and ethyl carbonate adsorbates in
the carbon dioxide-amine-ethanol-water systems is being studied. By creating
synergy between value-added carbon utilization and biorefining processes, this
research approach may lead to the development of new technologies for
manufacturing carbon-negative chemicals.