* 1748031
* Hybrid Sliding-Rocking Bridges for Resilient Accelerated Bridge Construction
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Petros Sideris, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2019
* USD 237,090.00

A large number of bridges located in seismic regions in the United States are in
need of immediate retrofit or replacement. Accelerated Bridge Construction (ABC)
techniques have been investigated to accomplish these retrofits/replacements
more rapidly, that is, in days, rather than weeks or months, in order to
minimize socio-economic impacts due to disruptions in bridge operation. Further
advantages of ABC techniques include reduced environmental impact through
reduction in construction emissions, improved safety and reduced traffic delays
for the traveling public, and improved product quality/durability. Despite these
advantages, ABC techniques have been mostly implemented in low seismicity areas
because of uncertainties in their seismic performance. This research will study
the performance of a new system, termed the hybrid sliding-rocking (HSR) bridge,
which has shown the potential to combine construction rapidity with resilient
(low damage) seismic performance. This research will improve understanding of
the dynamic response properties of HSR bridge systems, and address the lack of
design procedures for HSR bridges and the lack of methods and data to quantity
the costs and benefits of such a system over its life span.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HSR bridges combine the features of rocking systems with
the attributes of sliding seismic isolation, providing a versatile resilient
seismic system for ABC. This research will formulate a holistic framework that
integrates mechanics-based modeling of sliding/rocking systems, computational
sensitivity studies for major design variables, experimental validation and
performance assessment studies, development of performance-based seismic design
(PBSD) methodologies, and life-cycle benefit-cost evaluations. This framework
will be applied to the HSR bridge concept to investigate the fundamental dynamic
response properties of HSR bridges, quantify the effects of various design
variables on the seismic performance of HSR bridges, develop a PBSD and life-
cycle assessment methodology for HSR bridges, and quantify the performance
benefits of HSR bridges over conventional bridges over their entire service
life. This research will advance understanding of the fundamental
mechanics/dynamics and seismic response of sliding-rocking systems through an
integrated experimental and computational approach. This research will also
advance the science of the design and evaluation of new seismic systems by
formulating a new holistic framework for PBSD and life-cycle assessment that
will be applicable to new systems in both building and bridge construction.