* 1748464
* Database of Dopants and Defects in 2D Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Richard Hennig, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2021
* USD 187,437.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER award supports computational research
on two-dimensional materials and the development of a 2D materials data resource
that will be made available through the 2-Dimensional Crystal Consortium (2DCC)
Materials Innovation Platform at Pennsylvania State University. Graphene is
perhaps the most famous of the 2D materials being a one-atom thick mesh of
hexagonal "chicken wire" with a carbon atom at each corner. Graphene has exotic
electronic properties, including electrons that behave as though they traveled
at the speed of light and an ability to conduct electricity some 1,000,000 times
better than copper. Other 2D materials that contain atomically thin layers have
been developed. These are the focus of this research project and include
transition-metal dichalcogenides. A transition-metal dichalcogenide contains a
metal atom from the transition metal columns of the periodic table of elements,
like tungsten, or molybdenum, and two chalcogen atoms like sulfur or selenium in
the primitive unit that upon replication and translation to fill space defines
its structure. Transition-metal dichalcogenides differ from graphene in that
their electronic properties have some features akin to silicon, which for
example is a semiconductor whereas graphene is a semimetal. They also have a
host of interesting and more exotic electronic properties. These properties
taken together for transition-metal dichalcogenides and related compounds make
them promising candidates for the discovery of fundamentally new physical
effects and new electronic and optical device technologies, and the subject of
much research. &lt;br/&gt;The PI will modify software that he has developed for
the rapid calculation of the properties of many materials in parallel to enable
calculations for 2D materials. Using this software, high quality calculations
will be performed for the properties of 2D materials for which the arrangement
of the constituent atoms deviates from the structure of a perfect materials
because of additional impurity atoms, missing atoms, or other defects in the
structural atomic arrangement. This information will be collected and served in
a database that is accessible to the broader community, particularly to
researchers that use the 2DCC Materials Innovation Platform. Understanding the
role of defects and impurities that change the concentration of charged
particles that can carry current and otherwise alter the properties of bulk
silicon was important in the development of the transistor. Ready access to the
data provided under this award may have a similar transformative effect for 2D
materials in new fundamental science discoveries and in the invention of new
electronic or optoelectronic devices. &lt;br/&gt;This project in conjunction
with 2DCC would address in a timely way, the growing needs of the community for
information on the role defects, dopants, and impurities play in 2D materials to
help guide experimental and theoretical efforts. Software, documentation, and
data created during the project could be applied in other contexts and will be
made freely available to the broader community as part of the materials research
community cyberinfrastructure. Data will be made available through the
MaterialsWeb database. The project will contribute to the training of the next
generation of computational researchers to enable the development of future
cyberinfrastructure. Collaboration with researchers in Germany will contribute
to the education of the students participating in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER
award supports computational research on two-dimensional materials and
cyberinfrastructure development to be made available through 2-Dimensional
Crystal Consortium (2DCC) Materials Innovation Platform at Pennsylvania State
University. Progress in the synthesis and application of 2D materials as pursued
by the 2DCC requires understanding how dopants and defects control the carrier
concentration, character, and mobility of 2D materials. Just like in bulk
semiconductors, dopants and defects in 2D materials are frequently charged.
Understanding their formation energies and charge transition levels is crucial
for the design of novel 2D-materials-based electronic and spintronic devices.
Developing a database of the properties of defects and dopants in 2D materials
has the potential to revolutionize the design of 2D electronic devices, the way
analogous data did for bulk semiconductors. Density-functional theory employing
accurate hybrid exchange-correlation functionals provides a tool that can
predict formation energies and charge transition levels to an accuracy of 0.1 -
0.2 eV, sufficient for electronic device design. However, charged defects in
single-layer materials challenge conventional computational approaches such as
density-functional theory calculations using plane-wave approaches and lead to
the divergence of the energy with vacuum spacing. A correction scheme that
employs a generalized dipole approach and restores the appropriate electrostatic
boundary conditions for charged 2D materials will be coupled in to the PI's
Python-based high-throughput framework MPInterfaces. This will enable the rapid
development of the database of defect and dopant properties for widely-used 2D
materials, such as graphene, phosphorene, metal dichalcogenides, and
monochalcogenides. This approach will then be applied to materials of interest
to users of the 2DCC and then to the complete MaterialsWeb database. The results
will be made freely available through our MaterialsWeb
database.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project in conjunction with 2DCC would
address in a timely way, the growing need of the community for information on
the role defects, dopants, and impurities play in 2D materials to help guide
experimental and theoretical efforts. Software, documentation, and data created
during the project could be applied in other contexts and will be made freely
available to the broader community as part of the materials research community
cyberinfrastructure. Data will be made available through the MaterialsWeb
database. The project will contribute to the training of the next generation of
computational researchers to enable the development of future
cyberinfrastructure. Collaboration with researchers in Germany will contribute
to the education of the students participating in this project.