* 1748686
* University-Industry Engagement outside Major Metropolitan Areas and Megacities: Identifying Issues and Finding Solutions
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Jennifer Taylor, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 07/31/2019
* USD 99,971.00

A myriad of engagement opportunities between universities and companies exists
across a partnership continuum, including research collaboration, technology
commercialization, curriculum support, internships, and jobs. While
relationships between companies and universities in metropolitan areas are
stellar examples of robust innovation ecosystems that easily foster university-
industry partnerships, many universities and companies in non-metropolitan areas
struggle to create equivalent ecosystems. Numerous research-intensive
universities are located outside metropolitan areas. Engagement between these
institutions and industry is of equal importance, as their economic,
educational, and social impacts in local communities and states are especially
pronounced. Metropolitan regions possess innate assets that are unavailable to
non-metropolitan areas; however, valuable and translatable lessons from
metropolitan models can be mirrored in non-metropolitan areas to stimulate
creation and growth of innovation and economic ecosystems. Non-metropolitan
regions and institutions also possess unique attributes and research
opportunities that can be leveraged to grow and establish relationships with
companies and enhance the economic ecosystem in the region and state. This
National Science Foundation supported workshop will promote a national
discussion on strategies that universities and companies can design and
implement to encourage partnerships with and between institutions and industry,
specifically when one or both parties are located and operate outside
metropolitan areas.

The University of Arkansas, in collaboration with the University-Industry
Demonstration Partnership, will organize a three-day forum in Fayetteville,
Arkansas, for universities and companies outside major metropolitan areas to
consider how to develop and grow strong industry engagement programs to bolster
local and state innovation ecosystems. The workshop will leverage diverse
experts and recruit attendees from metropolitan and non-metropolitan areas
across the United States to participate in discussions about practical
approaches that can be used by academic, corporate, government, and nonprofit
groups in a community. Attendees will assess existing national models,
brainstorm new programs and ideas, and develop steps that can be taken to
improve academic-corporate engagement in non-metropolitan regions and support
collaborations with the objectives of advancing university missions (teaching,
research, service, and economic development), company goals, and local and state
economies. Topics for discussion include existing national programs that
universities and companies can use as a basis for research collaboration that
can lead to economic development at the regional, state, and national levels;
successful (and not so successful) strategies for university-industry
engagement; strengthening graduate and undergraduate research; technology
commercialization; career development and workforce pipelines; global
competitiveness and influence; and the importance of diversity and inclusion in
innovation teams.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.