* 1748684
* Acquisition of a Fourier Transform Infrared Imaging Microscope at LDEO
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2018,08/31/2020
* Terry Plank, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 208,362.00

This grant supports acquisition of an Infrared (IR) imaging microscope at Lamont
Doherty Earth Observatory (LDEO) for research focused primarily on the
measurement of water and carbon dioxide (CO2) in glasses and crystals. The
instrument will support faculty and student research at Columbia University, the
American Museum of Natural History, other universities in the region and high
school teachers and students. Water and CO2 analysis is an increasingly
important tool in research on volatile element effects on mantle processes,
volcanic activity and the environment. Detailed understanding of the
distribution and chemical behavior of water and carbon dioxide in a range of
rock types and conditions will be enabled by the acquisition. Students will be
trained in instrumental procedures and the instrument will serve regional
institutions in the Mid-Atlantic states and New England. The acquisition will
also support faculty outreach efforts to engage regional K-12 and community
college students in societally relevant environmental and geohazards research.
This support is congruent with NSF's mission of promoting the progress of
science and advancing the national health, prosperity and welfare and training
the next generation scientific workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The past years
have seen a leap in understanding of the incorporation and diffusion of water in
silicate minerals. Recent laboratory experiments have revealed infrared (IR)
band-specific diffusivities in both clinopyroxene and olivine, meaning that the
rate of water loss from a crystal depends on the specific defect that hosts H.
Different defects can lose water at rates that vary over orders of magnitude. IR
imaging becomes necessary to illuminate the zonation profiles for specific
defects. Recent work finds pervasive H zonation profiles in volcanic crystals
with rapid mapping, and potentially each crystal can tell its specific ascent
history. Magma ascent rate is a parameter otherwise difficult to constrain, but
one that may be critical to the vigor of eruption. Water zonation in minerals
found in mantle xenoliths also records the timing of magma ascent and xenolith
re-equilibration, essential for understanding the water content, and thus
strength, of mantle lithosphere. IR imaging of water zonation in crystals and
melts, at higher resolution and for greater populations of samples, has the
capability to provide a new understanding of not only the volatile history of
tectonic plates, but also the volatile budget, migration rate and explosive
potential of magmas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.