* 1748614
* Workshop: Mobilizing a Global Science of Learning to Address Future Challenges; Alexandria, VA;  2018
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Andrea Chiba, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 02/28/2019
* USD 49,883.00

A primary purpose of this workshop proposal is to leverage the strengths of
global scientific communities with substantial expertise in human, animal,
neuromorphic, and machine learning. It seeks to leverage NSF investments in
Science of Learning to develop a network of US and international researchers who
are committed to interdisciplinary and integrative research in the study of
learning and its implications for societal challenges in education, technology
innovation and workforce preparation. The workshop will purposefully mobilize
and engage US and international partners to identify shared interests and needs
(expertise, infrastructure/organization) that can create new research
opportunities with meaningful international experiences for students and
faculty. Funds will be used for planning and coordination activities to
culminate in a consensus building workshop with the following goals: 1) Identify
research priorities (and/or associated societal challenges) for which networks
of scientists are poised to work together; 2) identify and build a community
infrastructure that allows teams to quickly re-configure in response to research
and societal challenges/opportunities; 3) identify ways to address learning in
the growing divide between societies with and without science and technology
resources, while maintaining important cultural features; and 4) Co-convene a
International Science of Learning Summit meeting in tandem with the Science of
Learning Awardees meeting to identify priorities in training needs and knowledge
domains for science of learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful fostering
of a global community in the science of learning enables access to a large
expertise base, and accelerated sharing and dissemination of knowledge across a
broad spectrum of disciplines. It builds capacity of interdisciplinary groups to
collaborate, and strengthens and builds new partnerships for US researchers to
work with international partners. This in turn, enables greater fluidity and
cooperation for student exchange and training in international laboratories