* 1748848
* Collaborative Research:  Development and empirical tests of a mechanistic multi-host, multi-pathogen theory
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Michael Cortez, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2020
* USD 203,399.00

Most plants and animals can be infected by very small organisms that can make
them sick. The infected plant or animal is called a "host" and the infecting
organism is called a "pathogen". The interaction between hosts and pathogens is
important to understand because it often determines one's health. Scientists are
now becoming aware that the host-pathogen interaction is more complicated
because one host can be infected by many pathogens, all of whom interact with
each other as well as with the host. Likewise, one type of pathogen can infect
several types of hosts, and how one host responds can influence whether another
host becomes infected. Figuring out how all this plays out in Nature requires
carefully designed experiments and mathematical models and this project provides
both. Developing a deeper understanding of hosts and pathogens is critical
because humans are dramatically altering the biological world, introducing new
types of hosts and pathogens in some areas and removing them from others.
Understanding how such gains and losses of organisms influences the spread of
disease is important to the fields of conservation science and public health.
This research program will train undergraduate, graduate, and high school
students in the fields of disease ecology and mathematical biology, and will
engage the public through a variety of outreach activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Humans are impacting biodiversity patterns globally and
these changes can influence the risk and prevalence of infectious diseases. The
goal of this project is to develop a mechanistic multi-host multi-pathogen
epidemiological theory that explains how between-host and between-pathogen
competition jointly shape disease dynamics. To determine how competition alters
the amplification or dilution of diseases, mathematical models will be developed
and tested using planktonic species and their associated pathogens via
laboratory based mesocosm and field experiments. This work will both extend
current theory on multi-host and multi-pathogen communities as well as unify
theory developed independently for diseases with different transmission modes.
The theory-data pairing approach of this study is likely to generate important
advances in epidemiological theory and disease ecology. This work will also
yield insight into how future alterations to diversity will affect disease
outbreaks in humans and wildlife.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.