* 1748067
* EAGER:  Data-Driven Contact Modeling
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2017,10/31/2019
* C. Karen Liu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Erion Plaku
* 10/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

Accurate physics simulation has become an essential component for developing
robots that physically interact with the world. A particularly important aspect
is simulating contacts between the robots and objects in the environment, which
can be useful for both planning and machine learning. However, robots that learn
in simulation often perform poorly in the real world due to inaccurate
parameters, idealized dynamic and contact models, or other unmodeled factors.
This project therefore tackles an important challenge in physics simulation:
accurate modeling of contacts. The results will significantly improve contact
modeling in physics simulation, which offers a safe space to learn difficult and
highly risky motor skills such that the robots can operate more efficiently and
robustly even in unseen scenarios in the real world. This capability will have
potential impact on robotics in healthcare, search-and-rescue, and space
exploration.

This proposal introduces a technique that effectively utilizes real-world data
to model the complex, poorly understood contact phenomena. Specifically, the new
data-driven technique accurately computes contact states (sticking, sliding, or
breaking) and contact forces such that the simulated results match the real-
world phenomena. Instead of taking the conventional approach of system
identification, this proposal leverages empirical evidence and deep learning
techniques to enhance the existing contact model, namely, an implicit time-
stepping, velocity-based Linear-Complementarity Program (LCP). The key insight
is that the contact problem can be broken down into two steps: predicting the
next state of each contact point and calculating contact forces based on the
prediction and current dynamic state. The first step is solved by learning a
classifier from real-world data. By doing so, the second step can be simplified
from an LCP to a Linear Program (LP), thus making the calculation of contacts
much more efficient.