* 1748357
* The Ninth Annual Graduate Student Mini-conference in Computational Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Lili Ju, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 12/31/2018
* USD 7,280.00

This awards supports "The Ninth Annual Graduate Student Mini-conference in
Computational Mathematics", held at University of South Carolina at its Columbia
campus on February 17-18, 2018. The conference webpage is at
http://imi.cas.sc.edu/events/ninth-annual-graduate-student-mini-conference-
computational-mathematics/. The conference will promote the progress of science
by bringing together a wide group of students and researchers working at the
frontier of computational mathematics. Topics include recent advances in the
theory and implementation of numerical solutions to partial differential
equation models for, but not limited to, materials science, turbulence,
biomedical flows, climate simulation, and data rich phenomena. The conference
series has established a unique role as a comfortable forum for culturally
diverse graduate students and recent Ph.D.s to present their work, learn of
recent advances, form collaborations, and network to advance their career
opportunities. The Ninth Annual Graduate Student Mini-conference will continue
this tradition. The conference organizers are committed to supporting the
participation of graduate students, recent Ph.D.s, and researchers from
underrepresented groups.

The organizing committee anticipates approximately 55 participants in
attendance, to include 1 senior and 1 junior plenary speakers, 30 graduate
students (10 from USC), and their advisors (5 from USC). The conference consists
of 2 forty-five-minute-long plenary talks, approximately 16 fifteen-minute-long
contributed talks, and 1 two-hour-long discussion session. In particular, one
plenary talk will be given by a senior computational scientist from Argonne
National Laboratory, the other will be presented by a junior postdoc fellow at
USC; all the contributed talks will be given by graduate students, and the
discussion session will focus on the career development for graduate students
and postdocs. The student speakers will be selected from attendees based on
their CVs and by consulting with their advisors about their research
achievements.