* 1748897
* Assessing the changes in the brain representations of individual STEM concepts in the course of learning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Marcel Just, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2022
* USD 549,377.00

Discovering how STEM concepts are represented in the brain will allow us to both
assess student learning of science and to teach STEM concepts more effectively.
This project makes use of previous work by the investigators that demonstrated
the remarkable new ability to determine the neural correlates (brain signature)
of an individual concept, using fMRI brain imaging. Knowing the brain signature
of physics concepts like gravity and velocity makes it possible to observe how
the brain representations develop in a learner's brain, how they are organized,
and how they depend on that person's learning background and on the teaching
method. If we know the brain's way of organizing STEM concept knowledge, we can
design curricula that teach to that organizational system and measure student
learning at the brain level. This approach will not replace conventional tests,
but it will provide a new type of basis for those tests such that they can
assess alternative instructional methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
investigators had previously shown that neural signatures can be decomposed into
meaningful underlying dimensions that are remarkably similar across people,
making it possible to precisely compare the neural representations of student
learners to the representations of instructors or of other successful learners.
What has not been attempted before, and is the major goal of this project, is
relating the neural signatures of concept learning to various learning outcomes.
Behavioral tests will assess the students? acquisition of the concepts and fMRI
scans will assess the acquisition of the concomitant brain representations of
the individual concepts. The students' neural representations will be analyzed
for their intrinsic integrity, measured by a machine learning classifier's
accuracy in identifying a concept from its fMRI signature. These will be
compared to the neural representations of people with demonstrated mastery of
the concepts (such as advanced students and the class instructors).
Additionally, the project will assess changes in brain tissues (gray and white
matter) that co-occur with concept learning, as well as changes in
synchronization (functional connectivity) between brain regions involved in the
concept representations. A central contribution of this project will be a brain-
based understanding of how individual scientific concepts are learned and how
this learning can be related to behavioral measures and individual differences.
The long-term goal is to build the foundation for neuroscience findings to
inform teaching techniques and assessments, and as inspiration for additional
strategies to promote successful learning in both the general student population
and students at risk for failure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.