* 1748286
* Exceptionally well-preserved fossil plants from the Late Jurassic and Early Cretaceous of Mongolia and China
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2023
* Patrick Herendeen, Chicago Horticultural Society
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 04/30/2023
* USD 567,730.00

This project will document seed-bearing plants that lived during the age of
dinosaurs in Mongolia and Inner Mongolia, China. Sediments laid down 100-125
million years ago in these areas produce many exceptionally well-preserved
fossils that capture the biodiversity of Asia at the very beginning of the rise
of flowering plants. Many seed-bearing plants during this time were close
relatives of flowering plants yet later became extinct for reasons that are not
well understood. Documenting these extinct seed-bearing plants will allow
scientists to more fully understand the ecology of this ancient environment and
the evolution of seed plants, including flowering plants that form the
foundation of terrestrial ecosystems today. Researchers will unearth and
describe seed plants preserved as compressed as well as three-dimensional
fossils from multiple field sites. The project will train undergraduate and
graduate students, including members of groups that are under-represented in
science, and support the professional development of an early-career researcher.
Researchers will educate the public about the Mongolian fossils by authoring a
book of popular science non-fiction intended for wide audiences. Their outreach
activities will build on popular interest in dinosaurs and will include
materials and exhibits produced through the Chicago Botanic Garden. Project
personnel will use next-generation science standards to engage middle-school
students via an online, bilingual illustrated series about paleontology and
earth science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to a deeper
understanding of a critical ecological transition period in the history of life.
Research will add significantly to existing knowledge about seed plant diversity
during the Jurassic and Early Cretaceous in Asia and the global distributions of
these species. Researchers will uncover numerous fossil fragments of species,
which will allow unprecedented opportunity to reassemble whole plants and
compare different developmental stages. Researchers will analyze the morphology
and anatomy of these fossils using scanning electron microscopy and high-
resolution X-ray microtomography. Newly excavated and existing fossil specimens
are expected to yield species new to science and as well as new insights about
previously described species. Outcomes of this project will include improved
understanding of ancient ecosystems, the historical biogeography of extinct seed
plants across continents, and the homology of pollen- and seed-bearing organs
among living and extinct seed plants, including flowering plants. The project
will create new fossil collections and strengthen international research
collaborations among US, Russian, Mongolian and Chinese
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.