* 1748779
* Ventilation Processes and Effects on Tropical Cyclones
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Kristen Corbosiero, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 02/28/2023
* USD 397,626.00

Tropical cyclone development is significantly affected by the presence of dry
air and wind shear. Wind shear can interact with the tropical cyclone vortex
through a process called ventilation to inject cool, dry environmental air into
the tropical system. While it is well known that these processes exist, there is
significant uncertainty as to how ventilation occurs and how it modulates
tropical cyclone development. This project will shed light on these issues by
conducting a series of high-resolution numerical modeling simulations. The main
societal impact of the project will be improved knowledge of the factors that
affect hurricane intensity, which is especially important for forecasts of
hurricanes near populated and vulnerable areas. The researchers also plan
outreach events for students and the general public to enhance scientific
literacy. Two early career researchers will also be educated and trained under
this project, ensuring the development of a highly capable
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team plans an idealized modeling
study to increase understanding of how dry air and vertical wind shear work
synergistically through the process of ventilation to modulate tropical cyclone
development. The CM1 model will be used with different combinations of vertical
wind shear and relative humidity, starting from tropical cyclones states with
different initial intensities. The simulations will be analyzed to test the
following hypotheses: 1) low- and mid-level ventilation both increase as the
relative humidity decreases and the vertical wind shear increases, but the
ventilation pathway depends on the intensity of the TC, 2) mid-level ventilation
is accomplished by vortex Rossby waves in the inner core and descending radial
inflow in the stratiform region of TC rainbands, 3) ventilation increases
lateral entrainment of low-moist static energy air into convection and
convective/turbulent mixing of low-moist static energy air into the boundary
layer, thereby weakening TC convection and the secondary
circulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.