* 1748352
* Sustainable Nanotechnology Conference, November 5 - 7, 2017 in Marina del Rey,  California
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Arturo Keller, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 07/31/2018
* USD 25,000.00

The Sixth Annual Conference of the Sustainable Nanotechnology Organization will
be held in November 5 - 8, 2013 in Marina Del Rey, California. The objective of
this sixth conference is to bring together scientific experts from academia,
industry, and government agencies from around the world to present and discuss
current research findings on the subject of sustainability of nanotechnology.
Sustainable development has been defined as the balance of economic success,
environmental protection and social responsibility. Sustainable nanotechnology
strives to ensure that industrial growth is sustainable while maximizing
societal benefits. The current challenge however, is that many existing
nanotechnology products are not sustainable due to their dependence on large
quantities of energy, water, and materials. In addition to being resource and
energy intensive, some existing nanomanufacturing processes utilize non-
renewable materials. Also, their impacts on human health are not clearly
understood. The conference program will address the critical aspects of
sustainable nanotechnology such as life cycle assessment, green synthesis, green
energy, environmental and biological fate, economic and societal aspects of
nanotechnology, and the overall sustainability of engineered nanomaterials. In
principle, this involves fundamental/applied research on the chemistry of
producing new green nanomaterials and the eco-manufacturing processing of
nanomaterials and products. The conference will also foster new collaborations
between academic and industrial participants. This community of users,
researchers and developers of engineered nanomaterials will provide a long-term,
scientific assessment of where the science of nanotechnology, its future, and
propose activities which academics, government agencies and others can engage in
to achieve sustainability goals.

This conference considers two main aspects: how to make nanotechnology more
sustainable in terms of its environmental, social and economic implications, and
how to use nanotechnology to improve the sustainability of human activities. Of
particular interest is the use of nanotechnology to reduce carbon footprint,
make energy and water use more efficient, and minimize human impacts. The
conference brings together experts from different areas, such as academics,
industry, regulators and other interested parties. The output of the conference
is made publicly available through publications and press releases. The
conference program will address the critical aspects of sustainable
nanotechnology such as life cycle assessment, green synthesis, green energy,
environmental and biological fate, economic and societal aspects of
nanotechnology, and the overall sustainability of engineered nanomaterials. In
principle, this involves fundamental/applied research on the chemistry of
producing new green nanomaterials and the eco-manufacturing processing of
nanomaterials and products. The conference will also foster new collaborations
between academic and industrial participants. This community of users,
researchers and developers of engineered nanomaterials will provide a long-term,
scientific assessment of where the science of nanotechnology, its future, and
propose activities which academics, government agencies and others can engage in
to achieve sustainability goals.