* 1748706
* P-adic Representation Theory and Geometry of the Lubin-Tate Tower
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2017,01/31/2018
* Sarah Kitchen, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 01/31/2018
* USD 23,975.00

The principal investigator studies two outstanding problems in p-adic
representation theory. The first problem is analyzing a conjectural geometric
construction of supercuspidal representations of p-adic groups proposed by
Lusztig in 1979. Lusztig's construction can be viewed as a special case of
automorphic induction. While automorphic induction has been constructed in many
special cases, the existing approaches are quite complicated and often rely on
global methods. Lusztig's construction is much more elegant, but the questions
of formalizing it and comparing it to the more classical constructions of p-adic
representation theory remain completely open. It is expected that the results
obtained by the principal investigator will shed light on the geometry that
underlies the known cases of automorphic induction. The second problem was
formulated by M. Harris in 2002. It asks for a construction of Bushnell-Kutzko
types for the general linear group of a local field K in the cohomology of
suitable analytic subspaces of the Lubin-Tate tower of K. The principal
investigator studies a family of open affinoids in the Lubin-Tate tower whose
cohomology is expected to realize various special cases of the local Langlands
and Jacquet-Langlands correspondences (which will partially answer Harris's
question). The relevant cohomology computations have much in common with the
examples of p-adic Lusztig induction that have so far been understood.

The Langlands Program has dominated much of research in algebra during the last
40 years. It has connections to some of the most prominent results in number
theory and other areas of mathematics, such as Fermat's Last Theorem. The
principal investigator works in a branch of this field known as the local
Langlands program. It is concerned with the representation theory of the so-
called p-adic groups, and the main driving force is the search for a general
proof of the local Langlands correspondence. Various special cases of this
correspondence have been obtained by Henniart, Harris, Taylor and many other
mathematicians. However, most of the existing proofs are not explicit and do not
provide sufficient information for the desirable applications of the local
Langlands correspondence. The principal investigator uses methods of geometric
representation theory for unipotent groups, developed in his previous works, to
give new explicit constructions of the local Langlands correspondence, and to
simplify and clarify the existing ones. One of the main tools is a conjectural
geometric construction of representations of p-adic groups formulated by Lusztig
in 1979. Until recently this construction has remained relatively unknown
because it was not clear how to compare it to the more classical constructions.
The principal investigator developed general techniques for analyzing this
construction, and is currently using it to shed light on the geometry behind the
local Langlands correspondence.