* 1748166
* CAREER: Flexible Parsimonious Models for Complex Data
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Jacob Bien, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2022
* USD 400,000.00

Researchers throughout academia, industry, and government are generating data at
scales and levels of complexity far beyond what could previously have been
imagined. Complex data demand statistical models that are sufficiently flexible
to adapt to meaningful, underlying signals, allowing scientists to discover
unexpected patterns. Yet as society relies more heavily on statistical
algorithms to make decisions impacting everyday life, it becomes increasingly
important for a method's output to be interpretable by non-experts. This demands
parsimony: that simpler explanations be favored over more complicated ones. For
example, the Internet has led to unprecedented quantities of data in the form of
text (such as articles, blogs, webpages, consumer reviews, and many other social
media products). Such text data represent a potential treasure trove of insights
into the world -- what people are thinking, how this is changing over time, how
this varies by location, etc. The investigator develops new statistical methods
for overcoming major technical challenges to gleaning useful information from
this data. This same methodology can be applied to the study of the microbiome,
the vast community of microbes living in an environment such as the human gut.
Better statistical methods are needed to identify types of microbes in the gut
that play a crucial role in human health and disease. Another problem that is
tackled in this project involves modeling data collected over time (such as
wind-speed data and wildlife monitoring). The methods that are developed allow
for more accurate forecasting, which is crucial in many areas including health
and medicine and the development of lower cost energy systems. The last major
area in this project is devoted to making the process of statistical research
more efficient and its software of higher quality and easier to share across the
community of statistical researchers. Finally, all three research objectives are
closely integrated with educational outcomes, including the supervision and
teaching of graduate students, outreach to non-statisticians and non-scientists,
and the release of undergraduate-accessible mini-papers describing the
investigator's new research findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses
on the design of new statistical methods that balance two important and often
opposing needs: flexibility and parsimony. (1) Building predictive regression
and classification models is difficult when the features are highly sparse.
While many methods focus on the challenge of high dimensionality, relatively few
have considered the obstacle posed by features that are rarely nonzero. The
investigator develops a new framework for feature selection when the features
are highly sparse that succeeds where preexisting methods fail. This is studied
both from theoretical and computational standpoints. (2) High-dimensional
covariance estimation and time series modeling are two rich, but largely
distinct, areas in statistics, which the investigator combines to develop new
methods for modeling locally stationary time series. The added flexibility in
going from stationarity to local stationarity must be carefully balanced with
parsimony. (3) A series of area-specific software modules will be distributed
freely online building on the investigator's new platform for streamlining the
process of performing simulation studies. Each module will implement some of the
most common models, methods, and metrics used in a given area of statistics
research. The goal is to facilitate the sharing of high-quality, reproducible
simulation code in the statistics research community by creating an easily-
adaptable standardized format.