* 1748433
* EAGER: Applied Econometrics Laboratory and Summer Economics Research Program
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2017,09/30/2019
* Gregory Price, Morehouse College
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 09/30/2019
* USD 86,977.00

HBCU DCL, EARGER: Applied Econometrics Laboratory and Summer Economics Research
Program

This research project will contribute to the development of research
infrastructure in Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) by
running an intensive six-week workshop in applied econometrics in which students
complete a first draft of a research paper they will submit to a referred
economics journal for publication. Despite African Americans making 13.3% of the
U.S. population in 2016, they constituted only 1.7% of the economics faculties
in the U.S. in that year. This is partly due to supply side factors as African
Americans are increasingly earning fewer PhDs in economics compared to their
share of the population and to other racial groups. Undergraduate research
experience in economics is probably the best predictor of interest and success
in pursuing graduate studies in economics. The proposed applied econometrics
workshop focusing on undergraduate research experience at an HBCU, which is
still a major source of African American undergraduates, will build research
capacity among these undergraduates, hence serve as a pipeline to graduate
programs in economics. In addition to increasing the potential supply of
graduate students, the workshop will also build research infrastructure at an
HBCU as well as enhance research collaboration among students and faculty.
Participants who do not go on to PhD programs will learn valuable skills that
will equip them to be employed as economic analysts. The results of this
research project will lead to increases in the number of African American PhDs
in economics and on economics faculties, thus diversifying the economics
profession generally and economics faculty particularly. This research project
will bring students from HBCUs for a six-week intensive workshop in applied
econometrics research in a bid to increase their empirical research skills. The
workshop will feature both classroom learning as well as laboratory experience.
Workshop participants will work with two Morehouse College economics faculty who
are experienced empirical researchers. The focus will be on the research
component with participants developing and writing drafts of a research paper
they will revise later and submit to a referred journal for publication
consideration. The use of STATA for economics research will be emphasized in
this workshop. These competencies will not only help those who will continue to
obtain PhDs in economics but will also provide valuable skills to participants
who may choose to work as research analysts/assistants after their baccalaureate
degrees. The results of this research project will not only increase the number
of African Americans with PhDs in economics; but will also serve to diversify
the STEM workforce in the U.S. and ultimately strengthen the U.S. economy.