* 1748616
* RAPID:  Pacific Island Reefs Under Siege--An Undergraduate Training Partnership
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Rebecca Ostertag, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 07/31/2023
* USD 199,026.00

The coral reefs of the Marshall Islands, some of the most pristine in the world,
are endangered by algal blooms caused by contamination from human sewage and a
rise in seawater temperature triggered by the last El Nino. These environmental
hazards threaten the wellbeing of the Marshallese people and the health of the
coral reefs. Scientists from the University of Hawaii at Hilo and the College of
the Marshall Islands will map and analyze the algal blooms and establish a new
system to monitor seawater temperature and its effect on coral reef bleaching.
During the project, students and faculty from the College of the Marshall
Islands will be trained in current methods for environmental science. This
enhanced local expertise will mitigate the urgent need for ongoing monitoring of
reef health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Poor infrastructure allows human sewage to
leak into the lagoon enclosed by Majuro, the largest city on the Marshall
Islands. This pollution fuels algal blooms that suppress the corals. In
objective one, the team will analyze nutrients in water and use microbiological
techniques to investigate and map the distribution of bacteria and algae
involved. In addition to this anthropogenic stress, the reefs are endangered by
one of the longest and most damaging seawater temperature rises on record. In
objective two, the scientists will deploy monitors to measure seawater
temperatures and correlate these with coral reef bleaching. There is a critical
need to establish this monitoring system to provide baseline data against which
future change can be assessed. The project will also have a sustained impact on
building research capacity through the collaboration of faculty from the
University of Hawaii and the College of the Marshall Islands. Collectively the
faculty will provide STEM training for eight students from the College of the
Marshall Islands. Increasing the local expertise through student training will
be critical for resilience on the Marshall Islands, one of the Pacific Island
groups at the forefront of environmental change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is being made jointly by The Division of Biological Infrastructure
(Directorate for Biological Sciences), and The Division of Human Resource
Development (Directorate for Education &amp; Human Resources).