* 1748398
* Underrepresented Engineering Students: Travel/Training Grant to Attend the International Microwave Symposium
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Rhonda Franklin, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 08/31/2022
* USD 59,997.00

U.S. continued competitiveness in the global economy of the 21st century relies
on maintaining a well-trained science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) workforce. The last two decades have focused on the U.S. lag in terms of
the per capita graduates in STEM-related disciplines compared to an increasing
number of European and Asian countries. A more pressing need and new for the
first time in U.S. history is that the emerging majority of K-12 U.S. students
are first-generation and from minority groups, who are significantly under-
represented in engineering and other STEM -elated fields. The participation of
underrepresented groups of women and minorities in Electrical and Computer
Engineering (ECE) is far below their percentage representation of the population
as a whole. This reality points to both systemic problems within the discipline
in terms of attracting students to the field and suffers from the on-going
discussions about achievement gaps in the K-12 education. The identification of
appropriate role models and mentors within ECE in particular is deemed necessary
to increase the efficiency of participants staying with the profession. The
objectives of Project Connect are to directly address the aforementioned
problems by exposing underrepresented students to exciting opportunities and
potential mentors within the IEEE International Microwave Symposium (IMS)
community related to broad technology areas such as electronics and
communications. These objectives will be met through the IMS 2018 and 2019
programming effort of Project Connect, which brings underrepresented university
students to the symposium to engage with the university and industry
professionals for exposure, guidance, and development in technical areas ranging
from research and development, to applications and near-term industrial
initiatives. The three primary objectives for the IMS Connect Program are to
provide the following:(1)education about the rf/microwave industry,(2)awareness
on career opportunities and expectations, and (3)access to and guidance from
role models and potential mentors who are active in the field as educators,
practitioners, researchers, and industry leaders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
support being requested from the National Science Foundation is for travel
stipends for the student participants in IMS Connect for 2018 (Philadelphia, PA)
and 2019 (Boston, MA). IMS is the largest conference in the world for
RF/microwave engineers. Students who are selected to participate in IMS Connect
will attend the conference for four days, in which they will participate in
several professional development activities, learn about student activities for
aspiring microwave engineers, and meet and network with other engineering
students, professionals, and leaders in the field. Selected student participants
will also learn about microwave industries and local cultures in the conference
location region.