* 1748369
* I-Corps: Z-Threaded Carbon Fiber Composite Technology
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Kuang-Ting Hsiao, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 03/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to explore
the opportunities of using a new technology to help manufacturers make carbon
fiber composite products with higher production speed and lower cost. This novel
fabrication technology produces materials that are stronger, stiffer, thinner,
lighter, and better conductors of heat and electricity than current carbon fiber
composites widely used in manufacturing industries. Parts produced from these
new materials are more accurately made and have less internal stress remaining
after manufacturing than previously. In addition, this technology will also
reduce the energy consumption and material waste during the operation of
vehicles and equipment that utilize them. Since carbon fiber composites are
being increasingly used in many industries including aerospace, automotive,
energy, marine, sporting goods, and defense, successful commercialization of the
new technology catalyzed by this I-Corps project will bring significant benefits
to the U.S. manufacturing base.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on a new technology using long ultra-thin carbon nanofibers to thread
through a bed of conventional thicker carbon fibers all surrounded by an epoxy
resin adhesive. As a result, the thicker fibers are strongly bound together by
the nanofibers, and all are held in place by the epoxy, to produce a composite
material that is much stronger than either the epoxy resin alone or the
conventional carbon fiber composite including the epoxy. This is called
"z-threading". The network of interlocked carbon nanofibers and carbon fibers
significantly improves the composite material's strength and conduction of heat
and electricity. Conventional carbon fiber composite materials, typically in the
form of a laminate, lack the z-threading nanofibers and have significantly
poorer properties across the thickness direction of the laminate. As a result,
manufacturing processes currently using carbon fiber composites will be
significantly improved. This will allow production of more aggressively designed
components with higher performance than has been possible before.