* 1748755
* NSF Nanoscale Science and Engineering Grantees Conference, December 12-13, 2017
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Gerhard Klimeck, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 08/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

The National Science Foundation's Nanoscale Science and Engineering Grantees
Conference: Progress in Nanotechnology will be held December 12-13, 2017 in
Arlington, Virginia. Now in its seventeenth year, the conference is held
annually to highlight the research and education activities of currently-funded
projects. The conference brings together researchers, educators, and
practitioners from academic, industry, and government sectors to share progress,
discuss challenges, and explore new opportunities for collaboration. This year's
conference focuses on foundational nanotechnology and infrastructure, grand
challenges, and convergence of disciplines in nanomanufacturing. In addition to
keynote presentations on these topics, the conference features panel discussions
expanding on the main topics, poster sessions presenting current research, and
multiple networking opportunities. The conference supports dissemination of
grant-funded research results and fosters ideation of new avenues of
exploration, promoting advances in many disciplines including public health and
medicine, environmental science, cybersecurity, materials, and manufacturing.
Nanotechnology as a component of improving the public perception of science and
nanotechnology education is also a component of the workshop. The conference
also affords NSF program directors opportunities for discussions with principal
investigators.

Day 1 of the conference includes keynotes and panel discussions on Progress in
Foundational Nanotechnology and Infrastructure. The agenda includes nanoscale
modeling/simulation and use of big data, nanotechnology-based devices and
systems by design, and two-dimensional materials and quantum phenomena in
nanoscales systems, along with updates from nano-centers. The Day 2 agenda
focuses on Progress in Grand Challenges and Convergence, with invited speakers
and panelists presenting on manufacturing networks and nanotechnology, advanced
nano-biomanufacturing convergence across disciplines, and brain-like cognitive
systems. Panelists with expertise in brain-inspired computing hardware
architecture and brain-machine interfaces, and nano device re-creation of neural
and synaptic functions will discuss how nanotechnology contributes to brain-like
computing and share visionary ideas for the next twenty years. A working lunch
on best practices when portraying nanotechnology research and development in
video and on the web is a highlight. The conference closes with educational and
societal aspects of nanotechnology, with panel discussions on nanotechnology
immersion in the public perception of science, societal aspects of
nanotechnology and converging technologies, and convergence in education.