* 1748889
* Talking Black in America, Part II: Mini-Series and Public Education
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Walter Wolfram, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 01/31/2024
* USD 461,416.00

This project will produce a four-part mini-series on African American Language
(AAL) designed for television broadcast as well as for formal and informal
public educational distribution. This mini-series addresses the social,
cultural, and educational issues related to the most prominent, the most
controversial, and the most misunderstood dialect in the history of American
English--African American Language. Dialect prejudice, linguistic profiling, and
language-based discrimination continue to be "so commonly accepted, so widely
perceived as appropriate, that it must be seen as the last back door to
discrimination. And the door is still wide open" (Lippi-Green 2012:73). By
presenting the history, development, diversity, and symbolic role of language in
the lives of African Americans, this documentary series helps to counteract the
persistent misinformation and misinterpretation circulated about the language of
African Americans. The series builds on the popular public reception to the one-
hour documentary, Talking Black in America: The Story of African American
Language, and includes the following episodes: 1) the historical and
contemporary development of African American Language; 2) the diversity of
language use among African Americans based on region, age, status, education,
and style; 3) the use of language in expressive performance, including
preaching, comedy, music, hip hop, spoken word, and other expressive genres; and
4) the role of language differences in educational achievement. A website
accompanying the series will include a variety of educational resources,
including streaming, discursive chapters with integrated vignettes from the
episodes, additional commentary and background, activities, and discussion
questions for each episode, with further online materials for education. The
documentary and accompanying activities constitute an important milestone in the
effort to educate the public about language diversity in American society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;No dialect in the history of American English has been
more prominent, more controversial, and more misunderstood than African American
Language, and dialect prejudice, linguistic profiling, and language
discrimination still intensely affect speakers of this variety. By presenting
the history, development, diversity, and symbolic role of language in the lives
of African Americans, this documentary series will help to counteract the
persistent misinformation circulated about African American Language. This
series and the accompanying online materials offer an important milestone in the
effort to educate the public about language diversity that can help to reduce
linguistic discrimination in American society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.