* 1748093
* EAGER: Making with Understanding
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Bertrand Schneider, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2020
* USD 299,999.00

There is a new cultural movement where everyday people tinker with concepts in
STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics), simply for the purpose of
satisfying creativity and curiosity. This "maker movement" is powered by the
wide availability of low-cost electronics and manufacturing tools, which allow
amateur makers to create interactive objects while exploring scientific
phenomena. Such environments have great potential to engage people with STEM
concepts and activities while empowering individuals to find creative solutions
to complex and personally meaningful issues. However, in these learning
environments, frequently students' focus is more on completing a technical
project rather than comprehending scientific concepts. While some learning does
happen in such contexts, a significant portion of maker activities may include
following a list of instructions and trusting that they are going to result into
a functional project. In this project an emerging technology, Augmented Reality
(AR), is investigated as a means to transform the STEM maker movement by making
challenging concepts accessible to students. Many invisible phenomena are
involved in maker space activities (e.g., the flow of electricity, the
interaction of magnetic fields, or the movement of air pressure waves).
Augmented Reality headsets, such as the Microsoft Hololens, allow students to
see virtual "holograms" in the physical world. This project investigates the
impact of design activities where learners can visualize and interact with the
hidden forces involved in their projects, such as electrons, magnetic fields,
light or radio waves, or to visualize the inner workings of physical components
such as microchips and sensors. This proposal explores how a new generation of
maker spaces can be enhanced by augmented reality technologies to create
learning environments that enable making with understanding.

This project augments traditional student activities in maker spaces using
augmented reality (AR) technology, and investigates whether this intervention 1)
increases learning gains, 2) facilitates deeper conceptual discussion among
students, and 3) modifies student conceptions of the observed phenomena. An
example activity includes building a speaker from scratch (in which amplified
electrical signals are converted into magnetic fields), or programming a micro-
controller to make decisions based on the readings of multiple sensors. Such
activities are enhanced by the use of AR technology, as the system overlays a
representation the invisible phenomena (flow of electrons, magnetic forces,
sensor values, snippets of code, etc.) directly on top of the relevant physical
components. Research involves conducting systematic empirical studies to compare
the usefulness of AR-based learning vs. traditional non-AR approaches, and
follow-up studies to identify the affordances for collaborative learning. The
project will employ traditional quantitative and qualitative measures, along
with novel methods from the field of multi-modal learning analytics to
understand and classify students' behaviors across conditions. This work will 1)
contribute to our understanding of how student education of STEM concepts can be
enhanced by new technologies such as augmented reality, 2) contribute a set of
reusable modules to visualize and simulate the invisible phenomena that are
commonly encountered in maker activities, and 3) produce guidelines to help the
design of innovative learning environments.