* 1748102
* EAGER: Vertebrate food web structure and complexity at predator-derived versus human-derived resource hotspots
* BIO,DEB
* 08/20/2017,01/31/2021
* Joseph Bump, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 01/31/2021
* USD 94,471.00

Humans have unintentionally supplied food to animal communities for millennia.
Dumps that attract bears and unharvested or spilled crops in agricultural fields
are common, modern-day examples. The goal of this project is to determine the
ecological consequences of this supplemental food. The work is important because
some types of wildlife may benefit from human-provided food and other types may
be harmed. The food may also bring together predators and scavengers in unusual
ways, driving interactions that would not otherwise happen. This research serves
the national interest because wildlife resources are increasingly valued for
both consumptive and non-consumptive recreation; wildlife management is a
priority across all 50 states. To detect wildlife around human-provided food
sources, this project will use "camera traps" that are automatically triggered
by nearby animals. Citizen scientists will be engaged in research by helping
with the camera traps, which will provide additional opportunities for education
and outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will compare food web structure
and complexity at carrion sites produced by predators and at anthropogenic
resource hotspots produced by hunters (carrion sites and bait stations,
respectively). The overarching goal is to examine how supplemental food affects
predator-scavenger interactions. Specific objectives are: (i) assessment of
species occurrence at different types of supplemental resource sites through
analyses of the relationship between site covariates and occupancy, and of
occupancy temporal dynamics, (ii) comparison of food web structure and
complexity between site types, using metrics of biodiversity and food web
connectance, and (iii) modeling the seasonal resource pulses produced from
predation, hunter bait sites, and naturally-occurring die-offs. The analytical
approach combines non-invasive survey methods (i.e., camera trapping) with
occupancy analysis for objective (i), and ecological modeling techniques for
objectives (ii) and (iii). The Principal Investigator will collaborate with
regional, national, and global camera trapping efforts that engage citizen
scientists; these include including Snapshot Michigan, eMammal, and Smithsonian
WILD.