* 1748982
* CAREER: A meta-omics approach to discover the determinants of micropollutant biotransformations performed by wastewater microbial communities
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Damian Helbling, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This project seeks to improve water quality through enhanced wastewater
treatment to protect public health and improve the environment. Many types of
pollutants are poorly removed by existing wastewater treatment technologies. As
a result, pollutants accumulate in aquatic environments and may contaminate
drinking water resources. The PI will study the mechanisms by which organic
pollutants are transformed during wastewater treatment through detailed
characterization of the complex organic matter in wastewater using advanced
chemical analysis tools. This information will be coupled with next generation
genetic characterization of the microbes responsible for pollutant removal to
allow optimization of wastewater treatment plant performance to more efficiently
remove pollutants and decrease cost. The education plan for this project will
train a diverse group of students to broaden participation in environmental
engineering and other STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The occurrence of
anthropogenic organic micropollutants in wastewater treatment plant effluents
raises concerns about their human-health and ecological impacts. As wastewater
reclamation and recycling become more widely adopted, efficient and cost-
effective means for micropollutant removal are becoming essential. This research
seeks to leverage the broad metabolic capabilities of wastewater microbial
communities to achieve this goal. The research will utilize high-resolution mass
spectrometry to broadly infer the metabolic functioning of microbial communities
and next-generation sequencing to characterize the structure of microbial
communities from population to functional levels with a goal of identifying
taxa, ecological features, metabolic pathways, or operational parameters that
lead to enhanced micropollutant biotransformation. This research is significant
because it will provide wastewater utilities with an effective means for
optimizing bioprocesses to meet emerging performance objectives. The PI will
create opportunities for diverse groups of students across all education levels
to engage with water quality research through a collaboration with the Cayuga
Lake Floating Classroom for pre-college students, recruit undergraduate students
to work on the research plan through the NSF-funded Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation program, and integrate research and education activities
in the undergraduate environmental engineering curriculum at Cornell University.
The education plan is significant because it will create opportunities for
students to explore water quality problems outside the classroom and develop
skills in self-directed learning in environmental engineering or other STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.