* 1748635
* Discerning Mechanisms of Environmental and Climatic Changes Associated with the Late Silurian (Ludfordian) Extinction Event
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Seth Young, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 03/31/2023
* USD 292,923.00

The Silurian (419 to 443 million years ago) was an environmentally and
biologically volatile interval of Earth history, which was characterized by
numerous mass extinction events that are linked to reoccurring oceanographic
changes. The goal of this funded project is to determine the mechanisms
responsible for oceanographic and environmental changes associated with the most
severe mass extinction in the Silurian. This project will utilize both newly
developed and well-established geochemical approaches to develop a detailed
history of oxygen levels in the oceans during this time interval. It is
important to understand the history of oxygen concentrations in ancient oceans
because changes in oxygen levels impact marine life, critical biogeochemical
processes in the oceans and atmosphere, and the formation and preservation of
economic hydrocarbon and mineral deposits. The project will provide meaningful
hands-on field and laboratory experiences for undergraduate and graduate
students, support the training of underrepresented groups in the geosciences,
and support a high school science teacher to conduct cutting-edge research,
which will provide motivation for new activities in their own classrooms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address three research objectives:
construct high-resolution isotopic analyses of sulfur and carbon, along with a
suite of redox proxies (Fe-speciation, trace metal concentrations, thallium
isotopes, I/Ca ratios), and detailed sedimentary facies analyses through late
Silurian strata from multiple ocean basins on three separate paleocontinents.
This will allow the research team to directly test existing hypotheses related
to the causes of this late Silurian mass extinction event and associated large
positive 13C excursion. Second, new high-resolution sedimentary geochemical data
will be integrated with known paleobiological records via numerical
stratigraphic methods (CONOP) for constraining possible causative connections
between carbon cycle perturbation, marine extinction event, and eustatic sea-
level records. Third, geochemical modeling will be used to further evaluate
hypotheses regarding the links of local environmental changes, biotic extinction
and recovery, and fluctuating global redox conditions in the oceans during the
late Silurian.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.