* 1748389
* Coastal SEES Collaborative Research: Changes in Ship-borne Introductions of Invasive Species in Coupled Natural-human Systems: Infrastructure, Global Trade, Climate and Policy
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* David Lodge, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,370,148.00

Ships deliver 90% of the world's goods and link all ports in a global network.
That network confers large economic benefits to the U.S. economy, but can also
cause unintentional negative side effects including air pollution, water
pollution, and the introduction of harmful invasive species. Thousands of
species, some of which become invasive, hitchhike in the ballast water of ships
and on the hulls and other exposed surfaces of ships. The risk from invasive
species differs among ports based on the number of ships visiting a port and the
visiting ships' previous ports of call. This project analyzes the global
shipping network to discover where the risk of invasion has been high and to
identify where the risk may increase as a result of on-going changes in the
shipping network. Predictions about past and future invasions will be tested by
sequencing DNA extracted from water samples taken in or near ports to detect the
presence of potentially invasive species. Large changes in the shipping network
are being driven by creation and expansion of new ports (e.g., liquefied natural
gas terminals), the expansion of the Panama Canal, changes in ballast water
practices and policies (e.g., new rules from the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency and the U.S. Coast Guard, proposed agreements from the International
Maritime Organization), and changes in climate (e.g., opening of Arctic shipping
lanes as sea ice declines). Through a formal consultation process with
stakeholders, project results about the risk of invasions will inform port
managers, ship operators, and policy-makers who can identify opportunities for
the most cost effective reductions in risk in order to maximize the benefits of
shipping. This project will advance the science of big data networks, improve
cutting-edge genetic sequencing methods for environmental samples, and increase
the net benefits of shipping via improved information provided to the private
sector, non-governmental organizations, and policy-makers. Broader impacts also
include interdisciplinary training for undergraduate and graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers, including students from the University of Puerto Rico.
This project is supported as part of the National Science Foundation's Coastal
Science, Engineering, and Education for Sustainability program - Coastal SEES.

An integrated team of experts in network science, engineering, economics,
freshwater and marine invasion biology, genomics, and marine policy will
accomplish five goals: 1) develop a Nonindigenous Species Risk Assessment and
Prediction System (NIS-RAPS), using novel methods of network modeling and data
fusion; 2) calibrate and test NIS-RAPS predictions about invasions using
cutting-edge environmental DNA (eDNA) metagenetic methods; 3) use NIS-RAPS to
simulate NIS spread under future scenarios, exploring on a global scale how
changing infrastructure, global trade, climate, and policy will affect NIS
spread via ballast water and biofouling; 4) evaluate the effectiveness of
different policies in reducing invasions using NIS-RAPS under future scenarios;
and 5) use a Management Transition Board, including national and international
policy makers, to choose global change and policy scenarios, and to increase the
incorporation of research results into new national and international practices
and policies to reduce invasions from ballast water and biofouling.