* 1748280
* USENIX ATC'17 student travel grants
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2018
* Dilma Da Silva, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 01/31/2018
* USD 20,000.00

This proposal requests funding to assist 20 US-based graduate students to attend
the 2017 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 2017). USENIX ATC is the
premier forum for advanced professionals from academic and industrial
backgrounds to meet and discuss the latest research in systems software. USENIX
ATC 2017 will be held in Santa Clara, CA, from July 12-14, 2017. The conference
will consist of three days of the ATC 3-day technical program. Co-located
workshops and symposiums include HotStorage 2017, HotCloud 2017, and SOUPS 2017.
Other activities include industry talks, a poster session, Birds-of-a-Feather
(BoF) sessions and more. In addition to attending the conference events,
students receiving assistance may serve as scribes for the conference sessions
to write summaries for a later issue of ;login: magazine, will be invited to
attend the student Birds-of-a-Feather session to interact with senior members of
the research community specifically interested in meeting students in a casual
and informal atmosphere, and will be strongly encouraged to present posters and
works-in-progress as part of the selection process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conference focuses on the computer systems, and brings together professionals
from academic and industrial backgrounds. It provides students with the
opportunity to interact with more senior researchers in the field and exposes
students to leading-edge work in the field. The conference emphasizes innovative
novel research. Attendance offers many opportunities for students to meet,
interact, and exchange ideas in an informal atmosphere. Participation in USENIX
ATC 2017 and similar conferences is a valuable and important part of the
graduate school experience. The support requested in this proposal will enable
the participation of students who would otherwise be unable to attend ATC.