* 1748101
* EAGER:   Interface Engineering for Low-Temperature Process and Stable  Organometal Perovskite Solar Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,06/30/2019
* Qiuming Yu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2019
* USD 150,000.00

Photovoltaic (PV) technology is a promising method to convert sustainable solar
energy into electricity. In order to further lower the cost of solar
electricity, increasing efficiency of solar cells, and therefore solar cell
modules, becomes more critical because the same power target can be reached with
the installation of fewer modules. Recently, organometal halide perovskites have
attracted considerable attention as promising PV materials because of the rapid
increase in single-junction record efficiencies to exceed 20%, their simple
device structures, and the possibility for roll-to-roll low-cost manufacturing
on flexible substrates. However, achieving high performance via a low-
temperature manufacture process and long-term solar cell stability is still
challenging for solar cells based on organometal halide perovskites. This
research project seeks to gain fundamental knowledge supporting the discovery of
new solar cell interface materials that will have greater stability towards
moisture and air while retaining high efficiency. The project is also providing
research opportunities for freshmen from the Clean Energy Alliances for Learning
and Vision for Underrepresented Americans (ALVA) program and leveraging the
research results for the outreach program of Introduce A Girl to Photonics Fair.
The fundamental knowledge gained from these materials will make significant
impacts on the fields of photovoltaics, optoelectronics and new semiconductor
materials.

The objective of this research project is to research new hole transport layer
(HTL) materials to improve the performance and stability of perovskite solar
cells by introducing internal dipoles and by manipulating the morphology of
perovskite films. The new HTL materials utilize poly (3,
4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) as a hole transport backbone while different
functional group side chains offer to form dipole that could modify the band
energy alignment. By modifying the band energy alignment of the HTL structure
and the morphology of the perovskite layers, it is hypothesized that an
improvement in charge transport and collection as well as device stability will
result. The PEDOT-based HTL materials are being synthesized and the electronic,
optical and structural properties of HTL thin films fabricated at low
temperatures are being investigated. The new PEDOT-based HTLs are being deployed
in planar p-i-n structure perovskite solar cells and the device performance and
stability are being tested. Organometal halide perovskites exhibit a broad range
of band gap enabling the possibility to make highly efficient single-junction
and tandem solar cells. This research project could transform photovoltaic
technology and make it possible to commercialize perovskite-based photovoltaic
technology with competitively low cost.