* 1748413
* Alan T. Waterman Award 2017
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Baratunde Cola, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) named Dr. Baratunde Cola, Associate
Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the Georgia Institute of Technology, as
the 2017 Alan T. Waterman Award recipient. This award is NSF's highest honor
that annually recognizes an outstanding researcher under the age of 35 and funds
his or her research in any field of science or engineering. Dr. Cola pioneered
contributions to the synthesis, characterization and understanding of
nanostructured thermal interface materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Cola is
one of the most creative, productive, and innovative young scientists of his
generation. He is recognized for interdisciplinary work spanning the fields of
mechanical and electrical engineering, chemistry, and materials science to
design new materials with novel thermal properties and functionality. An
internationally known and prolific scholar, Cola has developed a distinctive
research program that designs novel thermal interface materials, and enhances
these materials with unprecedented thermal characteristics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Cola is revolutionizing the subject of thermal
interfaces as he utilizes an array of novel methods to create materials
displaying unparalleled properties. Recently, Cola's research resulted in the
discovery of the first thermally conductive amorphous polymer; the first
practical thermo-electrochemical cells for producing electricity from wasted
heat using carbon nanotube electrodes; the first evidence of thermal energy
conduction by surface photon polaritons, and the first complete depiction of
thermal transport through carbon nanotube arrays to correspond with his seminal
experimental data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recognition of Dr. Cola's outstanding
research contributions, he has received several awards, including, the ASME
Bergles-Rohsenow Young Investigator Award (2015), Atlanta Business Chronicle's
40 under 40 (2015), National Academy of Sciences US Kavli Frontiers of Science
Fellow (2014), National Academy of Engineering U.S. Frontiers of Engineering
Education Symposium Fellow (2014, 2013), AAAS Early Career Award for Public
Engagement with Science (2013), Presidential Early Career Award for Scientists
and Engineers (2012), and NSF CAREER Award (2011). He holds 11 issued or pending
patents related to energy transfer and nanotechnology, and is the founder of
Carbice Nanotechnologies, of which he is CEO and
Chairman.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Cola has received funding as a PI from the
Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems
(PECASE/CAREER award 1055479), the Division of Engineering and Education Centers
(1407187), the Division of Industrial Innovation and Partnership (1561881,
1343265), and the Emerging Frontiers and Multidisciplinary Activities (1410572),
all in the Engineering Directorate.