* 1748571
* CAREER: The Role of Stellar Feedback in Star Formation
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Stella Offner, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 429,054.00

The investigator's group will write detailed computer-models of how stars are
born from gas in our galaxy. All stars are born in large clouds of gas in
galaxies, which condense to form stars and planets. The investigator will write
new computer models for the physics that determines the mass of new stars. She
will also study how neighboring young stars influence each other and their birth
environment by injecting energy into their surroundings. Evidence suggests our
Sun formed together with thousands of siblings, which may have shaped our Sun?s
properties. However, why stars like our Sun have the masses they do remains
debated. Her team will model how stars interact with their birth environment and
test different theories for the origin of star masses. The investigator will
produce synthetic observations of the models and compare these to telescope
observations of star-forming regions in our Milky Way galaxy. The educational
goal of the project is to increase participation and diversity in STEM. The
investigator will use the World Wide Telescope (WWT) educational software to
communicate recent exciting astronomy discoveries to the public. She will use
WWT to create interactive labs for several local underserved populations, will
also organize research training and organize an annual star formation
symposia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal aims to explore two fundamental
questions in star formation: How do stars obtain their masses? What sets the
star formation rate in molecular clouds? The PI will address these questions by
performing multi-physics numerical simulations of forming star clusters
including outflow, wind and radiation feedback. The three key science objectives
are to 1) constrain the importance of core masses in setting the stellar initial
mass function, 2) evaluate the influence of feedback on turbulence and star
formation efficiency, and 3) bridge simulations and observations using "apples-
to-apples" comparisons. The investigator will produce synthetic observations of
the models and compare directly to observations, harnessing thousands of hours
of current and planned large- scale surveys probing dense gas, proto-stellar
outflows with very fine resolution.