* 1748074
* Connecting Interdisciplinary STEM Education and Research in HBCUs
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2017,12/31/2018
* Ambrose Jearld, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 12/31/2018
* USD 58,560.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;Czujko and Nicholson, 2010 reported that of all (about 460)
universities that award bachelor?s degrees in geoscience, four universities
(Jackson State, Mississippi State, Pennsylvania and Savannah State) top all in
awarding bachelor?s degrees to African Americans and they are the only ones that
awarded more than 10 bachelor?s degrees to African Americans in geoscience over
the 5 years (2004-2008) combined. Together, the four universities accounted for
19% of all geoscience bachelor?s earned by African Americans and Jackson State
University is a top producer in both physics and geoscience. Over the last 5
years combined, about 300 universities with geoscience degree programs awarded
no bachelor?s degrees to African Americans and about another 95 awarded only one
geoscience bachelor?s to an African American.&lt;br/&gt;Not surprisingly, three
of the four top producers of African Americans earning geoscience bachelor?s
degrees are of Historically Black Colleges and University (HBCU) status (Czujko
and Nicholson, 2010) yet there are fewer than 10 degree-granting geoscience
departments at HBCUs. However, several HBCUs offer related geoscience programs
and degrees based on the classification of geoscience instructional programs
(Status of the Geoscience Workforce, 2016). Organizationally, HBCUs structure
does not include geoscience departments, schools, or program classifications
such as biogeosciences, ocean science, etc. Historically, most African Americans
who chose geoscience pathways at the graduate levels and who become practicing
geoscientists or counted as part of the workforce received their undergraduate
training at HBCUs. Recognizing that obstacles to the recruitment, training and
retention of underrepresented minorities (URMs) in geosciences exist at all
educational levels, concerted and sustained efforts are needed to increase
ethnic diversity in geoscience and related sciences, and to understand why so
few minority students choose to go into this discipline.&lt;br/&gt;A community
of stakeholders representing higher education including HBCUs, professional
societies including NTA, NOBCCHE (National Organization for the Advancement of
Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers), BEYA, to name a few, and organizations,
governmental and private entities will convene during a one-day workshop to lay
the foundation for a sustained effort to strengthen geoscience (and STEM)
education and research among HBCUs to catalyze these institution?s contribution
to broadening participation in the education and workforce
sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;The number of African Americans
receiving undergraduate and advanced degrees in Science, Technology, Engineering
and Mathematics (STEM) by all accounts is disproportionately low. According to
an American Institute of Physics report (Czujko and Nicholson, 2010), physics
and geoscience consistently rank near the bottom among all disciplines in their
ability to attract and retain African American students. In an effort to address
this pervasive issue, the National Technical Association (NTA) in collaboration
with Morgan State University proposes to host a day-long workshop during the NTA
89th Annual Meeting on September 20-22, 2017 in Baltimore, Maryland. This
workshop will provide a forum to convene geoscience and STEM stakeholders to
discuss the status of HBCU education, research and workforce in these
disciplines, facilitate collaborative efforts and establish a geoscience agenda
that contributes to broadening participation.&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the
2017 workshop are to:&lt;br/&gt;- Create a shared understanding among
participants of geosciences disciplines, education, research and workforce with
the context of STEM and non-STEM discipline.&lt;br/&gt;- Review the current
status of geosciences (and STEM) education and research within HBCUs and
simultaneously consider current gaps and potential opportunities from which an
action agenda can be established.&lt;br/&gt;- Draw on and leverage the expertise
of institutional and individual stakeholders engaged in related geoscience and
STEM activities and document lessons learned and best and emerging practices for
broadening participation.&lt;br/&gt;- Present/offer for consideration an
interdisciplinary approach as a framework for advancing geosciences and more
broadly STEM initiatives within HBCUs.&lt;br/&gt;- Explore prospects and
strategies for collaboration among various entities?academic institutions,
professional associations, federal agencies?to enhance the contribution of HBCUs
to the broadening participation and inclusive science agenda.