* 1748083
* Deterministic and probabilistic well-posedness results for nonlinear dispersive and wave equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Aynur Bulut, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 08/31/2018
* USD 44,582.00

The research supported in this proposal concerns the study of nonlinear
dispersive and wave equations. These arise as fundamental models of a wide
variety of physical systems, including the propagation of waves and the study of
nonlinear optics, and are closely related to models of fluids, as well as a
number of aspects of statistical and quantum mechanics. The development of
mathematical tools to understand important issues such as existence and
uniqueness of solutions, as well the behavior of the corresponding evolutions on
a qualitative and quantitative level, is therefore an issue of fundamental
scientific importance. As a particular example, several of the questions to be
investigated in this research involve studying long-time properties of solutions
to the nonlinear Schrodinger and nonlinear wave equations evolving from
"generic" randomly chosen initial data. In addition to being of substantial
mathematical interest, investigation into these questions addresses the broader
scientific issue of whether possible singularities arising in the mathematical
formulation can occur in physically relevant settings. Moreover, the topics to
be studied are closely connected to a wide range of issues in partial
differential equations, probability, and harmonic analysis, and the ideas and
techniques developed will provide important contributions to the availability of
mathematical tools for future research on related
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The particular scope of this research project is
to investigate several problems concerning local and global well-posedness
properties for nonlinear dispersive and wave equations, focusing on the
nonlinear Schrodinger, nonlinear wave, and Korteweg-de Vries equations. The
research encompasses four broad directions, which are often interrelated, and
which each contribute to the wider theme of understanding the precise dynamical
behavior of solutions both locally and globally in time. The first two
directions of interest concern global in time existence of solutions, in
particular focusing first on the development of global well-posedness results
adapted to the energy-supercritical setting, and second on important issues
surrounding probabilistic global well-posedness results in endpoint and limiting
situations (in this probabilistic framework, initial data for the problem is
chosen as a random Fourier series, and results are obtained by excluding sets
occurring with small probability). The third direction of interest turns to the
study of local in time stability properties of solutions, focusing in particular
on initial data of low-regularity. The fourth direction of study investigates
dispersive models with higher-order nonlocal terms, in which a key ingredient
will be the adaptation of recent developments in the study of nonlinear elliptic
and parabolic partial differential equations with similar nonlocal features. In
each of these settings, the PI and collaborators will incorporate techniques
from harmonic analysis, probability, and spectral theory to analyze the
dynamical features involved in the evolution.