* 1748737
* EAGER:  Implantable Medical Device and Body Area Networks: A System Resilience by Construction
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* James Aylor, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2021
* USD 199,322.00

The advances of low-power and highly integrated technology provide enormous
opportunities for the deployment of implantable medical devices (IMDs) and body
area networks (BANs). BANs and IMDs either provide critical clinical information
for medical decision-making or directly deliver medical treatment to maintain an
individual?s health status. However, failures of these devices, either caused by
device faults or malicious attacks, can have negative impact on the user?s
health or even cause the loss of life. The significant increase in device
complexity has created major challenges in ensuring reliability, safety, and
security of these devices. First, researchers from the different domains,
specifically engineering and medicine, have developed their respective
perspectives, concerns and definitions regarding patient safety, security, and
dependability. In fact, the concept of (patient) safety is often compromised by
inconsistent use of language. The lack of a consistent understanding of the
perspectives with respect to the healthcare and engineering disciplines could be
the cause of the rising number of recalls and adverse events of medical devices
in recent years, as recorded by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA). In
addition, the consideration of safety and security in the design of these
devices is often ignored or overlooked in the design phase due to the limited
time-to-market and lack of knowledge of the area of fault tolerant and
dependable system design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work proposes to consider a
new system-resilience design methodology which integrates the multidiscipline
perspectives and considers the many dimensions of complexity and design
constraints to design a system that continuously prevents, detects, mitigates,
or ameliorates hazards and incidents. The intellectual merit of this project is
in development of a generalized fault-tolerant model-based technique that
applies the principle of "resilience-by-construction" to design of the next
generation IMDs and BANs. The main goal is to develop a design methodology that
provides the automatic inclusion of safety monitors in any functional design
without the designer having to explicitly designate monitors during the design
process. To be specific, this design methodology/framework includes: (i) a
rigorous safety requirement development environment that enables the close and
effective collaboration between engineers, medical professionals, and regulators
to identify all the potential safety hazards and develop safety requirements
that guide product design; and (ii) a standardized architecture for more
resilient BANs and IMDs that enables the designers to concentrate on the
development of a functional device and not be concerned about the safety and
fault tolerance features. Once the functional architecture is complete, the
designer will be able to add standardized hardware and software safety
mechanisms based on the specific safety requirements of the device. Both model-
based and knowledge-based fault detection and diagnosis methods and the
combination of the two will be investigated for design of effective standardized
safety mechanisms.