* 1748757
* Examining an Innovative Approach to Supporting Science Teachers Practice towards Three-Dimensional Learning Goals through Adapting Classroom Assessment Tasks
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2020
* William Penuel, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 12/31/2020
* USD 299,837.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. This collaborative project will conduct early stage research on
promising advances in how we prepare science teachers to support three-
dimensional science learning as outlined in the Framework for Science Education
(National Research Council, 2012). In order to achieve the new goals for science
teaching and learning aimed for in current standards reforms, there is a need
for radically new models of professional development of science teachers. While
prior research has identified that 80-100 hours of professional development is
necessary for teachers to change their instructional vision and practice to
align with the Next Generation Science Standards, most states and districts who
are adopting the new standards do not have the resources to support teacher
preparation to this extent. This project aims to demonstrate the effectiveness
of a new approach to designing support tools and professional development
focused on adapting classroom assessments that achieves these shifts in
teachers' instructional vision and practice in less than 20 hours of
professional development. The team will also discern the contributions to
changes in teachers' instructional vision when teachers only use the support
tools versus using the tools in the context of the full professional development
model. Evidence of effectiveness of this high leverage approach to teacher
preparation focused on adapting classroom assessments is important in order to
develop scalable solutions to the significant science teacher professional
development need created by the recent adoption of the Next Generation Science
Standards by 28 states and numerous other districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will conduct a two-iteration comparative research study that explores
differences in outcomes between science teachers who use only the support tools
as resources to adapt classroom tasks versus those who use the tools as part of
a two-day professional development experience. The outcomes include changes in
teachers' instructional vision related to three-dimensional science learning as
measured by a teacher vision survey and teacher interviews, and improvements in
the quality of teachers' adapted assessment tasks as determined by a rubric-
based analysis and observations of the professional development sessions. Data
analysis will follow a conjecture-mapping strategy to compare changes over time
within and across groups in order to evaluate hypothesized links between design
features of the tools and professional development models, mediating processes,
and outcomes. Findings of this study will provide evidence to inform
instructional leaders and designs for science teacher preparation, and lead to
future development and research in this area.