* 1748752
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Tailored sorbents for the removal of emerging per- and polyfluorinated alkyl substances from water
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Kevin O'Shea, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2019
* USD 35,000.00

Fluorine-containing chemicals are contaminants of emerging concern because of
their toxicological properties, widespread presence in manufactured goods, and
incredible stability in the environment. These compounds are used in many
industrial processes and are found in a wide range of consumer products. This
project aims to use innocuous, chemical-sequestering compounds, called
cyclodextrins, for the remediation of legacy and emerging fluorine-containing
chemicals. This research project also seeks to gain a fundamental understanding
of how cyclodextrins sequester fluorine-containing chemicals in the environment
and then to develop a cyclodextrin-based treatment technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this research project is to
explore the combination of environmentally friendly beta-cyclodextrins for the
remediation of legacy and emerging per- and polyfluoro alkyl substances. While
the project researchers have demonstrated enhanced removal of perfluorinated
octanoic acids using cyclodextrin in combination with activated carbon, there is
a lack in the fundamental understanding about the cyclodextrin complexation of
per- and polyfluoro alkyl substances and how the cyclodextrin:per- and
polyfluoro alkyl substance complex properties may be exploited for contaminant
remediation. Guided by strong preliminary evidence the project researchers are
pursuing two specific objectives: 1) determining binding constants for and
detailed characterization of amino cyclodextrin:per- and polyfluoro alkyl
substance complexes, and 2) employing combinations of beta-cyclodextrins and
carbon-based materials for remediation of per- and polyfluoro alkyl substances.
The project is expected to provide information critical for the development of
sustainable strategies for per- and polyfluoro alkyl substances removal from
water. The research activities are promoting teaching, training and learning by
bringing together a research team composed of undergraduate students, graduate
students, and researchers from two institutions in different states. Results are
being broadly disseminated through peer-reviewed publications and presentations
at scientific meetings. Special presentations, seminars and web seminar series
are being organized to enhance public awareness on health risks of per- and
polyfluoro alkyl substances and on cost-effective methodologies to address this
serious environmental problem.