* 1748906
* EAGER: Selective Biodamage with Shaped THz Light Fields
* MPS,PHY
* 01/15/2018,08/31/2020
* Keith Nelson, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

To date, scientists have developed only a very small number of modalities to
treat human disease: pharmaceutics, irradiation (photon and particle radiation,
focused ultrasound), and surgery. Advances in each of these continues, as do
efforts aimed at reducing side effects. Aside from efficacy, specificity of
disease treatment is an important goal of medicine, for it offers a promise of
personalized therapy and disease cure. The present project, although itself not
directly connected to treating disease, informs a potential new treatment
modality that has intrinsic specificity and potentially minimal side effects.
The intellectual merit of the project lies in a new paradigm that focuses on
synthesizing new concepts for molecule specific interaction with nonionizing
electromagnetic radiation. The project combines scientific and technical
expertise from multiple disciplines, including theoretical and experimental
physics, biochemistry, nanotechnology and optical spectroscopy. Five graduate
students from three academic departments at two institutions will be engaged in
forefront integrated science research with a common goal of obtaining proof-of-
principle of the core concept which, if successful, will lead to substantial
follow-on research and ultimately form the basis of the development of a new era
of disease treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore a new
physics-based technique that could contribute to the treatment of various human
diseases, including infectious and noninfectious disease, Alzheimer's, etc., and
eventually even to treatment of cancer and aging. The technique employs
nonionizing, "structured" electromagnetic radiation for ultrafast, massively-
parallel and highly selective dissociation of target biostructures, such as
large organic molecules and various forms of nucleic acids (viral DNA or RNA
genomes as well as bacterial genomes) and proteins (mutant or prion, etc.), in
vivo. The structured radiation will be highly tailored in the time and frequency
domains, in the mid-infrared (IR) and far infrared / THz ranges and, to retain
selectivity, will be carefully tuned into the moderately-nonlinear intensity
domain. Modulation techniques will be used to overcome the field penetration
problem. This project represents the first step toward this goal. It is clearly
"high risk-high payoff", and necessarily interdisciplinary.