* 1748353
* I-Corps: Airborne Chemical Sensing Platform for Remote and Hazardous Environments
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Kevin Peng Chen, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 03/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will further
develop new digitized manufacturing schemes, new materials and structures to
construct compact laser photonic systems. It will open new innovation and
product opportunities. The technology has potentials to yield robust and ultra-
lightweight laser photonic systems with superior thermal management performance,
which can be digitally manufactured at much lower cost than conventional means.
The innovation in manufacturing digitization and utilization of new materials
and structures will allow rapid design modification and radical design
innovation in developing laser and photonic systems for wider deployments on
mobile drone platforms for a wide array of industrial, consumer, environmental,
and military applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will
evaluate several additive manufacturing process using both ceramic and metal
powder feedstocks to build laser systems. The technology exploits the
flexibility of the bottom-up manufacturing schemes to produce entire laser
photonic systems made of flexure, cellular structures with embedded cooling and
sensing functions. It will lead to drastic reduction on labor cost in manual
assembly and alignments. Through combined optical, mechanic, and thermal design
optimizations, we intend to completely digitize the manufacturing of laser
photonic systems with advantages in weight, size, thermal, mechanic performance,
manufacturing costs, which are unattainable by current commercial products.