* 1748883
* EDT: Montana Partnership for Enriching Mathematical Knowledge and Statistical Skills (MT PEAKS)
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Karlene Hoo, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2024
* USD 634,850.00

The MT PEAKS program will broaden the training of doctoral students in the
mathematical sciences so that they are equipped to pursue career paths beyond
the traditional academic tract and are able to recognize opportunities to apply
mathematics and statistics to solve problems in a variety of settings. The
project is a collaboration between the Department of Mathematical Sciences
(MathStat), the Montana multi-university Materials Science (MTSI)
interdisciplinary doctoral program and business, industry and government (BIG)
partners. MT PEAKS program activities consist of three main pillars:
interdisciplinary research project activities involving a BIG-inspired project
and MTSI lab rotations, an internship experience with a BIG partner, and
preparatory coursework and professional development activities. MT PEAKS
students will apply their mathematical and statistical skills in the context of
a year-long research project developed through collaboration with an advisory
team of MathStat and MTSI faculty and a BIG partner. They will also participate
in summer internships with BIG partners. The program will produce a broadly
prepared workforce of PhD mathematicians and statisticians ready to apply their
technical skills and multidisciplinary exposure to help address a myriad of
regional, national and global challenges outside the traditional academic
environment. This project is co-funded by the NSF Research Traineeship (NRT)
Program, which is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in
high priority interdisciplinary research areas through comprehensive traineeship
models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce
and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coordination of the lab rotations, the
interdisciplinary research project, and the BIG internship is a hallmark of the
MT PEAKS program. Lab rotations will expose MT PEAKS participants to a variety
of sophisticated large and bench scale instrumentation, experimental protocols,
lab safety practices, and team dynamics. MT PEAKS students will be trained by
MTSI doctoral student mentors on the use of lab equipment needed for
experimentation and data collection related to their lab projects. MTSI mentors
will be chosen so that their research focus complements the MT PEAKS
participant's lab project. The interdisciplinary research project will include a
component that involves the collection and analysis of experimental data and
technical information from a core group of MathStat and MTSI faculty and a BIG
partner. BIG partners will provide students with internship experiences that
foster growth in communication and teamwork skills, as well as an increase in
students' recognition of the ubiquitous nature of mathematics and statistics in
the modern technical workplace. Students will also participate in professional
development workshops to enhance networking and other professional skill sets.
Results of graduate training aspects of MT PEAKS will be disseminated through
online media and educational journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.