* 1748200
* EAGER: A Standard Enabled Workflow for Synthetic Biology
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Chris Myers, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2020
* USD 181,758.00

A synthetic biology workflow is composed of data repositories that provide
information about genetic parts, sequence-level design tools to compose these
parts into circuits, and system-level design tools to construct and analyze
models of complete designs. Data standards enable the ready exchange of
information within such a workflow. They allow repositories and tools to be
connected from a diversity of sources. This workflow will leverage several data
standards developed for systems and synthetic biology. This workflow will have a
broader impact on several diverse communities of synthetic biology users. This
project also will work with journals, especially ACS Synthetic Biology, to
integrate this workflow into their data archival process, and it will provide
training videos for authors to minimize the impact on them. Ultimately, this
workflow should play a significant role in enabling synthetic biology to become
a truly reproducible scientific endeavor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This standard
enabled workflow will leverage a variety of data standards. These standards
include the Synthetic Biology Open Language (SBOL), which can be utilized to
describe and visualize genetic designs, the Systems Biology Markup Language
(SBML), which can be used to create computational models, the Simulation
Experiment Description Markup Language (SED-ML), which can describe simulation
experiments, and the COMBINE Archive, which can combine these files into a
single exchangeable document. Using these standards, a synthetic biology
workflow will be constructed that includes multiple repositories, such as the
Newcastle SynBioHub and the JBEI ICE Repository, and multiple software tools
such as Benchling, SBOLDesigner, iBioSim, and Cello, among others. The
intellectual merit of this project includes the following
activities:&lt;br/&gt;--Integration and refinement of genetic part datasets from
a variety of libraries, including, among others, the iGEM registry, MIT Cello
transcriptional circuit library, and the Newcastle BacillOndex part library.
&lt;br/&gt;--Improve SynBioHub's connections with remote repositories, such as
Benchling, JBEI ICE, and SBOLme, as further sources for genetic design
information.&lt;br/&gt;--Connection of software to form a synthetic biology
workflow, including, among others, SBOLDesigner, iBioSim, and
SynBioHub.&lt;br/&gt;--Application and validation of this workflow using as a
driving example the genetic circuit design and computational modeling of
communication circuits for multicellular spatiotemporal patterning.