* 1748537
* CAREER: A Path Integral Methodology for Accurate and Computationally Efficient Stochastic Analysis of Diverse Dynamical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Ioannis Kougioumtzoglou, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 570,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project will support
research that will contribute new knowledge for analyzing behavior of complex
engineering systems that have random behavior and, in doing so, will promote
both the progress of science and advance national prosperity. To analyze and
eventually design structural systems requires potent mathematical tools to
account for complex response behaviors as well as for the presence of
uncertainties in the modeling process. The current state-of-the-art analysis
techniques exhibit either high accuracy or computational efficiency but not
both. This is inadequate for proper system analysis, design and optimization.
The unique feature of the approach, that exhibits both considerable accuracy and
computational efficiency, will push the current capabilities of stochastic
analysis to unprecedented levels. This will lead to a paradigm shift in the
optimization and design of higher quality diverse engineering systems ranging
from nano-mechanical oscillators, to vibratory energy harvesters and civil
infrastructure systems at reduced cost. The results from this research will
benefit the U.S. economy and society in general. The diverse education and
outreach plan will also impact the advancement of next-generation researchers
and practicing engineers, as well as students and educators via the teaching and
learning innovations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Available techniques for solving the
governing equations and determining the stochastic response of dynamical systems
can be broadly divided into two categories: a) those that exhibit high accuracy,
but can handle a very small number of stochastic dimensions due to prohibitive
computational cost, and b) those that can readily treat high-dimensional
systems, but provide reliable estimates for low-order response statistics only
(e.g. mean and standard deviation). In comparison to the current state-of-the-
art techniques, the path integral methodology will exhibit superior accuracy and
computational efficiency. To achieve high accuracy the research approach is to
account for higher order terms (fluctuations) in related path integral
expansions. At the same time the error of the methodology will be quantified. To
achieve high computational efficiency and account for a large number of
stochastic dimensions (&gt;100), the research approach is to explore highly
sparse representations for the system response in conjunction with appropriate
optimization algorithms. The methodology will also be versatile, accounting for
cases of complex stochastic excitation and system modeling including fractional
derivatives, and non-Gaussian, nonlinear, and hysteretic response
behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.