* 1748275
* Collaborative Research: Ecological Knowledge and Predictions: Integrating Across Networks and National Observatories
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Jason McLachlan, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 09/30/2019
* USD 41,443.00

Ecology, the science of the relations of organisms to one another and to their
physical surroundings, and its relevance to society are in a period of rapid
change. As a society, we are becoming increasingly globalized, while at the same
time facing a growing number of environmental challenges, many of which are
international in scope and extent. At the same time, our ability to measure and
monitor the world around us has changed dramatically, both through technology
development, such as remote sensing, automated instrumentation and high-
throughput DNA sequencing, and through the establishment of both top-down
observatories and bottom-up research networks. Data is more open and
interconnected and these changes are fundamentally shifting the questions we can
address in ecological science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The time is ripe to shift
from conception to actively building international research collaborations that
span international boundaries, ecological scale and observation systems. A
workshop will be held in Arizona during February to bring together world leaders
from the US, Canada, Australia, Mexico and South Africa in large scale
ecological science. The workshop will investigate three major themes: 1) From
data networks to knowledge networks, 2) ecological forecasting, and 3) training,
education and outreach.