* 1748439
* RUI: Fate and Impact of CuPro 5000 and Kocide 3000: A Microcosm Based Study
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2022
* Brandon Mitchell, West Chester University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 04/30/2022
* USD 372,276.00

Data on the fate and transport of nanomaterials are necessary for the successful
development of environmental risk management strategies and policies. Otherwise,
precautionary principles of risk management may limit the ability of society to
exploit the potential benefits of engineered nanomaterials. The goal of project
is to confirm whether the commercial copper nanoparticle-containing microbicide
products used by vegetable and fruit growers influence the diversity and
fertility of the soil microbial communities over short and long term. The
principal investigator anticipates that successful completion of this research
will not only impact the sub-discipline known as nano-ecotoxicology, but also
add to the pool of knowledge in the areas of environmental science, molecular
biology, agricultural science, and microbiology. Direct intellectual merit
includes providing scientific answers to the basic question concerning the
environmental fate and impact of commercial products containing nanoparticles.
This research will further scientific understanding of how soil properties
affect the fate and impact of nanoparticles. The research will also have a huge
impact on the educational training provided to undergraduate students not only
at West Chester University, but also throughout the country. In collaboration
with Illumina Inc. and Southern University of New Orleans, the principal
investigator plans to develop an open-source seven laboratory teaching module to
allow institutions around the world to incorporate state-of-the art hands-on
teaching in the area of molecular biology. In addition, four undergraduate
students who are interested in learning environmental biology will be trained.
The research would also involve training six high school students by involving
them in minor research activities. Taking science to the broader audience is an
important component of the proposal and the principal investigator plans to give
public seminars titled "Environmental Conservation: By Us, For
Us"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two copper nanoparticle base microbicides - CuPRO 5000
and Kocide 3000, will be studied in the proposed research project. The overall
goal of the research is to understand the transformation of nanoparticles over
time in soil and elucidate whether transformation has any impact on the
microbial community. Methodology includes obtaining five different agricultural
soil types and setting up a total of 464 microcosms. Experimental sets with
periodic dosage of nanoparticles will be maintained in an environmental chamber
and sampled at regular intervals over a 30-month incubation period. Positive and
negative controls will also be set up. Microbial community changes will be
monitored using Next Gen Sequencing. Nanoparticle transformation will be
followed using X-ray Absorption Fine Structure Spectroscopy and inductively
coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy. Changes in soil properties will be
followed using standard protocols. By analyzing the data and integrating the
results, the PI will test the following three hypotheses. Hypothesis 1:
Irrespective of soil properties and product type, a certain fraction of Cu
nanoparticles will be retained on the soil surface even after 2 ? years of
incubation, while transformation products and any ionic form of Cu present in
the products will leach out of the soil. Hypothesis 2: While certain sensitive
microbes will show changes with a single dose, the community as a whole will
resist changes until a critical dose is reached. Beyond the critical dose, the
community will collapse and show large changes. Also, the bacterial communities
will be more susceptible then the fungal or archaea communities. Hypothesis 3:
When exposed to nanoparticles, sensitive populations of bacteria will perish.
Other microorganisms will fill the vacant niche, making it harder for sensitive
populations to rebound. The proposed research will provide scientific answers to
the basic question on the environmental fate and impact of commercial products
containing nanoparticles under different soil properties and conditions. This
research will also further scientific understanding of how soil properties
affect the fate and impact of nanoparticles. In addition, evaluation of the data
on how the microbial community responds to nanoparticles will provide valuable
information on how the microbial community structure function relationship
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.