* 1748687
* PREEVENTS Track 1: Tornado Hazard Wind Assessment and Reduction Symposium
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Franklin Lombardo, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2023
* USD 47,699.00

Windstorms, on an annual basis, typically cause the most insured losses of any
natural hazard. A subset of windstorms, tornadoes, cause a significant amount of
these losses. Although high-resolution research radars have given great insight
into tornado structure and intensity, they are almost exclusively limited to
sampling at tens of meters above the surface and higher. It follows then that
the near-surface (i.e., lower than 10 m) wind fields of tornadoes are poorly
sampled. The wind field in the near-surface has been shown to be the most
complex, variable and intense in some cases. The wind field at these levels
overwhelmingly contributes to the damage and losses to the built infrastructure.
To fill-in current understanding of the fundamental processes underlying
tornadoes on various spatiotemporal scales and the variability inherent in these
events, more comprehensive information on the near-surface tornado hazard is
needed. To supplement radar, the built (e.g., structures) and natural (e.g.,
trees) environment are examples of indicators that can improve characterization
of near-surface tornadic winds. This requires bringing expertise from multiple
disciplines including severe storm meteorology, wind engineering and structural
engineering. A two-day symposium will be held at the University of Illinois in
spring or summer of 2018 to foster the needed collaboration between experts in
these relevant disciplines. Research collaboration between severe storm
meteorologists, wind engineers and structural engineers will create a truly
comprehensive view of the problem with tornadoes and could lead to a new
research area. Students and early-career researchers will have the opportunity
to present their work and to build the foundation for long-lasting relationships
with researchers in the other relevant disciplines. From a societal standpoint,
material presented at the symposium can eventually aid forecasters to alert the
public to the potential consequences (e.g., damage) and will set the stage for a
reduction of losses incurred by the public through warnings and mitigation
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This symposium will focus discussions toward
enhancing understanding of the fundamental processes underlying tornadoes on
various spatial and temporal scales, as well as the variability inherent in
these events through radar, in-situ and damage measurements to the built and
natural environment. Feedback mechanisms of tornado genesis and subsequent
intensity to the built environment will also be explored through these
measurements and subsequent simulation and modeling studies. Better assessment
of damage can lead to more accurate estimation of cascading effects such as
disruption of power and downtime caused by these types of losses. Discussion of
the above goals contributes directly to the enhancement of societal preparedness
and resilience. Therefore, discussions will include mitigation and recovery of
infrastructure and communities through better understanding of damage patterns
and subsequent consequences in tornadoes. Information on tornado genesis and the
dynamics of tornadoes to be discussed will help forecasters alert the public to
these potential consequences.