* 1748294
* RAISE: The Reconfigurable Optical Computer (ROC)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Tarek El-Ghazawi, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2022
* USD 899,981.00

The era of observing processor speed and number of transistors doubling every
18-24 months, as noted in the so-called Moore's law is believed to be over, due
to the associated increase in power consumption and technology physical
limitations. Computers and their applications, however, have been the backbone
of modern life and will continue to be so at even a higher rate. The demands for
increased computing capabilities will continue to be on the rise due to the
increase in data volumes that need to be processed. Further, the increase in
demand for higher accuracy will also continue in order to support the rising
needs for scientific discoveries and engineering breakthroughs, and the demand
for smaller and more energy efficient computing devices is also rapidly growing
as we move towards smarter cities and a smarter world. It is therefore
imperative to search for game changing computing devices that are orders of
magnitude faster, smaller and more energy efficient as opposed to the current
digital computer technology that seem to be approaching daunting physical
limitations. This proposal introduces a transformative computing device based on
analog computing, reconfigurable computing architectures, nanophotonics, and the
advances in material science. This new computing device, which is referred to as
the reconfigurable optical computer (ROC), aims to achieve a leap forward in
processing technology in addition to opening the doors for continued future
developments.&lt;br/&gt;This reconfigurable optical processor (ROC) that is
capable of performing computations out of first principle by solving those
partial differential equations (PDEs) that are used for most simulations in
science and engineering in one shot, rather than iteratively as in digital
computers. Such PDEs can be realized and directly solved using a network of
electric components. Those electric circuit components will be implemented using
programmable nanophotonic devices, referred to as the reconfigurable optical
elements (ROEs). ROEs can change their optical characteristics under electrical
bias to represent different components suitable for solving different problems.
ROEs are novel voltage programmable photonic components utilizing electro-optic
effects (i.e. modulation) and optical absorption (i.e. photodetection) to mimic
electrical circuit elements. The approach includes a risk-tired strategy for ROE
design (low-to-high). Supporting programming/reconfiguration memory cells and
enabling electronic devices will be explored to form an integrated
reconfigurable architecture, the Reconfigurable Optical Computer (ROC). An
appropriate software stack including programming and execution modules for such
new paradigm will be also investigated to provide a productive platform for
domain users. If successful, the ROC system can potentially achieve orders of
magnitude improvements in speed, energy consumption and footprint as compared to
the modern state-of-the-art processors and potentially simplify software,
providing substantial impacts on many domains from the electronic industry to
smart life.