* 1748137
* Partnerships for Polar Science Education and Outreach in Greenland (JSEP) and Antarctica (JASE)
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2024
* Ross Virginia, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2024
* USD 994,119.00

Earth's polar regions are undergoing rapid changes that have relevance to the
entire world. Scientists are working to understand the causes and consequences
of this change and have a critical role in communicating their findings with
diverse stakeholders. The pace of polar change demands continuous investment in
training and educating the next generation of polar professionals who are
prepared to be leaders in academia, government, industry, and policy. The Joint
Science Education Project (JSEP) and the Joint Antarctic School Expedition
(JASE) are two NSF-sponsored polar-focused programs that provide significant
opportunities for training the next generation of STEM professionals and for
polar-science outreach. JSEP, a project of the Joint Committee, was initiated in
2007 to educate students and teachers from Greenland, Denmark, and the U.S. The
program brings US students together with Danish and Greenlandic students in
Greenland where the group spends three weeks studying the causes and
consequences of Arctic environmental change. JASE, a project in collaboration
with the Chilean Antarctic Institute (INACH), takes U.S. students to Antarctica
to work alongside Chilean students and examine Antarctica's rapidly changing
ecosystems. This award provides funding for Dartmouth College to lead the U.S.
contributions to JSEP and JASE for the next four years. Dartmouth will organize
a nation-wide application process to select high school student participants
each year and will work with the international program coordinators to design
student activities and learning experiences. In addition to coordinating each
field-based program for U.S. high school students, Dartmouth will work to
broaden the impact of these programs by sending a team of graduate student and
faculty researchers with polar field experience to lead scientific components of
JSEP and JASE, work with Greenlandic and Chilean educators to disseminate JSEP
and JASE polar science outcomes to local audiences during the field-based
expeditions, adapt JSEP and JASE polar science field activities for use in U.S.
and international classrooms, provide training in cross-cultural science
communication for diverse audiences to Dartmouth graduate students and the
campus community, and assess skill- and content-based outcomes for high school
and graduate student participants in JSEP and JASE. Societal benefits include
building international networks of students, educators, stakeholders, future
leaders, and polar scientists; diversifying the US polar scientific workforce,
and generating polar science educational tools and modules that are freely
accessible to students and teachers in multiple languages. This program
addresses national priorities by developing a U.S. scientific workforce that is
knowledgeable about the Arctic and the Antarctic, regions that are of growing
importance to U.S. economic development and national
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Joint Committee, a high-level government
forum between the U.S., Greenlandic, and Danish governments, initiated JSEP
during the International Polar Year in 2007. Since its inception, high school
students and teachers from Greenland, Denmark, and the U.S. have traveled to
Greenland to participate in two JSEP educational programs, Kangerlussuaq Science
Field School and Science and Education Week. In 2013, the Chilean Antarctic
Institute (INACH), invited the United States to participate in their Expedición
Antártica Escolar (EAE), a program to promote awareness and appreciation of
Antarctica in young Chileans. Since then, U.S. teams have joined three JASE
expeditions, which provide hands-on experience with Antarctic research to high
school students and teachers from both nations. Both JSEP and JASE aim to 1)
educate and inspire the next generation of polar scientists, 2) build strong
networks of students, teachers and researchers among the participating
countries, and 3) improve language and communication skills by taking teams of
students to the polar regions to share in polar science activities. The program
will strengthen international scientific ties between the U.S., Denmark and
Greenland and improve the understanding of polar science for students and
citizens of all three countries. Dartmouth will conduct assessments of outcomes
for the current high school students and graduate student polar fellows as well
as surveys of alumni from previous U.S., Danish, Greenlandic, and Chilean
participants. The JSEP program will provide U.S. high school students and high
school teachers with an immersion experience in polar science and international
collaboration. It will also provide graduate students with experience and
training in teaching, cross-cultural communications and
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.