* 1748494
* EAGER:   Bio-inspired Low Probability of Detection Secure RF Waveform Design
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Zhiqiang Wu, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2022
* USD 125,000.00

The goal of this project is to conduct research and development of a novel
secure communication waveform design technique in which not only the data of the
communication is secure but the very existence of the communication itself is
hidden. By exploiting a bio-inspired approach, a novel radio frequency waveform
will be designed to serve multiple purposes and contain multiple layers of
messages simultaneously. The developed radio frequency waveform exhibits no
feature that can be exploited by the adversary to detect its existence through
time domain analysis, frequency domain analysis, or cyclostationary
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project takes advantage of recent progress
in the radar and communication communities and brings them together
synergistically to develop an unprecedented low probability of detection, secure
radio frequency waveform design. Existing low probability of detection waveforms
do not provide a true low probability of detection and security capability when
new advanced detection schemes such as cyclostationary analysis are brought to
bear. This project employs a novel bio-inspired RF steganography scheme to
obscure the communication signal within a radar signal. This newly designed
signal remains an effective radar signal providing normal radar capabilities
such as range measurement to its operators; but it also carries secure digital
communication intended for designated receivers. Instead of limiting the
transmission power of the signal in hopes of avoiding detection by the
adversary, the newly designed waveform is broadcast at maximum power. However
the adversary does not detect the existence of digital modulation embedded in
the hybrid signal because it does not exhibit any feature when subjected to time
domain analysis, frequency domain analysis, or cyclostationary analysis. This
project is transformative because it provides a brand new way to design low
probability of detection and secure communication and radio frequency systems,
and it also paves the way to future development of a universal cognitive radio
frequency platform where all radio frequency systems such as communication,
radar, and navigation are designed jointly to optimize their performance and
spectrum efficiency.