* 1748533
* HSI Conference: Understanding and Improving Readiness and Student Transitions
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* W Frankino, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) Dear Colleague Letter NSF 17-092:
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education in Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs)
calls for projects to support conferences that will identify the most critical
challenges and opportunities regarding undergraduate science, technology
engineering and mathematics (STEM) education at HSIs, and potential actionable
solutions that fall within NSF's mission, policies, and practices. The
University of Houston will host a two-day conference where the most salient
challenges and opportunities will be addressed with a special focus on three
important transition points for Hispanic STEM students: the transition from high
school to post-secondary education; the transition from community college to
university; and the transition from college to the workforce or to
graduate/professional school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An organizing committee is
charged with bringing energy and attention to the three critical aspects of
student development that form the conference themes. The conference will not
only make clear what research is currently available, but will also highlight
areas critical for further investigation. The conference will include sixty
participants for the main agenda, as well as twenty-five presidents and chief
academic officers for the "HSI Presidents' Convening". The meeting will be
organized and conducted with the goals to: 1) synthesize a well-informed and
detailed understanding of the most important challenges facing HSIs now and in
the decade, with special attention to college readiness, university readiness,
and workforce or graduate/professional school readiness; 2) identify key
strategies, initiatives, and programs that are likely to address these
challenges and opportunities effectively; and 3) return conferees to their
campuses with a strong sense of what is working well on HSI campuses now. The
conference will frame an important set of student-transition issues for further
discussion and will explore and disseminate practices, programs, and strategies
that have been demonstrated empirically to be efficacious.