* 1748863
* Science of Broadening Participation: Promoting the Recruitment of Girls into Science, Technology, and Engineering
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Amy Bix, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 259,006.00

This award supports a research project that studies how improvements since 1965
in scientific and technical education for a broader range of young people has
grown into what is currently a national priority. The study will explain in
detail how, when, and why this commitment to diversity developed, permanently
reshaping our modern cultures of science, engineering, education, and child-
rearing. Major outcomes include an academic book, Recruiting Engineer Jane and
Astrophysicist Amy: American STEM Advocacy for Girls, 1965-Present, plus
scholarly papers, public presentations, a textbook, and museum exhibit. Analysis
is primarily grounded in history, but draws on and informs our understanding of
present-day outreach in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM).

Although the project being supported focuses on the evolution of campaigns for
girls, the account to be developed will provide insights into parallel efforts
to promote access for other under-represented groups, adding historical
dimension to ongoing discussions of diversity in STEM. The researcher conducting
the study has extended research experience in the history of science and
technology, science-policy studies, and the broad context of modern U.S.
history. Her study draws on a wide range of reports, letters, administrative
records, and other documentation from individual actors and organizations, such
as the National Science Foundation, National Academy of Engineering, American
Association of University Women, and Girl Scouts. Beyond assessing this wealth
of data, this initiative explores new territory by conducting central case-
studies and several dozen unique oral-history interviews with key figures in the
movement to open STEM to girls. The researcher will conduct oral-history
interviews and archival research across multiple libraries and archives. She
will deliver talks to both academic and general audiences, mount a museum
exhibit on STEAM (the A denotes the Arts) and diversity, and develop K-12
curriculum packets and exhibit-visitor materials.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.