* 1748345
* The NSF INCLUDES Open Forum: A Platform for Collective Impact and Knowledge to Advance Broadening Participation in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Shirley Malcom, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Tori Rhoulac Smith
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,302,331.00

The American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) is creating,
implementing and evaluating a forum for the NSF INCLUDES broadening
participation community of practice and for engaging the NSF INCLUDES awardees
and science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) researchers across
the nation to expand the NSF INCLUDES broadening participation network. The NSF
INCLUDES program is a comprehensive national initiative designed to enhance U.S.
leadership in STEM discoveries and innovations focused on NSF's commitment to
diversity, inclusion, and broadening participation in these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF INCLUDES Open Forum will use the AAAS
Trellis networking platform and the organization's experience engaging
communities of practice focused on broadening participation, STEM education and
STEM research. The project builds on the success of a prior NSF INCLUDES
Conference award (HRD-1650509) that was addressing goals to define networking
needs of the first round of NSF INCLUDES Design and Development Launch Pilots
(DDLP); to develop design specifications for NSF INCLUDES networking, curating
of resources, and supporting communities of practice; and to propose tools,
techniques, capacities and functionalities for an NSF INCLUDES national network.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF INCLUDES Open Forum project includes advisory
board members with expertise in networking platforms and others with broadening
participation knowledge and experience. A yearly conference for NSF INCLUDES
awardees will offer participants an opportunity to learn about how Trellis
platform upgrades, functionality and technology options (e.g., a smartphone
application) can be used in new ways to engage a broader community of partners
interested in broadening participation in STEM research and education contexts.
An external evaluator will assess the activities and outcomes of the NSF
INCLUDES Open Forum both during implementation and at project end. The PIs will
also communicate the outcomes of the project to broader audiences, both academic
and non-academic, and encourage a dialogue within the NSF INCLUDES community
about the use of technology for organization and communication within a network.