* 1748610
* OPUS: The Role of the Environment in Shaping Plant Diversity from Global to Local Scales
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Susan Harrison, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 05/31/2023
* USD 185,838.00

Climate is the strongest influence on biological diversity in space and time.
However, there are multiple aspect to climate (e.g., rainfall, temperature,
seasonality) and how they interact to determine the number of different species
living in a region is not well understood. The main objective of this research
project is to achieve a better understanding of how and why climate interacts
with other influences to shape the species diversity of natural plant
communities. This information is important to improving our capacity to forecast
how plant diversity is likely to change in the future. The researcher will
review and synthesize 20 years of experimental and observational work on plant
diversity in the California Floristic Province, to provide an overarching
understanding of the mechanisms that shape biodiversity, from local to global
scales. The project will also make useful data sets publicly available and will
support efforts to educate land managers and the public about plant diversity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this synthesis will be to better understand
how climate shapes patterns of plant diversity at multiple levels (species,
functional, phylogenetic) and spatial scales (local to biome), alone or in
interaction with other factors (soils, fire, herbivores, invasions). Topics to
be explored include why Mediterranean climates host high plant diversity, how
plant diversity will change under future climate, and whether plant functional
traits can be used to test the tolerance hypothesis for climate-diversity
relationships. Products of this synthesis will include several review papers on
underexplored aspects of the climate-diversity relationships, data publications
presenting three multisite and multiyear plant community and environmental data
sets, and a monograph on plant diversity for the Princeton
series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.