* 1748222
* Student Support:  PowderMET Conference on Powder Metallurgy; San Antonio, Texas; June 17-20, 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2018
* Wojciech Misiolek, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 10/31/2018
* USD 43,560.00

This award supports 40 graduate and undergraduate students studying at US
institutions to participate in the 2018 PowderMET sponsored by the Metal Powder
Industries Federation. This premier powder metallurgy conference acts as a
bridges between industries, government laboratories, and academic institutions.
The award provides student participants with opportunities to exchange ideas
with leading researchers and engineers from worldwide industrial and
governmental facilities, as well as with students and faculty from both domestic
and international schools. In addition to nurturing a powder metallurgy
community, participants will learn the latest research areas and results in
powder metallurgy.

This project provides the student participants with opportunities to exchange
ideas with leading researchers and engineers from worldwide industrial and
governmental facilities, as well as with students and faculty from both domestic
and international universities. In addition to nurturing a global powder
metallurgy (traditional press & sinter, metal injection molding, isostatic
pressing, and metal additive manufacturing) vision, participants will learn the
latest research areas and results in the fields of interest. These opportunities
will not only improve the participants' knowledge in the field but also develop
scientists and engineers who are ideally suited to craft the next generation of
designs in powder metallurgy that will push the nation's manufacturing
capabilities.