* 1748865
* The role of protein phosphatase-1 inhibitor-2 in synaptic scaling
* BIO,IOS
* 10/25/2016,08/31/2018
* Houhui Xia, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 08/31/2018
* USD 271,812.00

Brain neurons can sense the activity level of neuron networks. If the activity
levels are too low or too high, the neurons can adjust the communication level
between the neurons. The way that this is accomplished is not completely
understood. In previous work, the researcher found one interesting way that
involves a protein called protein phosphatase-1 (PP1) that is regulated by
another protein called inhibitor-2 (I-2). In this project, the researcher will
investigate the role of these two proteins in regulating neuron communications.
This work will lay the foundation for future studies in animals to understand
how the brain adapts to visual experience or deprivation. Adaptation to
environmental light is important for daily life, so these studies will have
broad impact on understanding vision in other animals, including humans. The
project will provide opportunities for a postdoctoral fellow, undergraduate, and
high school students, including underrepresented minorities and women, to be
trained in research in this EPSCoR state. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Studies will
focus on the function of an abundant enzyme, protein phosphatase-1 (PP1), and
its regulator, inhibitor-2 (I-2), in bi-directional synaptic scaling. The study
will also determine how I-2 regulates PP1 function in the dephosphorylation of
serine 295 (Ser295) on postsynaptic density protein 95 kilo Dalton (PSD95), a
molecule critical for synapse architecture and neuronal communication. The
impact of I-2 regulation by myosin light chain kinases (MLCK) via I-2
phosphorylation at serine 43 (Ser43) will be determined in the context of both
PP1 function on PSD95 dephosphorylation at Ser295 and synaptic scaling. Using
primary rat cortical neurons as a model system, the PI will apply bicuculline to
enhance neuronal activity or tetrodotoxin (TTX) to decrease neuronal activity.
I-2 will be knocked-down (KD) by expression of I-2 short hairpin RNA fragment
RNA (ShRNA), and its effect on PSD95 phosphorylation at Ser295 will be examined
by western blotting. The effect of I-2 KD on synaptic transmission will be
examined by electrophysiological recording. The identity of the MLCK isoform
responsible for I-2 phosphorylation at Ser43 will be determined by examining the
effect of ShRNAs of various MLCK isoforms on I-2pS43 by western blotting. MLCK
isoform effects on bi-directional synaptic scaling will be determined using
electrophysiological recordings of neurons expressing the corresponding ShRNA.