* 1748827
* SBP: Creating change in education systems: Can leadership-level inclusion training reduce achievement gaps?
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Stephanie Fryberg, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 01/31/2020
* USD 584,052.00

The U.S. is more racially and ethnically diverse than at any other time in the
nation's history. Yet achievement gaps continue to separate racial minority and
lower-income students from White and higher-income students. Research designed
to reduce these achievement gaps largely focuses on student characteristics,
such as motivation, belonging, and performance. The resulting interventions
often aim to change the way students engage with the school context. However,
eliminating achievement gaps may require more than changing individual students.
It may require changing the prevailing social norms and beliefs that undermine
racial minority and low-income students' success. This project examines how
school leaders might be trained to build culturally inclusive and sustainable
learning environments. The goal is to shape the beliefs that schools and
teachers hold about diverse students and the practices they use to engage
students from different racial and social class backgrounds. These culturally
inclusive changes in the learning environment are expected to improve racial
minority and low-income students' academic outcomes by fostering a sense of
belonging and positive beliefs about learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
uses a district-wide intervention to create cultural change within schools. The
intervention focuses on teaching educational leaders to understand and validate
multiple cultural ways of being in their schools and classrooms, such that all
students feel that they belong and are capable of succeeding in school.
Educational leaders will learn to change their school cultures by attending
week-long workshops that provide theoretical and practical information about
engaging cultural differences in educational contexts. The workshop curriculum
has been piloted with educators and works to bridge the gap between empirical
research and real-world classroom experiences. The curriculum reflects research-
based understandings of how culture influences cognitive development,
motivation, and emotional expression. It also offers concrete strategies for
applying empirical knowledge in educational settings. The research examines how
this intervention shapes a) the policies district and school leadership enact;
b) the classroom cultures teachers create and the practices they use with
diverse students; and c) students' psychological and academic outcomes,
particularly among racial minority and low-income students. Teaching
institutional leaders to understand and validate diverse cultural backgrounds is
expected to improve minority and low-income students' educational experiences
and reduce racial and social class achievement gaps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.