* 1748493
* Workshop on Future Directions for Algorithms in Biology
* CSE,CCF
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2019
* Carleton Kingsford, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 10/31/2019
* USD 98,936.00

Computation has become essential to progress in biology, and an important and
difficult research goal is to develop efficient, correct, and useful algorithms
to analyze biological data and answer biological questions. This workshop will
bring together the community of computational biologists who are interested in
algorithmic questions to explore future directions and open problems in applying
algorithms to problems in biology. The workshop will host distinguished
scientists, students, and junior faculty to discuss emerging research areas,
open problems, and grand challenges in algorithmic biology. This will solidify
the algorithmic underpinnings of the field of computational biology, jumpstart
new collaborations, and help set directions for the field for many years. It
will ensure that the most important problems are tackled by the field, and that
those who are interested in working on algorithms for those problems are aware
of them. The activity will result in publically available video lectures and a
published synthesis of the discussion and results of the workshop. It will
advance the education of students interested in biology, computational biology,
and algorithms by providing a venue for identifying important research questions
and providing educational resources such as video lectures. A diverse group of
speakers and researchers will participate, broadening the viewpoints represented
in the field of algorithmic computational biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
workshop will explore algorithmic questions in areas such as genomics,
metagenomics, population genetics, systems biology, biological image analysis,
phylogenetics, evolution, RNA and protein structure, proteomics, transcription
and translation, experiment design, bioinformatics, and biological data
management. The focus of the workshop will be on identifying, publicizing, and
formalizing algorithmic open questions and better understanding how algorithmic
approaches and thinking can aid biological investigations. The computational
focus will be on algorithms and techniques with provable properties (e.g.
runtime, correctness, approximation ratio), rather than heuristics. The workshop
will host invited and community speakers, and be structured around scientific
lectures, discussion sessions, and open problem sessions.