* 1748384
* EAGER:  Demystifying the Engineering and Computer Science Underrepresentation Problem:  Understanding the Pathways to and through these Disciplines for Black and Hispanic Women
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Monique Ross, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 12/31/2018
* USD 71,206.00

Many communities are underrepresented in the computing industry. With market
demands and equity at the helm, the computer engineering and computer science
community has increasingly become interested in broadening participation
matters. A more comprehensive understanding of the influences that shape
individuals' decisions to pursue computing is essential, especially among Black
and Hispanic women. To date, the exploration of Black and Hispanic women in
computing is limited, and, in the theoretical and scientific literature, there
are very few studies devoted to women of color in computing. The project
investigator outlined an exploratory qualitative study that is potentially
transformative, examining salient factors that contribute to the
underrepresentation of Black and Latino women in computer engineering and
computer science. This project is positioned to explore the pathways to and
through engineering and computer science for Black and Hispanic women, and the
findings have immense potential to render important strategies, solutions, and
practices that increase their representation in computing
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will conduct in-depth interviews
with Black and Hispanic women, using social identity theory and
intersectionality as guiding theoretical frameworks Used frequently in science
education, engineering education, and other social and behavioral science
research, social identity theory and intersectionality will help to pinpoint,
interpret, and understand the social complexities associated with being Black
and/or Hispanic and a woman in the world of computing.