* 1748570
* HSI Conference: Pathways for Hispanic Students in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Di Xu, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2018
* USD 99,984.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) Dear Colleague Letter NSF 17-092:
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education in Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs)
calls for projects to support conferences that will identify the most critical
challenges and opportunities regarding undergraduate science, technology
engineering and mathematics (STEM) education at HSIs, and potential actionable
solutions that fall within NSF's mission, policies, and practices. In keeping
with this call, the principal investigators of this project observe that while
campus faculty and administrators work with students in their classrooms and
offices every day, they are rarely presented with data about overall student
success by demographic or preparation level. This group is also rarely asked to
collaborate to build recommendations for actionable solutions. The proposed
conference aims to address both these oversights by creating an expert community
to address Educational Pathways for Hispanic Students in STEM. Hispanic
students, whether attending a 2-year or 4-year college, experience a high rate
of derailment from pursuing STEM degrees. Impediments tend to arise at
transition points, namely from high school to college, in early college, and
from community college to 4-year university. The conference focuses on the
critical transitions that students must negotiate from high school to successful
graduation with a Bachelor's degree. These issues are relevant to Hispanic
students across the nation, and more broadly, to other groups of
underrepresented students who face significant challenges in pursuing their
higher education goals. Conference attendees will be primarily and faculty and
administrators from local high schools and 2-year and 4-year colleges,
emphasizing those that serve Hispanic students. The conference's goals are
twofold: to educate key faculty and administrators about known research
regarding Hispanic students in STEM, and to produce a set of recommendations to
help NSF identify critical challenges, best practices, and potential actionable
solutions for undergraduate STEM education.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The University
of California, Irvine (UCI) proposes to convene scholars from Southern
California for a three-day conference in response to NSF's call for
identification of critical challenges and opportunities in undergraduate STEM
education at two-year and four-year Hispanic-serving institutions. The
conference's ultimate purpose is to advance an important national goal:
improving retention and graduation rates for Hispanic students in STEM in higher
education institutions nationwide. The conference will be interactive and is
intentionally designed to be both a learning experience and data collection
exercise. Primary topics are: 1) Moving Students from High School to College (2
or 4-year) with a Declared STEM Major; 2) Initial Challenges for STEM College
Students (2 and 4-year); 3) Challenges Specific to Community College Students;
4) Transfer Students and Their Challenges; and 5) Data and Analytics: Challenges
and Promise. After hearing from a number of experts, the conference attendees
will create working groups that will gather and organize evidence-based
solutions that may be supported by NSF. Conference proceedings will be written
summarizing information delivered at the conference. Recommendations for
designing an HSI program at NSF will be developed by the group and widely
disseminated. Assessment will be used to gather information for the conference
proceedings.