* 1748739
* EXP: Attention-Aware Cyberlearning to Detect and Combat Inattentiveness During Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Sidney D'Mello, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2019
* USD 456,171.00

The ability to concentrate on tasks is critical to learning. This project will
develop attention-aware cyberlearning as a new genre of learning technologies
that automatically detect and respond to students' attentional states. In
particular, this project will implement technology that will detect mind
wandering (MW) which is when attention shifts from task-related thoughts to
task-unrelated thoughts. MW has been studied in the context of complex
comprehension tasks and it has been found that a high degree of MW leads to
inferior performance. However MW has not been studied in the context of learning
with technology and technology solutions have not been proposed to reduce MW.
This project addresses MW in the context of learning with technology. The
detection of MW is through the use of inexpensive eye-tracking devices. The
devices will be integrated with software to detect MW while students are engaged
in learning high school biology through an interactive system called Guru. Once
MW is detected, software strategies will be used to enable the students return
to the learning task. The primary research will be in the development and
testing of MW detection algorithms and in the development and testing of
strategies to reduce MW.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more detail, the attention-
aware Guru will include an integrated eye tracker, an automated gaze-based MW
detector, and intervention strategies to improve learning by mitigating the
costs of MW. The research will be conducted in 9th grade biology classrooms in
Northern Indiana, where the core technological components will be formatively
studied, iteratively refined, and summatively evaluated. Generalizable insights
will be identified at every stage of the project in order to promote
transferability of the findings to future attention-aware technologies, thereby
helping students learn to their fullest potential. In summary, the proposed
attention-aware Guru technology will be used to advance fundamental research
focused on uncovering: (1) the incidence of MW during learning with technology,
(2) relationships between MW and learning, (3) patterns of eye-gaze that are
diagnostic of MW, (4) automated intervention strategies to reorient attention
and reduce the detrimental effects of MW, and (5) generalizable insights to
catalyze future implementations of attention-aware cyberlearning.