* 1748969
* Collaborative Research: The MegaAttitude Project: Investigating selection and polysemy at the scale of the lexicon
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Aaron White, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/29/2024
* USD 284,280.00

This project addresses how humans draw complex inferences from the thousands of
English predicates that combine with subordinate clauses -- "think", "know",
"say", "tell", "remember", "forget", etc. -- when the structural characteristics
of the clauses they combine with vary. For example, the sentence "John forgot
that he bought milk" is similar to the sentence "John forgot to buy milk"; but
from the first sentence, a listener infers that John bought milk, while from the
second, a listener infers that he didn't. This inference pattern is only one
among many such patterns in English; yet, in spite of this variety, there
appears to be substantial regularities across predicates and subordinate clause
structures that prior work has only scratched the surface of. Investigating the
systematicities in how humans compute these inference patterns sheds light on
how the human cognitive system constructs complex meanings from simpler parts
and supports the development of intelligent computational systems for
comprehending and reasoning about natural language in human-like
ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current project approaches this investigation in
two parts. First, it develops and deploys multiple scalable, crowd-sourced
annotation protocols, based on experimental methodologies from
psycholinguistics, in order to collect data about a wide variety of inference
patterns triggered by all of the thousands of English predicates that combine
with subordinate clauses. Second, it leverages recent advances in multi-task
machine learning to build a unified computational model of the relationship
between such predicates, the structure of their subordinate clauses, and the
inferences that they trigger, which is trained on these data. This model not
only helps to reveal systematicities in how humans compute the inference
patterns of interest; it can also be straightforwardly incorporated into applied
technologies for natural language understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.