* 1748191
* Collaborative Research: A Polarimetric Radar Climatology of Supercell Thunderstorms in the United States
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Darrel Kingfield, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 03/31/2023
* USD 120,671.00

Tornado warning lead times and false alarm rates have not improved significantly
in recent years. The researchers funded under this award will use upgraded
weather radar technology to determine if there are certain signals in the data
that can be used to help improve understanding and forecasting of tornado
development. The main societal impact of the work is related to public safety,
through enhanced understanding and improved data to help operational forecasters
provide warnings to the public. Students will also be trained in the latest
methods, helping to provide a highly capable workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
National Weather Service completed their upgrade of the nation's weather radar
system to dual-polarization capability in 2013, and since that point data has
been collected on thousands of supercell thunderstorms. The research team plans
to exploit this resource by developing a climatology of radar characteristics of
supercell thunderstorms. The goal of the project is to establish definitive
relationships between polarimetric variables and supercell characteristics,
structure, and evolution. Automated methods will be used to select around 1000
cases that can be used to identify links among distinct polarimetric radar
markers, supercell evolution, and near-storm environment parameters. The
specific scientific objectives of the project are to: 1) distinguish between
tornadic and non-tornadic supercells by identifying microphysical differences
between the two sets, 2) compare polarimetric radar signatures and estimated
drop size distributions to the near storm environment, and 3) determine how
polarimetric signatures and estimated drop size distributions change during
important storm processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.