* 1748163
* Workshop:   Current Challenges and Future Opportunities in Electronic and Photonic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2019
* Chih-Kang Shih, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 07/31/2019
* USD 49,735.00

Nontechnical description: Materials are so essential to societal advance that
early civilizations are often named after a particular material (e.g. "Bronze
age' and "Iron age"). Pivotal materials at the foundation of our modern
civilization are far too diverse to name just a few. Electronics and photonics,
nevertheless, capture the key technologies and industries that influence every
aspect of our lives such as computing, communications, and health care. Advances
in photonic and electronic materials thus bring unquestionable societal benefits
in catalyzing revolutionary changes and transforming the platform that
technologies are built on. The two-day workshop brings together leading experts
performing research in several classes of materials that are representative of
advanced electronic and photonic materials. Scientists and researchers working
in the areas of electronic and photonic materials develop synthetic methods,
characterization techniques and computational methods for new materials
discovery, with potential for delivering transformative scientific and societal
impacts. Young researchers trained in the field of electronic and photonic
materials are also vital for ensuring the nation's competitive advantage in
areas critical to national security, economic growth, and sustainable societal
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: This workshop brings
together leading experts to discuss the current challenges and future
opportunities in the broad field of electronic and photonic materials. The goal
of the proposed workshop is threefold: (i) to better understand what the
scientific community views as current frontiers and future opportunities for
electronic and photonic materials research; (ii) to assess the readiness within
the research community to address scientific questions of national and societal
importance; and (iii) to identify gaps and new areas for research in electronic
and photonic materials in the near-future. The specific scope of the workshop
covers epitaxially grown materials (semiconductors, oxide, and hybrid
materials), van der Waals materials, polymeric/flexible materials, and
metamaterials. Effective material development requires integrated efforts in
computation, synthesis, characterization, and prototypical device demonstration.
Workshop participants include experts in all these areas. A report summarizing
the workshop serves to inform fellow researchers, policy makers, and the general
public. The material platforms under discussion hold substantial promise for
advancing communications, information processing, health care, and clean energy
technologies. Young researchers trained in these research areas are vital for
continually driving economic growth, ensuring competitive advantages in national
security, and providing solutions for sustainable societal development.