* 1748097
* Collaborative Research: Improved Characterization of Internal Decadal-Multidecadal Climate Variability Using Paleoclimate Archives, Observational Climate Data and Model Simulations
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Michael Mann, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2022
* USD 474,083.00

This project aims to build upon past research investigating interdecadal and
multidecadal climate oscillations through the analysis of expanded paleoclimate
proxy data, updated instrumental data, and extensive multi-model simulation
archives that have recently become available. The complementary set of proposed
analyses may provide a more comprehensive understanding of the nature of
internal climate variability, allowing assessment of whether there are distinct
modes of internal variability on decadal and longer timescales that (a) are
oscillatory in nature, as opposed to being simply part of the red noise spectral
continuum, (b) persist back in time based on evidence from long-term
paleoclimate data and (c) are consistent, in both timescale and spatial pattern,
with modes of variability identified in long, state-of-the-art model control
simulations. Such analyses could inform assessments of the potential for decadal
and longer-term climate predictability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
methodology will principally focus on application of the multi-taper method
singular value decomposition (MTM-SVD) to detect and characterize narrowband
spatially-coherent signals in spatiotemporal instrumental, proxy, and model-
generated climate datasets. The MTM-SVD methodology will first be applied to up-
to-date global surface temperature data dating back through the mid-19th century
to reevaluate the observational evidence for oscillatory spatiotemporal modes of
decadal-to-multidecadal climate variability and to reconstruct the time-evolving
patterns of the associated signals. The signals will be projected onto other
fields (sea level pressure, sub-surface ocean heat content and circulation, and
upper-atmosphere data) to obtain a more comprehensive view of the associated
ocean-atmosphere dynamics. The next step will be to analyze paleoclimate proxy
records spanning the past millennium to establish the long-term robustness and
persistence of signals and to address potential changes in the character of
signals during the transition into the anthropogenic era. These analyses will
build upon past frequency-domain analyses of global climate proxy data by
employing the considerably more extensive paleoclimate data archives now
available spanning the past millennium. A further mechanistic understanding will
be sought through parallel analysis of the (a) control, (b) last millennium, (c)
historical and (d/e) RCP 4.5/8.5 future projection experiments from the Coupled
Model Inter-Comparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5) and CMIP6 projects. These
comparisons will assess whether consistent evidence exists across a diverse
selection of models for spatiotemporal oscillatory climate signals with similar
timescale and spatial characteristics to those isolated in the observations and
paleoclimate data. Comparisons of control, last millennium, historical, and
projected future simulations will allow assessment of whether and how changes in
forcing impact or interact with the characteristics of the internal
variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The complementary set of proposed analyses
should provide a more comprehensive understanding of the nature of internal
climate variability, allowing assessment of whether there are distinct modes of
internal variability on decadal and longer timescales that (a) are oscillatory
in nature, as opposed to being simply part of the red noise spectral continuum,
(b) persist back in time based on evidence from long-term paleoclimate data and
(c) are consistent, in both timescale and spatial pattern, with modes of
variability identified in long, state-of-the-art model control simulations. Such
analyses will, furthermore, inform assessments of the potential for decadal and
longer-term climate predictability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader
Impacts include a more definitive assessment of evidence for narrowband
interdecadal and multidecadal climate signals to improve decadal timescale
forecasting. More robust predictive skill in decadal and longer-term climate
forecasting and a better physical understanding of the underlying mechanisms, or
origin of that skill, could aid an array of stakeholders, including the public
at large, benefit from improved climate forecasts. The project will also support
an early career scientist and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.