* 1748492
* 2018 Ocean Global Change Biology GRC/GRS
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2018,08/31/2018
* Gretchen Hofmann, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 08/31/2018
* USD 30,350.00

This award provides funding to support the third and upcoming conference, the
2018 GRC on Ocean Global Change Biology to be held at the Waterville Valley
Conference Center in Waterville Valley, NH on July 15-20, 2018. The study of
global change biology in the oceans has emerged as a major area of focus for
marine sciences. This area of research is multidisciplinary, encompassing
biological, chemical and physical oceanography, along with marine ecology and
evolutionary biology. This research community has previously been challenged in
meeting to share data and advances made in this rapidly developing field of
study. However, the inaugural Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Ocean Global
Change Biology in July 2014, followed by a successful meeting in 2016, created
an unprecedented opportunity for the U.S. science community to discuss and share
cutting edge results in the retreat-like atmosphere of a Gordon Conference. Both
meetings were very successful, with excellent attendance, particularly from
early career scientists. This award for the 2018 GRC on Ocean Global Change
Biology will support U.S. researchers in attending a meeting where ideas can be
exchanged and research directions can be improved and advanced. These meetings
are highly attended by scientists from other countries, thus creating an
opportunity for U.S. marine scientists to develop international collaborations
in this globally important area in biological oceanography. During the GRC
itself and in the Gordon Research Seminar preceding it, the proposed project
will support interdisciplinary training for graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers. The seminar activities will advance the science communication
skills and insights of the U.S. scientists during the 5-day
meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This meeting will facilitate the sharing of new
results, often times unpublished material, from investigators in Ocean Global
Change Biology. Previous conferences served to highlight exciting new areas of
research in the field and the third GRC on Ocean Global Change Biology will
build upon these important emerging directions in 9 themes that comprise the
actual 5-day conference. These include the need to focus on adaptation and
evolutionary rescue as a possible response to climate change and multistressors,
the use of genomics tools and next generation sequencing to facilitate the study
of evolutionary response and gene expression patterns, a session on epigenetics
in a global change context, the need to examine species interactions in the
context of environmental change, to continue to explore the interaction of
physical factors such as OA, temperature and deoxygenation of coastal waters,
and finally to also examine ecosystem-level and bioenergetics consequences,
where possible. In designing the new themes, the Chair (Dr. Gretchen Hofmann)
and Vice Chair (Dr. Sinead Collins) have attempted to take into consideration a
venue that will focus on these identified areas, and to also report on progress
in this rapidly advancing field of ocean global change
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.