* 1748395
* Cybersecurity Risk Conference
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Jeannette Wing, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 02/28/2023
* USD 49,806.00

In the past several years, cyber-crime and cyber-breaches have exploded, due to
the increase in commerce conducted on the Internet, as well as increasing
quantities of sensitive information being stored in databases that can be
accessed by outside parties. In addition, cyber-criminals have advanced, not
only employing technical acumen but also preying on human error by using
sophisticated techniques like phishing. To address these challenges, the
Northeast Big Data Innovation Hub (NEBDIH) will convene two workshops to bring
together experts from academia, government, and industry in the fields of
insurance, cybersecurity, data science, and policy. The ultimate goal is to
develop a collaborative model (e.g., a cross sector consortium) that will help
to define the frequency and economic/social severity related to successful
attacks, and to begin to develop baselines for measuring and managing cyber risk
more effectively. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;NEBDIH will seek to gather leading
academic, government, risk management, general industry and healthcare
participants, whose mission will be to identify, quantify, and to help mitigate
risk associated with cyber-related criminal activity. The workshops will serve
as a forum for these experts to collaborate on: 1) better understanding and
defining the interrelated cybersecurity landscape across sectors, and 2)
planning for the resources necessary to develop baselines for measuring and
managing cybersecurity risk. Expected outcomes from these activities include
developing a framework for filling the gaps in quantifying and managing
cybersecurity risk across organizations and sectors. This may take the form of
an initiative that captures the best of breed technologies, vendors, and best
practices; captures a substantial portion of the data that is required, in
aggregate, to make a cybersecurity risk assessment at multiple levels (by
industry, by region, by company); provides the tools to make the data
discoverable and interoperable; and provides a basic suite of tools to allow for
high level analysis of the data within the context of cybersecurity risk.