* 1748282
* Bone strength and physical activity over the lifecourse
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Brigitte Holt, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2024
* USD 788,810.00

There are a number of genetic, behavioral and life history factors associated
with bone mass in the modern human skeleton. Previous research in animal models,
and in human clinical and archaeological samples, has shown a positive
relationship between physical activity and bone mass. However, few data are
available for population-representative samples from modern human groups with
very high activity levels and pathogen loads. This project will study bone mass
in such a population, in order to advance our understanding of the complex
relationships among bone mass, population history, energetics, and physical
activity across the lifespan. The proposed research will advance our
understanding of modern human skeletal evolution and adaptation, as well as the
skeletal impacts of the sedentary lifestyle found in many industrialized
societies including the U.S. This project will provide training opportunities
for graduate and undergraduate students, support international research
collaborations and public science outreach activities, and contribute bone-
related data to a larger ethnographic and biological database for a non-
industrialized population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Physical inactivity, relative to
past populations, is thought to contribute to modern human skeletal gracility,
based on the idea that impact forces from load bearing and muscle contraction
trigger bone deposition, a process called "bone functional adaptation."
According to this idea, which is well supported by studies of athletes and
exercise interventions, bone adapts to the demands of physical activity both by
adding bone tissue and altering its cross-sectional distribution in the
direction of the highest bending strains. However, anthropological studies of
bone functional adaptation have not fully explored the potentially interactive
and/or confounding effects of activity profiles, diet, infectious burden and
body composition (e.g. muscle mass) on bone. This project will test whether
higher physical activity levels, including in childhood, lead to greater bone
strength, and whether greater bone strength mitigates age-related bone loss and
fracture risk. The project will also examine the extent to which bone growth in
response to habitual, physically-intensive subsistence activities is constrained
by energetic limitations and high pathogen burden. To address these questions,
the research team will 1) image arm and leg bone structure using quantitative
computed tomography (pQCT) of the tibia, femur, radius and humerus; 2) measure
physical activity levels to examine effects of mechanical loading on bone
structure; 3) examine how degree of industrialization, family history of
fractures, and socio-economic factors impact the relationship between physical
activity levels and bone strength; and 4) document prevalence and structural
correlates of low bone mass.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.