* 1748529
* Chiral Ceramic Nanoparticles of Tungsten Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2022
* Nicholas Kotov, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 05/31/2022
* USD 520,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Chirality is a geometrical property describing
objects that are not the same as their mirror images. Such objects are common in
Nature and chirality determines the outcome of most biological processes. This
project will study how to make nanoparticles of ceramics chiral in order to
produce new drugs, reduce pollution, create new display technologies, improve
biomedical implants, and realize new ultra-strong materials. These technological
advances become possible because chirality of nanoscale ceramics can be combined
with their special mechanical, optical, electronic, chemical, and biological
properties. Synthetic methods, characteristic properties, and computational
tools will be established. The surface of small particles of tungsten oxide will
be coated with amino acids that will transfer their chirality to the inorganic
material. The best conditions for the synthesis of long chain molecules, known
as peptides, with specific chirality to be used as antibacterial drugs for
biomedical and national defense needs, will be found. The outcome of this
project will be a versatile toolbox for applied studies and education that will
be available to other scientists, engineers, teachers, and the public. The low
cost, biocompatibility and commonality of ceramic materials will enable
utilization of chiral ceramics in many technological areas. The University of
Michigan will collaborate with schools in poor communities in Detroit area to
demonstrate importance of chirality to high and middle school students. The
project will also help kids of high school age with speech impediments to find
interesting research topics in chemistry, physics, materials, or
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Chirality is a geometrical property with unifying importance
for physics, chemistry, biology, astronomy, and mathematics. Nanoscale ceramics
can be chiral, which will enhance mechanical, optical, electronic, chemical, and
biological properties of these materials. These advances in ceramics will make
possible a new generation of materials for polarization modulation devices,
chiral catalysts, biomedical implants, biosensors, and drug carriers. Thus, a
framework of synthetic methods, characteristic properties, and computational
tools will be established in this project. As a model system, chiral ceramic
nanoparticles of tungsten trioxide with L- and D- amino acid surface ligands
adsorbed to their surface will be synthesized. These nanocolloids will be
subsequently utilized in the catalysis of amino acid condensation into
antibacterial peptides. Integrated training of students skillful in both
computational and synthetic tools is essential to its impact of this project.
The educational and outreach efforts will be focused on underrepresented
minorities and middle- and high-school students from high-poverty Ypsilanti
area. Kids of high school age with speech impediments will be engaged in the
scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.