* 1748189
* Smart and Connected Communities Workshop: Visioning for Effective Community/University/Industry Collaboration Models
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Azer Bestavros, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Meghan Houghton
* 08/31/2018
* USD 99,963.00

Cities and communities face growing challenges as population size and
demographics change, infrastructure ages, and economic and environmental
pressures increase. Collaborations among cities and communities, universities,
and industry have the potential to address these challenges -- providing
opportunities for information and communication technology innovations, research
capacity building, and workforce growth. This project includes a two-part
workshop to be hosted at Boston University in July 2017 and in Washington, D.C.
in November 2017. The goal of the workshop series is to identify and propose
effective models of city-university-industry collaboration that help bridge the
gap between fundamental research on problems inspired by communities, aiming to
provide deployable solutions and sustainable services that improve the quality
of life in various smart-and-connected community
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The anticipated outcome of the workshops is to
generate a report that puts forth best practices and models of collaboration,
with a particular emphasis on actionable opportunities that will enhance the
impact of cross-sector smart-and-connected communities research. Specifically,
this project seeks to understand and elucidate resources and processes, which
yield robust, mutually beneficial, enduring relationships between cities,
universities, and industries; translate fundamental, sociotechnical research
into applications that have a meaningful impact within the community; and create
foundations necessary for applications to be sustained over time. In addition,
identifying improved processes and incentive-compatible collaboration models has
the potential to catalyze a number of broader impacts, including: enhancing
student engagement and experiential learning through translational research;
ensuring sustainability of established relationships and of developed solutions;
developing a diverse human capital by engaging underrepresented minorities and
early career researchers in workshop planning and activities; and advancing
technology commercialization and business development.