* 1748100
* 2017 Sleep and Rhythms Workshop, Valparaiso, Chile, November 15, 2017
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Paul Taghert, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2018
* USD 10,000.00

General Abstract

The biological mechanisms that generate biological rhythms are critical for
life, as most organisms on earth have to adapt to cyclical changes in their
environments. The time-scales associated with these changes vary widely, and
thus so do the mechanisms that allow organisms to use them to predict their
environments and survive. Identifying the fundamental principles associated with
such diversity requires a broad range of intellectual inputs. The conference
supported by this award will therefore bring a diverse group of investigators
together from across the United States and Latin America, including senior
scientists who are leaders in the field of biological rhythms and young
investigators just beginning their training, to foster the exchange of ideas and
to provide training and mentorship opportunities for the young investigators
from Latin America. Senior US investigators will run in-depth discussion groups
with young scientists from Latin America during a one-day workshop, and pairs of
senior-junior scientists will then interact one-on-one throughout the following
week at an associated conference. This not only provides excellent mentorship
opportunities for the young scientists, but also the potential for new ideas for
the senior scientists that come from fresh perspectives. A high proportion of
the US scientists that will be supported are women, and the international
collaborations between US and Latin American scientists will promote growth in
the field for investigators across the Americas.

Technical Abstract

This is a small meeting that will pair senior US and Latin American scientists
with graduate students and postdoctoral associates from Latin America during an
intense, one-day workshop in Valparaiso, Chile, followed by continuing
interactions between mentors and trainees during a subsequent meeting on the
topic of biological rhythms. There will be four roundtable discussions on 1)
Neural Circuits Associated with Sleep; 2) Sleep and Human Performance, 3) Neural
Models of Rhythmic Physiology, and 4) Mechanisms of Entrainment. Each will be
jointly chaired by US and Latin American senior scientists, and attended by
graduate students and postdoctoral associates from Latin America. The senior
scientists will briefly discuss their research, followed by intense discussion
groups with the students. Each senior scientist will be paired with a young
scientist and expected to have follow-up interactions with that student during a
subsequent meeting Chronobiology that all participants will attend. In the past,
these interactions have led to multiple, collaborative papers that include both
the senior and junior scientists. This meeting, like those, is expected to
greatly benefit both senior and junior scientists across the Americas and lead
to significant discoveries in the field of biological rhythms.