* 1748724
* Group travel to the Past Antarctic Ice Sheet Dynamics (PAIS) 2017 Conference, Trieste, Italy
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2018
* Robert DeConto, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 07/31/2018
* USD 16,000.00

The first international Past Antarctic Ice Sheet dynamics (PAIS) conference will
be held September 10-15, 2017 in Trieste, Italy. The PAIS research program was
recently formed by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), and
grew out of the 2009 Antarctic Climate Evolution symposium. The goal of the
workshop is to address key questions about the sensitivity of the Antarctic Ice
Sheet to climate change and its contribution to past and future sea level
change. The funds will be used to support travel costs for approximately 7-10
U.S. scientists, including early career researchers and graduate students,
enabling them to present their scientific findings and benefit from the
scholarly exchange of ideas. Travel support requests will be reviewed by an ad
hoc review committee made up of standing PAIS advisory committee members. The
committee members include both international and U.S. scientists. The review
committee will follow NSF guidelines on conflicts of interest in their review
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The future response of the Antarctic Ice Sheet to
a warming atmosphere and ocean will have a fundamental impact on global and
local sea level rise, coastal cities, communities, and strategic infrastructure.
The PAIS conference will facilitate the integration of the latest developments
in numerical climate-ocean-ice-Earth modeling with the latest information on
recent and past changes in the ice sheet, to better inform projections of the
region's physical and ecological future. This grant will allow US researchers,
early career scientists, and graduate students to attend the 2017 PAIS
Conference and associated workshops. Symposium presentations and publications
will provide an important record of research activities in Antarctic Earth
Sciences and Glaciology. The key outcomes of the conference and ancillary
workshops will set the stage for future international and interdisciplinary
collaborations and research proposals- particularly those linking observations
and numerical modeling.