* 1748381
* Workshop on Trustworthy Algorithmic Decision-Making
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2018
* Richard Wash, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 07/31/2018
* USD 93,909.00

Algorithms are increasingly being used in systems that make decisions that
affect people, including filtering news and updates we see, setting prices for
items, scoring resumes and credit applications, recommending routes and places,
and controlling smart homes and autonomous cars. As algorithms make these
decisions, it is natural to ask whether, when, and why we should trust them, and
to consider ways to improve their trustworthiness. To this end, researchers,
regulators, and industry have increasingly called for methods to audit and
account for algorithmic decisions to ensure their transparency and fairness.
This project's goal is to integrate these perspectives, bringing together people
who design and study these algorithms for a two-day workshop to lay out the
problem space and possible ways forward for algorithmic trustworthiness. The
workshop organizers will emphasize diversity of perspectives, recruiting
participants from a wide variety of disciplines, jobs, and backgrounds with a
particular focus on including people from underrepresented groups in computing
and PhD students.

The focus will be on developing interdisciplinary and convergent perspectives on
algorithmic decision-making by bringing together researchers, designers, and
policy-makers working on different aspects of the problem and different domains,
with the goal of integrating their ideas to get a bigger picture of the larger
question of trustworthiness of these algorithms in society. The main output will
be a report describing the problem space of trustworthy algorithmic decision-
making, outlining the major issues that need research to move these algorithms
and the decisions they make toward being trustworthy, and identifying promising
opportunities and approaches for studying these issues. It will also identify
some of the major challenges and constraints that will make progress on these
issues difficult, and will further the discussion of moving past these
challenges. In addition to the report, the participants will produce a set of
whitepapers that will illuminate important aspects of this problem, along with
responses and additional reflections by attendees.