* 1748516
* CAREER: OPTIMIZATION FORMULATIONS AND ALGORITHMS FOR THE ANALYSIS AND DESIGN OF HIERARCHICAL MODULAR SYSTEMS
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Victor Zavala Tejeda, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 03/31/2024
* USD 502,375.00

Modularization is a pervasive organization strategy that is used by living,
socio-economic, and industrial systems to cope with complexity. Modular
industrial systems are built from small-scale, standardized equipment modules,
which perform well-defined tasks. Standardization and size reduction enables
mass fabrication and fast deployment of equipment, which accelerates
experimentation and learning and ultimately leads to technology cost reductions.
Modular systems enable staged (sequential) investment strategies, which provide
flexibility to mitigate market and regulatory uncertainties. They also
facilitate exploitation of highly dispersed resources that are deemed too
expensive to centralize. The goal of this CAREER project is to develop
optimization formulations and algorithms that facilitate the analysis and design
of hierarchical modular systems. These capabilities will be used to design
flexible combined power fertilizer systems in rural areas that produce power,
ammonia, and urea from distributed resources such as wind energy, natural gas,
biomass, and organic waste. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current industrial-scale
process systems are highly customized and involve logistically-complex,
expensive and lengthy construction phases. Identifying technologies that are
suitable for modularization and determining appropriate degrees of enterprise-
wide modularity can improve operational flexibility and mitigate financial risk.
Large-scale industrial process systems that benefit from the economies of scale
can evolve into a hybrid state in which certain functions will be performed in
small modular systems that increase flexibility. To model these systems the use
of hierarchical graph abstractions is proposed to provide a natural framework
for analysis and optimization of the benefits of modularity. Graph abstractions
enable the use of techniques to properly organize process equipment units into
tightly integrated modules and can be applied recursively at higher levels where
modules represent subsystems, entire production facilities, and
local/regional/global supply chain hubs. Hierarchical graph structures will be
exploited by combinatorial optimization and multi-stage stochastic programming
techniques to derive scalable design and investment strategies that mitigate
markets and regulatory risk. The educational part of this project aims to
incorporate new hierarchical decision-making concepts into the engineering
curriculum, make the curriculum itself more modular and develop software tools
that enable the design of complex hierarchical systems using crowd-sourcing.
Planned outreach activities will provide K-12 students from schools with high
enrollment of underrepresented minorities with opportunities to learn about the
benefits of modular decision-making and motivate them to pursue career paths in
STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.