* 1748109
* EAGER:  Tracing Privacy-Policy Statements into Code for Privacy-Aware Mobile App Development
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Jianwei Niu, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2020
* USD 144,288.00

Privacy for smartphone and mobile applications users present unprecedented
threats. In the United States, privacy policies serve as the primary means to
inform users about how mobile apps process privacy data. The application
developers are responsible for implementing privacy policies so that the code
corresponds to the policies. Currently, there are no techniques for tracing
high-level privacy practices into code. New research is needed to develop
automatic privacy-aware development tools, as well as tools to determine if the
code implements the policies correctly.

To automatically trace high-level privacy practices in privacy policies into
application code, the project borrows the idea of context-based classification
from information extraction in natural language processing (NLP). In particular,
both the natural-language-based policies and the program code are subjected to
statistical NLP techniques to determine relationships between the policies and
their implementations. The assumption that NLP techniques can be applied to code
is based on recent work that has established the "naturalness" of software, in
the sense that statistical NLP techniques appear to work just as well for
computer programs as they do for, say, English. The project will mine a large
set of privacy policies and corresponding code to find out how, or to what
extent, policies manifest themselves in code. To the extent that consistency
between privacy policies and code can be determined, new approaches to privacy
policy understanding and enforcement might be possible.