* 1748885
* Workshop: Environmental Science in the Context of Court Decisions as a Critical Mode of Informal Science Education
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Sabrina McCormick, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2020
* USD 63,116.00

This award supports a two-day workshop to promote collaborative engagements
between scientists and legal scholars to bring about more effective
communication of science within judicial contexts. The workshop will bring
together legal scholars, social scientists, climatologists, and key leaders from
the energy, investor, and insurances communities to build a research network
that effectively communicates and connects science to be used in court
decisions. The basis of this workshop is the understanding that the court system
is a rarely acknowledged, yet critical, realm of informal science education and
policy-making. Many scientific fields including climatology, economics,
forensics, and the health sciences have often affected decisions in the courts.
This workshop will catalyze a research network of legal-scientific exchange that
will serve to transform how science is developed for and used in legal settings.
It will also advance the consideration of distinct stakeholder needs and agendas
in their diverse engagement with conjointly legal and scientific issues. This
workshop promises critical broader impacts to the scientific, legal, energy,
investor and insurance communities, as well as to the public understanding of
science and of its role in policy development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
workshop aims to catalyze collaborations across legal, scientific, and business
groups to advance work in the court system and in science, and to further
informal science learning. The workshop will include a series of discussions
that brings together scholars across different disciplines with the intent of
building collaborations and further opportunities for engagement after the
workshop. There will be four workshop sessions, including presentations and
discussions. One session focuses on legal and scientific collaborations to date
including consideration of the scope of such collaborations, the science that
has been used, the advances made, and the challenges encountered. Another
session focuses on the emerging science of extreme event attribution, a
relatively young field of research that seeks to quantitatively assess the
change in risk of individual extremes events (i.e., heat waves, drought,
floods). It will include a discussion of the diverse methods, tools, and
language used by scientists in order to build a foundation for cross-
disciplinary engagement. A third focuses on legal frameworks and approaches used
to address climate change litigation. The fourth focuses on post-workshop group
activities including the development of plans for
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.