* 1748307
* EAGER: Toward engineering a synthetic enhancer in Caenorhabditis elegans
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Ilya Ruvinsky, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 07/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Understanding how genes are switched on and off is a problem of central
importance in biology. Within genes, dedicated regions called enhancers, consist
of a patchwork of short sequences that bind to regulators of gene activity,
called transcription factors. It is this binding that determines when, where,
and how strongly a gene will express its function. The organization of enhancers
is dauntingly complex. Despite four decades of extensive study, many general
properties of enhancers remain obscure. For example, it is still nearly
impossible to predict enhancer function from the DNA sequence or to construct an
artificial DNA enhancer that would turn the gene on in the right kind of a cell
in response to a right kind of a signal. This project will specifically address
this problem. It will study in detail the composition and organization of an
enhancer of a gene in a model organism, roundworm Caenorhabditis elegans. Its
ultimate goal is to engineer an artificial enhancer that could direct gene
expression in specific cells in C. elegans. Not only would this serve as a
powerful demonstration of the understanding of basic rules of enhancer
organization and function, but also be an important step toward designing
biological systems with specific performance characteristics. The work on this
project will be also used to provide research experience for Chicago-area school
teachers, including those that work in schools located at the communities that
are underrepresented in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to investigate in detail the organization and function of an enhancer of a C.
elegans gene. General lack of fine-resolution data (at the level of individual
binding sites) for any C. elegans gene, hampers the use of this powerful model
organism for understanding enhancer structure/function and computational
modeling approaches. The project will start with an experimental dissection of a
short enhancer expressed in a small number of neurons. These empirical data will
be evaluated against comparative sequence data of orthologous and co-regulated
enhancers to infer particularly conserved features of sequence composition and
structural organization. Finally, a series of artificial enhancer elements will
be generated. They will test specific hypotheses by replacing native enhancer
sequences with different synthetic ones that retain basic features inferred to
be important from the prior experimental and computational analyses. The aim is
to construct a family of enhancers that retain little of the original sequences
and yet produce a largely correct expression pattern. This work will advance
understanding of enhancer function/organization, inform comparative genomic
analyses of regulatory regions, and contribute to design of synthetic genetic
circuits in multicellular eukaryotes. In a continuing collaboration with the
outreach office of the Institute for Genomics and Systems Biology at the
University of Systems Biology at the University of Chicago, the project will
interact with the area high school teachers, giving them an opportunity for
summer research experience and helping to develop teaching modalities that cover
modern genetics.