* 1748092
* Informal Roads: The Impact of Unofficial Transportation Routes on Remote Arctic Communities
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Nikolay Shiklomanov, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 02/29/2024
* USD 597,230.00

Transportation infrastructure plays a crucial role in economic development by
enhancing connectivity between places, resulting in both positive and negative
impacts on the local environment and communities. The impacts of roads are most
evident in Arctic and Subarctic regions, which are characterized by increased
economic activity, an extremely fragile environment, and Indigenous villages
often dependent on subsistence activities. In many remote Arctic regions, formal
roads are rare, and transportation infrastructure consists predominantly of
trails and paths established by Indigenous people for subsistence purposes as
well as temporary roads laid out for resource exploration. Although such
informal roads are usually unchartered, the impacts of the development and
implementation of these informal roads have yet to be significantly
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a detailed interdisciplinary
analysis of the overall impact of informal transportation routes on the Arctic
socioecological system. The expected project results will contribute to planning
for sustainable development of Arctic and Subarctic regions, which are
experiencing unprecedented anthropogenic and climate-induced changes. It will
also generate scientific knowledge for complex assessment of the positive and
negative impacts of development and tourism on other remote regions of the
world. This goal will be addressed through the following project objectives: 1)
Map and analyze the evolution of spatial extent and condition of formal and
informal roads using a range of remote sensing products, archival work, and
local knowledge; 2) Assess the importance and use of different types of roads
for diverse population groups using field observations and in-depth interviews;
3) Provide an integrative assessment of the informal roads' impacts on socio-
economic and environmental conditions of local communities; and 4) Work closely
with local communities to develop plan for sustainable development and use of
transportation infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.