* 1748944
* A Career Development Workshop for Early Career Geotechnical Engineering Faculty; Cleveland, Ohio; Fall 2017
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Edward Kavazanjian, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 03/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

This project supports the 2nd USUCGER (United States Universities Council for
Geotechnical Education and Research) workshop for early career geotechnical
engineering faculty. The workshop will be a two-day event including keynote
speeches, panels, facilitated group discussions, and mock Project Description
review sessions. The workshop will help junior geotechnical faculty understand
the role of the geotechnical engineer in addressing grand engineering and
societal challenges. Participants will be actively engaged thorough the
facilitated group discussions, mock Project Description review session, and a
poster session where they get share their research interests with other
participants. The workshop will be an integrated program that facilitates
experience-sharing and mentoring between early career professionals and
successful midcareer and senior professionals and promotes peer-to-peer
interaction and relationship-building among early career professionals. The
workshop will provide a forum for junior faculty to exchange their experiences
on important issues affecting their career path with other both junior and
senior faculty members. The targeted outcome is to help young geotechnical
scholars launch their academic career productively, avoiding common pitfalls and
enhancing the probability if successful on their academic journey.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will feature structured programs to engage
the participants and facilitate interaction among them and with mid-career and
senior professionals. It will update early career faculty on current research
priorities and funding trends for NSF and other funding agencies. The program
will feature keynote sessions and keynote panels on important academic issues,
including tenure and promotion. It also will enable early career professionals
(junior faculty, postdocs, and senior graduate students) to share personal
experiences (both successful and unsuccessful) and avoid common pitfalls in
starting an academic career. Participants will be asked to submit a mock Project
Description prepared in NSF format, peer review two such descriptions prior to
the workshop, and then participate in a panel review of the Project Descriptions
at the workshop, providing training in proposal preparation and in peer review.
Participants will also have the opportunity to build relationships with their
peers that will be invaluable as they progress in their academic careers. The
workshop will also provide participants with essential skills that they can
share with other early career faculty at their home institutions. And, by
facilitating the success of early career professionals, it can maximize the
potential for a successful return on the investment made by their home
institution and other stakeholders in their career development.