* 1748777
* EAGER: Advancing Women in Political Science
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2019
* Betsy Super, American Political Science Association
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/28/2019
* USD 57,760.00

Women comprise an unusually small percentage of tenured faculty in political
science programs -- especially programs at research intensive institutions --
relative to the number of women who received PhDs in political science and who
serve as assistant professors. This underrepresentation carries over into
important aspects of their professional careers. For example, women authors tend
to publish less frequently in top field journals, find their work cited less
frequently, and are often evaluated differently than men across a range of
indicators. This project seeks to identify the set of factors that help to
explain why women are underrepresented in political science and to devise a
mentoring program to assist women early in their careers. To do so, they propose
to conduct a cohort study of individuals who attended graduate school in the
1990s. Next, they will administer a survey to learn more about perceptions of
scholarly journals and publication success. Finally, they propose an
experimental mentoring program to identify the most effective strategies for
promoting success for female scholars in political science. The research team is
comprised of a number of successful scholars, most of whom are women, and will
have the support of the American Political Science Association in helping to
administer the studies and implement the mentoring program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines the factors that lead to
the significant underrepresentation of tenured women in political science. The
percentage of women with tenure is lower than one would expect given the number
of female PhDs and assistant professors. The proposal sets out to accomplish two
things: evaluate factors that hinder the advancement of women in political
science and generate evidence-based strategies to develop successful mentoring
programs. A diverse team of accomplished scholars has been assembled to conduct
this research. The project consists of three components. First, a team will
conduct a survey to evaluate respondents' attitudes toward journals and
perceptions of success with a particular focus on notable differences across an
array of respondent characteristics. Second, they will conduct a cohort study
comprised of individuals who entered graduate school in the 1990s and are
currently mid-career scholars. Third, they will implement a randomized
experimental mentoring program to assess the relative success of competing
interventions. The project will work in conjunction with the American Political
Science Association, thereby increasing its reach and enhancing the likelihood
of increasing the number of tenured female scholars in political
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.