* 1748461
* Functional Mind
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Kurt Hugenberg, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 392,299.00

People who have physical disabilities or who have difficulty moving easily often
experience discrimination in everyday life. This project focuses on the
dehumanizing treatment of such people. The research examines how it is that we
make judgments about others' worth based on their bodies or on their physical
mobility. It also considers why it is that we sometimes see those lacking
physical abilities as also lacking mental abilities. The long-term goal is to
find ways to reduce the dehumanization of people who have mobility challenges. A
new model of dehumanization proposes that we often fail to carefully consider
others' minds, especially when those others do not appear able to influence our
own lives. According to this model, people who lack physical mobility (such as
the elderly, obese individuals, physically disabled persons) often fail to claim
our attention. By failing to think about them, we then fail to consider their
minds as being sophisticated and capable. A deeper understanding of this process
will support the development of interventions aimed at reducing the
discrimination so often experienced by those who have physical
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sixteen behavioral experiments examine the
link between how others are perceived and the triggering of dehumanizing
responses. It is expected that perceiving others as personally relevant will
trigger the perception of more sophisticated minds, and that believing a target
is not personally relevant will trigger dehumanizing responses. The first line
of work will establish that simple cues to self-relevance (such as an impending
interaction or direct eye gaze) will trigger the perception that others' have
more sophisticated minds. The second and third lines of work will extend these
findings to physical mobility cues, demonstrating that individuals who have
lesser physical mobility will be seen as less capable of acting on the self, and
therefore will be ascribed less sophisticated physical capacities. This project
will also extend to interventions to reduce the dehumanization of those with
physical disabilities. It is expected that individuals who are seen as more
physically capable (because of effective prostheses) will no longer be
dehumanized. Taken together, this research bridges the interface between person
perception, the perception of others' bodies, and mind perception. It also
addresses questions about the causes of dehumanizing stigma and how such stigma
may be reduced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.