* 1748377
* CAREER: New Learning-based Algorithms for the Analysis of Very-Large-Scale Neuroimaging Data
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Mert Sabuncu, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 581,438.00

Artificial intelligence, fueled by recent advances in machine learning, is
poised to transform healthcare and biomedical research. Machine learning
algorithms allow researchers to analyze complex patterns in large datasets, in
the service of advancing our understanding of biological mechanisms and
developing clinical tools. This project considers very large scale brain imaging
studies, including, for example, tens of thousands of individuals contributing
head MRI scans and other biomedical data such as whole-genome sequences or
clinical records. Such data allow researchers to map the effects of genetic,
environmental, and other factors on the structure and function of the brain,
which in turn advances our knowledge of disorders like Alzheimer's. Today, the
primary obstacle in exploiting very large scale brain imaging datasets is
computational, because existing software tools don't scale well and lack in
quality assurance capabilities. This project will produce a machine-learning
based computational pipeline that will fill this gap. In the largest study of
its kind, we will showcase the developed software tools to chart the
heritability of shapes of brain structures. In addition, the project will
implement a diverse set of educational outreach initiatives, such as a
customized research experience for under-represented minority high-school
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neuroimaging is entering a new era of
unprecedented scale and complexity. Soon, we will have datasets including more
than 100,000 individuals. The fundamental challenge in analyzing and exploiting
these data is computational. Today, widely-used neuroimage analysis tools are
computationally demanding, produce results that are sensitive to confounds, and
are limited in quality control capabilities, making them infeasible at scale.
This project will extend recent advances in machine learning to develop an
innovative computational pipeline that addresses the drawbacks of existing
methods. First, a computationally efficient and flexible brain MRI segmentation
framework will be developed that integrates rich neuroanatomical prior models.
The segmentation tool will be made robust to confounding effects such as subject
motion via the use of an adversarial learning strategy. Learning-based methods
will be further investigated to obviate the time-consuming manual quality
control of segmentations. Finally, an innovative metric learning approach will
be used to study genetic influences on brain morphology in the UK Biobank. The
project will also implement an integrated educational plan that is focused on
interdisciplinary, hands-on and lifelong learning. The researchers will devote
significant effort to developing core educational material that will be adapted
and utilized for audiences of various backgrounds and
stages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.