* 1748903
* CAREER: Global Digital Privacy Innovation
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Nicola Dell, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 05/31/2024
* USD 548,450.00

This research will drive global digital privacy innovation by developing a
fundamental understanding of the privacy challenges faced by novice technology
users in non-Western contexts and designing empirically-driven and
theoretically-grounded technical interventions that transform existing knowledge
of human-centered privacy. Although access to digital technologies offers great
potential benefits, it also puts people at risk of digital security and privacy
attacks, and novice technology users in non-Western contexts may lack the
technological knowledge and experience required to understand the risks and
protect their personal data. Moreover, a growing amount of evidence suggests
that (1) these populations face a range of new and interesting digital privacy
challenges that result from their different social, cultural, and religious
contexts, and (2) the current design of mobile devices, and the privacy
mechanisms that come with them, are primarily driven by Western values and do
not adequately address the needs of these diverse populations. This research
will help US corporations to be more competitive in the global technology market
and enable developers to create privacy-preserving systems that respect
different cultures and values.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research agenda has four
primary aims. The first will collect empirical data through qualitative
fieldwork that provides a deep understanding of people's usage patterns, privacy
concerns, and priorities. The second will analyze this empirical data to
generate privacy threat models and assess the relevance, severity, and
likelihood of different privacy attacks. The third will use participatory
design, software development, and field deployments to create and evaluate novel
technical interventions that improve digital privacy by supporting alternative
device usage models and increasing people's understanding and awareness of
privacy threats. Finally, the fourth will integrate these research efforts into
a broad set of education and outreach activities that amplify the project's
impact on academia, industry, and society. This human-centered research advances
existing knowledge of digital privacy and technology use in non-Western
societies, which will benefit researchers in computer science, security and
privacy, human-computer interaction (HCI), global development, and others. The
specific intellectual contributions include: (1) developing a fundamental
understanding of the privacy challenges faced by novice users in non-Western
contexts, (2) identifying new threat models and analyzing the privacy attack
landscape, (3) designing and evaluating novel technical interventions that
improve digital privacy for diverse populations, and (4) contributing empirical
data and design ideas that initiate a new field of innovation at the
intersection of HCI for development and computer security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.