* 1748762
* CAREER: Enabling "White-Box" Autonomy in Medical Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Jin-Oh Hahn, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 02/29/2024
* USD 516,369.00

Despite a long-standing effort on the automation in the care of critically ill
patients, prior automation capabilities have not been suitably mature for real-
world use due to a few limitations: (1) the decisions/actions of the automation
could not be easily interpreted by clinicians, preventing clinicians' effective
interaction with and supervision of the automation for safe patient care; (2)
the automation was designed to perform a particular task of interest without
accounting for the overall physiological state of the patient; (3) multiple
automation functions were not often coordinated to avoid possible conflicts in
patient treatment; (4) automation was prone to errors in the medical devices;
and (5) regulatory science for evaluation and approval of safety-critical
automation capabilities was lacking. This research program seeks to address
these fundamental challenges by studying novel methodologies for (1)
mathematically representing the patient physiology in a way to facilitate the
interpretation of clinicians and (2) designing automation capabilities that can
facilitate clinician interaction and supervision, coordination of multiple
treatment goals and functions, and resilience to device errors and faults. In
addition, this research program will benefit society and Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) education by creating a wide range of
automation systems that can improve the quality of care of critically ill
patients, expediting the deployment of new medical devices with advanced
automation capabilities, facilitating the evaluation and approval of emerging
healthcare automation capabilities, and training STEM workforce especially from
underrepresented minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the long-term vision of
enabling interpretable white-box autonomy in healthcare by advancing
generalizable methodologies for medical cyber-physical systems (M-CPS), the
objective of this CAREER program is to investigate physiological modeling,
coordinated and resilient multivariable closed-loop control, and regulatory
science methodologies in circulatory resuscitation. An integrated research,
education, and outreach program is proposed to achieve this objective. On the
research front, physiological modeling and closed-loop control methodologies
applicable to white-box autonomy in a wide range of circulatory resuscitation
scenarios will be investigated. Specifically, generalizable methodologies for
(1) patient physiology and pharmacology modeling and (2) coordinated and
resilient multivariable closed-loop control will be developed. The value of
these methodologies will be demonstrated by developing interpretable white-box
physiological closed-loop control algorithms for circulatory resuscitation. On
the education and outreach front, members of the next-generation M-CPS workforce
will be trained and regulatory science for evaluating critical care autonomy
capabilities will be advanced. Specifically, (1) graduate, undergraduate, and
K-12 students will be attracted into STEM and M-CPS, (2) collaboration with the
US Food and Drug Administration will be performed to investigate testing
methodologies and tools for physiological models and closed-loop M-CPS via its
Medical Device Development Tools Program, and (3) newly created knowledge will
be disseminated to further advance M-CPS research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.