* 1748715
* Mechanisms Controlling the Probability of Tornadogenesis in Supercell Thunderstorms
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Matthew Parker, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 02/28/2023
* USD 587,109.00

The characteristics of supercell thunderstorms that form tornadoes are well-
known. However, a large fraction of the supercells that exhibit those
characteristics do not develop tornadoes. This research award will use high-
resolution numerical modeling to investigate why tornadogenesis so frequently
fails in environments that are otherwise favorable. The work has the potential
to improve forecasting, nowcasting and warnings for tornadoes. The award will
also contribute to training and mentoring of early-career research scientists,
ensuring a diverse and highly capable workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team will conduct a numerical modeling study to analyze the within-
storm attributes and associated environmental traits that distinguish simulated
tornadic from non-tornadic supercells. The researchers suggest that more study
needs to happen at the point at which tornadogenesis succeeds or fails, rather
than focusing on the origin of the rotation. The Cloud Model 1 (CM1) model will
be used in idealized simulation ensembles, multi-storm simulations, and toy
model simulations to: 1) Explain why supercells with large surface vertical
vorticity often fail to produce significant tornadoes, 2) Establish the
environmental proxies that are most directly, physically linked to supercells
with a high probability of tornadogenesis, and 3) Explain why multiple
supercells within the same environment can differ dramatically in terms of
tornado production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.