* 1748374
* Collaborative Research: Place-based Research to Understand Youth Development: Integrating Dynamic and Culturally-Informed Models
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2021
* Dawn Witherspoon, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 04/30/2021
* USD 29,066.00

This award will support a two-day workshop at The Pennsylvania State University,
which will bring together a multidisciplinary group of scholars to improve
understanding of how the places people live in influence their social,
emotional, and cognitive development. Scientific evidence has documented how
neighborhoods and other "activity spaces"--such as schools, workplaces, and
social institutions--influence development. The aim of this workshop is to use
this evidence to help build a comprehensive, place-based science. Broadly
speaking, a place-based science of lifespan development will recognize that
different residential neighborhoods and activity spaces might expose children,
youth, and families to different resources and risks. These differences have
important implications for development. In addition, there is a critical need to
incorporate transdisciplinary perspectives on race, ethnicity, and culture to
advance a place-based science that is relevant and meaningful for an
increasingly diverse U.S. society. This workshop will enhance the theoretical
and conceptual frameworks that will support future place-based research on
development across the lifespan. Such research can address important societal
issues related to segregation, inequality, and positive development.

This workshop will allow a group of scholars to work together to (1) integrate
existing theoretical foundations of neighborhood and activity space research and
(2) critically analyze how these theoretical foundations can incorporate
scientific evidence that has documented racial, ethnic, and cultural diversity
in developmental processes across the lifespan. Additionally, workshop
participants will advance a set of recommendations on innovative, dynamic,
multi-level approaches that reflect theoretical and conceptual advances made in
the workshop. Finally, the participants will address long-term methodological
challenges in neighborhood and activity space research. The activities during
the workshop will culminate with a set of research questions and suggested
approaches that will establish the next decade's research agenda.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.