* 1748671
* Workshop: Non-Academic Careers for STS Scholars
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2018
* Matthew Harsh, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 25,322.00

This workshop will be a pre-conference event at the 2017 Society for the Social
Studies of Science (4S) meeting in Boston, MA. It will help prepare Science,
Technology and Society (STS) graduate students to consider, apply and succeed in
non-academic jobs. Traditionally, graduate students receive minimal mentoring
for careers outside of academia and this workshop is designed to broaden the
mentoring opportunities beyond the university environment. This workshop will
expose students to alternative careers outside of tenure-track jobs. By
providing skills and strategies to STS graduate students this workshop will help
STS maximize its societal impact by expanding STS graduates pathways into work
in industry, government and the nonprofit sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The one
day workshop will provide STS graduate students and faculty the opportunity to
interact and network with STS scholars that have successfully transitioned into
non-Academic careers. It will feature a series of panels with speakers from
government, industry, and non-profit sectors. The speakers will discuss non-
academic resumes, interviewing, networking, job opportunities and the skill sets
necessary to have successful non-academic careers. The workshop will address how
STS scholars have made the transition to careers outside of academia, and have
become competitive in industry, government and non-profit sectors. Workshop
participants: graduates students, faculty and non-academics will have the
opportunity to explore how the current STS curriculum supports/hinders non-
academic careers and suggest strategies to improve training for non-academic
careers. The workshop will cultivate an environment of shared learning among
these three groups in order to develop a report that reflects on the current and
future curriculum needs of STS scholars.