* 1748057
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Examination of Factors Which Underlie Community Mobility
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2021
* Peter Lape, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2021
* USD 25,005.00

Archaeologists at the University of Washington, Seattle, will collaborate with
Indonesian colleagues to investigate why some residentially sedentary
communities relocate over short distances. Some societies have developed and
retained building styles that allow easy movement, although communities therein
tend to remain in the same place for generations. The researchers will examine
potential causes for infrequent, short-distance mobility including changing
climate, conflict, changes in trade, ideological change, and epidemics, which
may have influenced decisions to shift settlement locations within a small area.
While it is well understood that humans often shift their settlements from place
to place as part of a subsistence strategy, this research examines mobility as
an adaptation to a range of factors not directly related to subsistence, which
have affected humans throughout time, including in the present, and space,
including in the Americas. While examining mobility's uses beyond subsistence,
this research also asks whether otherwise sedentary societies have used
lightweight, mobile building methods to adapt to a range of infrequent
pressures. A clear understanding of these past adaptations may inform adaptive
strategies in the present, whether in terms of house design, settlement
planning, or civic organization. The research will involve consultation with
members of the present community in which it takes place. The researchers will
provide archaeological training to local students, and develop educational
materials to distribute through regional schools and museums.

The researchers will test ideas about the social effects of the changing
climate, hypothesized as "climate refugees" or conflict over scarce resources.
Likewise, they will investigate theories about how newly arrived ethnic groups
integrate or do not integrate into an indigenous population. They will also test
the hypothesis that societies may relocate to take advantage of new access to
long-distance trade. Finally, they will test the historical hypothesis that
colonial-period diseases spurred the abandonment of settlements. The researchers
will use datable ceramics and radiocarbon dating to determine a chronology for
the abandoned sites on the islands of Ujir and Wasir in the Aru archipelago,
Eastern Indonesia. They will determine the sources of locally produced
earthenwares through geochemical analysis, and of porcelain and stoneware from
more distant regions through stylistic analysis. By tracking changes in the
diversity of ceramic sources over time, the researchers will reconstruct a
history of the sites' connections to local and long-distance trade networks. The
site chronology and trade history will then be compared to historical records
and oral traditions, as well as regional climate proxies. These methods will
allow the researchers to infer whether one factor or multiple factors together
caused the past communities on Ujir and Wasir to abandon their settlements, in a
case study that can inform scholars and members of the public interested in
mobility, conflict, climate change, cultural difference, and trade.