* 1748653
* CAREER: Integrating field geomorphology, remote sensing, undergraduate education, and  modelling to improve understanding of Arctic hydrology
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Colin Gleason, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 01/31/2024
* USD 542,383.00

The Arctic is undergoing rapid changes as this sensitive region responds to
altered energy and water transport at the global scale, deeply affecting its
local communities, ecosystems, and water cycle. One of the best ways to catalog
and understand these changes is through the study of Arctic rivers. Rivers are
an excellent indicator of overall Arctic change as the water in the river at any
given time (its "discharge") is a reflection of all of the other components of
the water and energy cycles: precipitation, evaporation, and groundwater
movements. However, logistical difficulties and shifting international
priorities have resulted in a steep decline in gauge monitoring network.
Likewise, the unique geomorphology (the way rivers shape and are shaped by the
landscape) of Arctic rivers is relatively understudied. Without advances in open
source data and understanding of Arctic rivers we lack the ability to assess
recent Artic changes that are affecting citizens and ecosystems alike, and our
ability to accurately predict the future climate and water resources of the
Arctic is greatly impaired.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Therefore, this project seeks
an unprecedented accounting of the pan-Arctic hydrologic cycle built from the
river up. The project will first develop the basic open-source river data needed
to assess recent changes in Arctic hydrology and then use these data to catalog
and understand the state of the Arctic's water. Specifically, the project will
couple the recent explosion in big-data remote sensing and specific remote
sensing discharge estimation techniques with classic fluvial geomorphology to
estimate discharge for every Arctic river wider than 150m from 1984 to present
using NASA's Landsat family of satellites. This remotely sensed Arctic river
assessment will be founded upon a backbone of detailed fieldwork as designed and
executed by undergraduates at UMass Amherst in a new program: Integrating
Geosciences and Engineering in the Arctic (IGEA). IGEA participants will design
and lead fieldwork intended to deepen understanding of unique Arctic
geomorphology, and this information will be absorbed to improve the discharge
estimates made from remote sensing. IGEA students will design field experiments
in the spring semester as juniors, perform Arctic fieldwork in the summer after
their junior year, and then analyze their data and train the next cohort of
participants in the fall of their senior year. Undergraduates are purposefully
drawn from two different disciplines, Engineering and Geosciences, to address
disciplinary siloing at the undergraduate level and to train, teach, and inspire
the next generation of interdisciplinary thinkers through this immersive Arctic
research program. Finally, the IGEA-informed remotely sensed discharge data will
be used to calibrate an open source global hydrology model, integrating the
other components of this project to reach a fuller understanding of the entire
Arctic system achieved through improved process-based understanding of Arctic
rivers.