* 1748826
* Children's real-time language processing and verb learning during interactions with caregivers
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2018,12/31/2023
* Sudha Arunachalam, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 12/31/2023
* USD 312,179.00

Learning language is one of the most fundamental tasks children face in the
first few years of life. Children who struggle with this task are at higher risk
of experiencing difficulties in school, as well as challenges at work and in
relationships with loved ones and in the community. A key factor in successful
language learning is the richness of the language children hear from their
caregivers. To understand why some children develop strong language skills and
others do not, it is essential to understand how caregivers adapt their language
to match their child's needs and abilities. This project will study how
caregivers adapt their language when introducing new words to their children,
and how this affects the way children learn the words. This project will also
train students, teachers, and parents to better understand child language
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiments in this project are based on a
game that caregivers and children play together. The game allows researchers to
test how quickly and how well children discover the meanings of new words. The
children who participate in this research will be 2-, 3-, and 4-year-old
children acquiring English as their first language. The research team will
measure children's language comprehension and language learning using state-of-
the-art eye-tracking techniques. This technique involves showing children
several pictures, one of which their caregiver describes using a word that is
unfamiliar to the child, and then analyzing whether and how quickly children
direct their gaze to the correct picture as it described. These data will reveal
what features of caregiver speech best support children's language comprehension
and learning of the unfamiliar word. Results of the research will be shared with
other child language researchers and will also be used to create easy-to-use
educational materials that will give parents and teachers strategies for
supporting children in their language learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.