* 1748392
* EAGER: Large-Scale Real-Time Information Visualization on Immersive Platforms
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Tobias Hollerer, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2019
* USD 93,230.00

This proposal breaks new ground in the rapidly evolving field of Immersive
Analytics. Virtual and Augmented Reality technologies are uniquely suited to
enable large-scale data analysis that provides global overviews of data
landscapes as well as fine-grain control and navigation. The proposed work will
implement a scalable development environment for immersive analytics
experiences, and evaluate different methods for authoring and collaboratively
exploring very large datasets using Virtual Reality headsets, display walls, and
curved immersive displays. The proposed work will pave the way for making
immersive large-scale data exploration more accessible to large audiences,
opening up possibilities of letting home virtual reality users participate in
novel learning experiences. The PI will showcase the resulting immersive
visualizations at regular outreach events to attract underrepresented minorities
to novel human-computer interaction, and thus STEM research.

Effective information visualization needs to be able to process and display
large amounts of data in real-time to enable interactive analysis. The PI will
build direct graphics processing unit (GPU) support into a modern information
visualization library design, targeting one to two orders of magnitude
acceleration in the rendering of large numbers of graphical elements, compared
to current web-based visualization libraries. This computational scalability
will enable interactive exploration of very large datasets, either displayed
using a single visualization paradigm (e.g. node-link network) or multiple
paradigms (e.g., map, network, sensor data, time series, etc.). Immersive
information environments have the potential to support more effective
capabilities for collaborative analysis than is possible with desktop or web-
based platforms by placing groups of stakeholders in the middle of large-scale
data visualizations to relate to others' first-person perspectives and
interactively and jointly navigate through information spaces and control and
highlight different aspects. The PI will design interactive collaborative data
navigation and control tools that focus on this potential.