* 1748038
* The Neural Basis of Attention: A Festschrift in Honor of Robert Rafal
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Tony Ro, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 16,000.00

At any given instance, there is typically far more information in the world than
our visual systems can handle. For example, while reading this sentence, only a
small proportion of the letters and words are processed at any given time.
Although seemingly simple, the process of selectively attending to some
information while ignoring other information requires the orchestration of many
different brain areas, each of which contributes differentially towards this
feat. This workshop will bring together international experts to discuss how the
human brain focuses attention. In addition to covering historical and
contemporary perspectives on the neural basis of attention, speakers will pay
special tribute to the substantial contributions and influences of Professor
Robert Rafal, a cognitive and behavioral neurologist whose career focused on
better understanding the neural underpinnings of attention, consciousness, eye
movements, and perception. This award will primarily fund travel for deserving
students and early career stage researchers in the field and publications costs
associated with producing a special edited volume from this meeting.

The meeting will take place on March 22-23, 2018 in the Segal Theater of The
Graduate Center of the City University of New York. The talks and edited volume
will highlight some of the important mainstay principles of attention research,
as well as ones that have been substantially revised or overturned. Furthermore,
unlike most other conferences and workshops, which tend to schedule more
established researchers as speakers, this workshop will include speakers of
varying experiences and ages, ranging from current and recent students to
established senior researchers. Speakers will include several prominent female
speakers, which should be especially inspiring for the younger female
researchers and attendees. Additionally, specific efforts will be made to
include a diverse group of student attendees, including invitations to
underrepresented minority high school students and undergraduates in the STEM
fields at CUNY, a highly diverse public institution in New York City. The
student attendees should greatly benefit from the knowledge to be gained from
attending this workshop and may decide to pursue a research or academic career
focusing on better understanding the neural basis of attention.