* 1748590
* EAGER: Training and Text Collection as a Vehicle for Recruiting and Retaining Endangered Language Fieldworkers
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,02/29/2020
* William Torrence, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/29/2020
* USD 267,648.00

There are an estimated 7,000 languages in the world and linguists anticipate at
least half of those will go silent by the end of the current century. A key
intellectual challenge is thus documenting the language and associated
scientific knowledge before the 3,000 threatened languages cease to be spoken.
This project addresses the challenge using an exploratory modification of a
Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU)-style model focused on students at
or near the onset of graduate study in linguistics. The focus on early-career
linguists is intended to shape their research trajectories and produce
continuing long-term research results as the project participants advance in
their graduate and post-graduate careers and in turn train others. The project
has the potential to increase the number of linguistic specialists in the United
States focusing on underdocumented and endangered languages, an increase in
technical capacity serving the national interest by keeping U.S. institutions at
the forefront of scientific research on endangered languages. The project will
recruit and train post-baccalaureate linguists in fieldwork methodology and
language documentation. It will also enlist a postdoctoral researcher into the
project. Second, the project will also result in documentation for multiple
underdocumented and endangered languages, directly advancing scientific
knowledge via the archived collection of texts from multiple endangered
languages. These texts will provide researchers with a large corpus of connected
natural speech, which will help to reveal grammatical properties of the
languages, especially those where sentence structure (syntax) and pronunciation
(phonology) interface, which has been shown from cross-linguistic investigations
to display considerable complexity. Broader impacts include the training and
mentoring of linguists from underrepresented groups, the fostering of
international collaborations, and international research and fieldwork
experience for early-career (post-baccalaureate and post-doctoral) scholars.

Led by two faculty from the University of California, Los Angeles and the
Graduate Center, City University of New York, this project will develop a
pipeline of junior scholar linguists working on African languages and new
collaborations with African communities through the mechanism of in situ field
research experiences in Ghana, resulting in actual, quality language
documentation. The first phase will target "early career" graduate and
prospective graduate students with interests in African languages, leveraging
the 2018 Institute on Collaborative Language Research (CoLang 2018) to train
students in the technical aspects of language documentation. This will be
followed in the second phase by hands-on training in which the participants will
work directly with members of four endangered language communities in Ghana,
targeting the North Guang or Ghana-Togo Mountain languages. The entire project
team will work one-on-one with speakers and record, transcribe, translate and
analyze a collection of texts, which will come from a number of genres, such as
folktales, personal reminiscences, family histories, and children's stories.
These efforts will augment the existing literature on the targeted languages in
terms of their lexical, morphological, syntactic and phonological properties, as
these languages are generally underdocumented, or even undocumented. Narratives
involve speech in context, and are likely to show syntax-phonology interface
effects, as well as other grammatical structures of interest. Moreover, the
documentation will be a permanent record of important cultural and historical
information, having broad applicability across fields and serving as the basis
for future work on the languages.