* 1748105
* RESEARCH-PGR:  Anchoring phenotypes to gene networks for embryo formation in maize
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Masaharu Suzuki, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 08/31/2023
* USD 3,066,853.00

Corn is among the world's most productive crops and provides food for a growing
population. The United States is the largest producer and exporter of corn.
Every corn kernel contains an embryo that will grow into a plant if the kernel
is planted. A vigorous embryo is critical for establishing the healthy stand of
corn plants needed to maximize yield. The embryo also supplies valuable
nutrients including unsaturated corn oil, vitamin E, and other anti-oxidants.
Despite the importance of this embryo, the genes that control its formation and
interaction with other organs of the kernel are not well understood. Planned
work will identify networks of interacting genes that control growth of the
embryo as the kernel develops on the ear. Genes involved in embryo growth will
be identified by analyzing genomes of individual plants that carry heritable
defects in embryo formation. This research will use and augment the UniformMu
national public resource for corn genetics developed for systematic analysis of
gene function. Genes revealed by this genetic analysis are in turn compared to
networks of genes identified by correlations in timing of action during embryo
development. Results will delineate new sources of natural genetic variation for
improving quality and quantity of maize. The project will also connect with the
public via museum programs, and will train students in application of genomics
technologies to problems with both fundamental and practical
importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The maize embryo dramatically impacts resource
partitioning between embryo and endosperm during kernel growth. A striking
feature of the cereal-grain embryo is its unique organ-- the scutellum. In
addition to well-known roles of the scutellum in germination, it is also the
storage site for lipid-soluble vitamins and unsaturated oils that impact
nutritional quality of the grain. Surprisingly, the processes involved in
formation and growth of the scutellum remain largely unknown. Planned work
targets the developmental control of this distinctive organ: Objective 1 will
implement high-throughput, phenotype-to-genotype analysis for 86 embryo mutants
isolated from the UniformMu maize population. Objective 2 will delineate and
genetically anchor gene networks for embryogenesis by combining transcriptome-
network analysis with in-depth morphological, metabolic, and molecular analysis
of embryo phenotypes identified in Objective 1. Objective 3 will enhance the
UniformMu national public resource for genetic research by replenishing and
improving depleted seed stocks to aid their availability and accessibility via
the Maize Cooperation Genetics Stock Center and MaizeGDB.org. The project will
reach out to diverse communities through public museum programs, resource
workshops, proactive engagement, and user support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.