* 1748526
* HSI Conference: Transforming STEM Education in Hispanic Serving Institutions - Regional Insights from the Southwest
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Marla Franco, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2019
* USD 98,422.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) Dear Colleague Letter NSF 17-092:
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education in Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs)
calls for projects to support conferences that will identify the most critical
challenges and opportunities regarding undergraduate science, technology
engineering and mathematics (STEM) education at HSIs, and potential actionable
solutions that fall within NSF's mission, policies, and practices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Arizona (UA) proposes a regional
conference that brings together up to 100 students, faculty, practitioners, and
administrators from southwestern 2- and 4-year Hispanic-Serving Institutions
(HSIs). Workshop participants will be recruited from the 150 HSIs in Arizona,
New Mexico and California. The 3-day workshop will focus on five topics relevant
to STEM undergraduate education: (1) Enabling transitions from 2- to 4-year
HSIs: gaps and opportunities for cross-institutional partnerships, (2) Charting
the role of Research 1 (R1) HSIs in undergraduate STEM education: research as a
pathway for college and career success, (3) Leveraging innovative and inclusive
pedagogies and curricula: gaps and opportunities for new instructional
initiatives, (4) Mapping HSI opportunities and challenges to recruitment,
retention, and persistence: successful examples and potential new initiatives,
and (5) Meeting HSI students where they are: the meaning and role of culturally-
responsive STEM education at the college level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop is expected to results in a report that is focused on the regional
challenges and opportunities of HSIs in the southwest. The workshop participants
will work toward identifying priority areas for improving STEM education in
HSIs. The outcomes of the conference will: (1) serve to advance knowledge
regarding critical gaps and opportunities in bolstering the educational mission
of HSIs that are demographically and geographically situated in the Southwestern
United States , (2) identify and characterize models of institutional
collaboration that best serve the needs of Hispanic students within and across
science, engineering, and mathematics education,(3) improve our understanding of
effective practices for generating sustained interest and success in STEM fields
among Hispanics, and (4) synthesize evidence from ethnographic research to
inform institutional change, pedagogy, and STEM curricula in HSIs.