* 1748312
* American Scientific Participation in the United Nations Conference of Parties-23
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Edward Liebow, American Anthropological Assoc
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2018
* USD 7,899.00

The participation of American scientists in landmark international conferences
is vital for improving the quality of competitive work within the U.S. This UN
Conference of Parties (COP)-23 is a gathering of more than 10,000 scientists and
policymakers, who will convene to discuss cutting edge work in environmental
transformations, institutionalized patterns of adaptation, migration,
resilience, and disaster mitigation and response. The American Anthropological
Association (AAA) is the only social sciences scholarly society to be awarded
Consultative Observer credentials, and COP-23 presents a significant opportunity
for the delegation to report on the work of an AAA Task Force. The project will
strengthen collaborations between American anthropological scientists and others
internationally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The American Anthropological Association
is fund travel for a delegation from a task force for participation in the
United Nations Conference of Parties-23 in Bonn, Germany from November 6-17,
2017. The Task Force was completed over an 18-month period by a nationally
recognized group of scholars drawn from all 4 subfields of anthropology. The AAA
delegation will report on the work of our Task Force, identifying opportunities
to strengthen collaboration, and establishing priorities for additional work to
fill in gaps and thinly developed areas of knowledge on environmental change.