* 1748025
* Antarctic Dinosaurs: A Film and Exhibition Development Initiative
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2018,07/31/2018
* Deborah Raksany, Giant Screen Films
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 07/31/2018
* USD 1.00

The Antarctic Dinosaurs project is a media development initiative that seeks to
leverage the popularity and charisma of dinosaurs to draw museum audiences into
an educational science adventure, exploring the history and transformation of
Antarctica and the planet's polar ecosystems, and revealing how understanding
changes of the past may help predict and protect our future. This project will
address critical gaps in public understanding of polar science concepts,
reaching over 8 million museum visitors through the development of new immersive
educational content, including a high impact large format film, a traveling
exhibition, and an outreach plan that will allow children, families and lifelong
learners to participate in meaningful engagements with diverse scientists and
STEM professionals. These products will offer the public a more nuanced
understanding of how the field of paleontology connects to other disciplines--
from evolutionary biology to climate science--and will provide a deeper
appreciation for the pursuit of scientific research in many fields. By offering
a glimpse of the facilities, logistics and support systems that make up
Antarctica's unique research community, the project will also highlight the many
diverse participants and roles that contribute to Antarctic science, creating
STEM role models and inspiring young viewers to consider joining the STEM
workforce. All project efforts seek to portray the southernmost frontiers of the
planet as parts of a connected and changing global community, increasing public
appreciation for the value of scientific research, the process of science, and
participation in STEM pursuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on a
successful history of collaboration between producers Giant Screen Films and
David Clark, Inc., and with the Field Museum. The project will document the work
of scientists conducting research funded by NSF lead proposal #1341304
(Collaborative Research: Understanding the evolution of high-latitude Permo-
Triassic paleoenvironments and their vertebrate communities); as well as
additional related projects. Digital filming and photography will support
powerful visual storytelling about field work and the science adventure to
unearth evidence of dinosaurs and other prehistoric life in Antarctica. Shoots
will take place at McMurdo Station and at field sites in the Shackleton Glacier
region, including Shackleton Camp and at several satellite camps where data
collection and excavation are planned. The project will employ cutting-edge high
definition (4K) and high dynamic range (HDR) cameras to capture imagery of the
continent. The media content generated will reach the public through a high
impact large format film, Antarctic Dinosaurs, for distribution to museum
cinemas worldwide (including IMAX and other giant screens). Content will also be
incorporated into narrative video elements in a synonymous traveling exhibition
that will be hosted by an extensive list of global museum institutions. The
unique size and emotional impact of the giant screen canvas, as well as diverse
exhibition interactions, will make a distant continent seem less remote,
building a connection to scientists as adventurers, imparting a greater
understanding of polar science, and inspiring a deeper appreciation for the
Earth's changes. An extensive educational outreach plan, encompassing museum
events, screenings and panel discussions, industry conferences, social media,
and educational resources will be developed. The film/exhibition collaboration
will serve as a model for museum-based practitioners seeking to promote learning
across experiences in those venues, and will lay the groundwork to evaluate the
integration of science content into new media. The project is supported by NSF's
Office of Polar Programs.