* 1748414
* EAGER:  COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Reversible Solid Electrolyte Interface (SEI) Layers for Advanced Li-ion Batteries and Beyond
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Fei Gao, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 01/31/2019
* USD 70,000.00

Although lithium ion batteries have been commercialized for consumer
electronics, they still fall far behind the requirements needed for batteries
used in long-range electric vehicles and large-scale renewable energy storage.
There is a need to improve the energy densities of lithium ion batteries and to
research "beyond lithium ion" battery technologies that employ high-capacity but
low-cost materials such as silicon, oxygen or sulfur electrodes. Almost all
battery chemistries in electrochemical energy storage cells operate beyond the
stability limits of the electrolytes, substance that produce an electrically
conducting solution when dissolved. These battery cells operate in many cases
because electrode material-electrolyte reactions result in the formation of a
protective material layer on the electrode material, called a solid-electrolyte
interface layer. The mechanical and chemical reactivity properties of this
protective layer dictate the energy, power and the long-term cycling stability
of the battery system; however, fundamental knowledge on the formation of this
protective layer is lacking. This research project is investigating a new solid-
electrolyte interface layer formation mechanism that will enable design
solutions for many of the performance limitations of batteries. The research
outcomes of this project are being integrated into energy-themed educational
activities for students to study science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) subjects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research
project between research groups at the University and Arkansas and the
University of Michigan seeks a fundamentally new solid-electrolyte interface
formation mechanism by using silicon/electrolyte interfaces as a model system.
Intensive electrochemical characterizations are being conducted by testing
silicon film electrodes in various concentrated electrolytes to understand the
coordination environments of lithium cations in the bulk electrolytes and its
implications on the solid-electrolyte interface layer compositions. In situ
atomic force microscopy is being employed to probe the formation and evolution
of solid-electrolyte interface layers on silicon surfaces in a cell. Theoretical
simulations are being combined with material characterizations to advance the
fundamental understanding of solid-electrolyte interface layers derived from
concentrated electrolytes. The research project is designed to test a new theory
to control the interfacial properties between electrodes and electrolyte, one
that is broadly applicable to battery technologies and many other energy storage
and conversion systems.