* 1748293
* Self-derivation of new knowledge through memory integration
* SBE,SMA
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Patricia Bauer, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 02/28/2022
* USD 535,184.00

The project addresses the fundamental question of how children build up factual
knowledge about the world over time and experiences. People do not acquire all
knowledge about a topic in a single experience. Instead, it is built up over
experiences or lessons that are separated in time. The lessons also may come
from different sources, such as books, lectures, videos, museum exhibits. A
major challenge is to explain how individual, separate episodes of learning are
integrated with one another, such that the knowledge base accumulates over time.
This knowledge base extends beyond what we have learned explicitly, to include
self-derived information, through logical processes such as induction and
deduction. Prior research has found age-related increases in the ability to
extend beyond explicit information to self-derive new knowledge through
integration of separate episodes of learning. It also has found individual
variability in the process, that relates to academic achievement. This new
research will highlight the sources of these differences. These discoveries will
inform interventions to promote these processes, thereby improving the depth and
breadth of learning. In addition to its translational potential, the project
also will benefit society by increasing the scientific literacy of undergraduate
and graduate students, and by engaging children from diverse backgrounds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project concerns the specific productive process of
self-derivation of new factual knowledge through integration of separate yet
related episodes of new learning. This occurs when learners integrate
information newly acquired in one lesson (e.g., liquids expand with heat) with
information newly acquired in another (thermometers contain liquid), and
productively derive new factual knowledge (thermometers work because liquid
expands as heat increases). There are age-related increases in self-derivation
through integration across the school years. The major objective of the project
is to test the source of the improvements. The research is situated in a broader
literature on memory integration. It is distinguished by its focus on
development, on process, and on producing factual knowledge. The guiding
hypothesis is that age-related improvements are explained by developmental
variability in the efficiency and efficacy of five component processes:
encoding, reactivation, integration, selection, and self-derivation. The
behavior of preschool to elementary-age children is consistent with a
developmental progression in successful engagement of these processes. The
project will directly test the suggested progression in 4- to 9-year-olds.
Behavioral measures will be complemented by eye tracking. Tracking visual
attention provides a window on cognitive effort, indicating engagement of
component processes, and their relation to self-derivation of new
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.