* 1748080
* Investigating the light-absorbing carbonaceous aerosol lineage: The brown carbon - black carbon continuum
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2021
* Geoffrey Smith, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2021
* USD 439,151.00

Over the past two decades, it has been established that black carbon (BC), also
known as soot, is a significant light absorber with a climate-warming effect
potentially second only to carbon dioxide. However, the climate forcing effect
of BC is subject to large uncertainties, and resolution is crucial for
constraining the climate sensitivity of combustion carbon. One of the major
contributors to this uncertainty is the limited understanding of light
absorption by BrC, which is often co-emitted with BC, thus coupling the effects
of the two. This project will promote graduate and undergraduate research by
constituting a major component of a PhD dissertation and involving undergraduate
students in the project. Third, the project will involve an outreach component
through the involvement in workshops led by the UGA College of Education aiming
at creating spaces where bilingual (Hispanic) middle- and high-school students,
their parents and teachers, and researchers can engage in science-learning
(STEM) activities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;BrC light-absorption properties (the
most relevant properties for climate calculations) are poorly constrained, with
reported values varying over two orders of magnitude. The source of this
variability is largely unknown, posing major challenges to representing BrC in
climate models. This work will build on advances in BC formation research in the
field of combustion science and recent findings by the PI to understand the
effects of BrC. The main hypothesis of the project is that a major fraction of
BrC is comprised of organic precursors of BC, and that BrC exhibits a continuum
of light-absorption properties that can be correlated with molecular mass and
volatility.