* 1749778
* CAREER:  Structural dynamics of post-translationally modified Calmodulin and its role in target recognition
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2024
* Hugo Sanabria, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 03/31/2024
* USD 636,625.00

Cells communicate by generating, transmitting and receiving chemical signals.
The protein Calmodulin, present in all higher organisms, senses calcium levels
in the cell and regulates vital functions such as heart beating, muscle
contraction, learning and memory. This project is geared towards identifying the
fundamental principles that allow this protein to regulate these critical
functions. Interestingly, Calmodulin can activate or deactivate these functions,
but the process by which Calmodulin selects this action is not understood. The
project will study modifications to the protein that are likely to alter the
protein's flexibility and its three-dimensional structure. The obtained
knowledge would help explain how certain modifications regulate the way
Calmodulin interacts with its targets. The broader impacts of this project
include the incorporation of a thorough educational and training program to
prepare a pool of highly qualified undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
researchers across various disciplines. In particular, the program will create
enriched curricular programs that provide new opportunities for hands-on
experience using state-of-the-art instrumentation and train a globally competent
workforce by creating new study abroad opportunities. To improve scientific
literacy among the general population, a new video library is to be broadcasted
from Clemson University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to
understand how the structure, dynamics and phosphorylation state of Calmodulin
modulate target recognition by providing the required target specificity and
selectivity. The PI will use an integrative approach combining fluorescence
spectroscopic tools, biophysical methods, and molecular dynamic simulations to
characterize the three-dimensional structure and the dynamics of Calmodulin at
different phosphorylated states. To accomplish this goal, the program will be
split into three distinct tasks. The first task will involve the generation of
structural models of wild-type Calmodulin and the comparison of the wild-type to
various phosphorylated states using a hybrid structural dynamic tool based on
FÃ¶rster resonance energy transfer experiments. The second task is to determine
the difference in the dynamics of the central helix of the wild-type Calmodulin
against various phosphorylated states. The third and final task is to determine
the differential impact of the phosphorylation state of Calmodulin on target
recognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.