* 1749464
* Broadening Participation through a Workshop on Nanoengineered Surfaces for Thermal Energy Transport
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2018
* Damena Agonafer, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 07/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

Phase change heat transfer is desirable in many industrial processes including
water desalination, solar thermal energy storage, electrochemical energy
storage, and electronics cooling. Over the last several decades, nanoscience has
played a crucial role in the development of novel engineered surfaces for
improving the thermodynamic efficiency of phase change heat transfer processes.
While nanoengineered surfaces has become a critical technology for energy
storage, nanoscience education is new and relatively underdeveloped. It is
therefore important to develop novel and effective methods for teaching the
concepts of nanoscience to students to continue the advancement of
nanotechnology. The project seeks to address these issues with exploring the
concepts of wettability characteristics of engineered surfaces and effects on
multiphase systems. Through a workshop format, K-12 students will learn about
the concepts of nanoengineered surfaces and multi-phase heat transfer. During
the workshop, students will also participate in seminars and laboratory tours
and conduct laboratory experiments. The goal is to inspire the students to
pursue education and careers in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) fields as well as convey the importance of surface
engineering in solving future problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An anticipated
outcome of the project is to increase the awareness of novel evaporative cooling
technology in development of chips and corresponding cooling challenges as one
proceeds to make systems such as servers or power electronics devices. The
project team will work with local outreach programs from Washington University
including the Academic Pipeline programs to recruit students with few financial
resources to participate in the workshop. The focus of this workshop is to
address broadening participation in STEM fields by exposing underrepresented
minorities and women to the interdisciplinary field of nanotechnology. An
additional outcome of the workshop is the creation of a classroom module for
teachers to use to experimentally demonstrate the importance of nanoengineered
surfaces on thermal transport. Further, the project will collaborate with the
Institute for School Partnership (ISP), is Washington University's signature
effort to improve teaching and learning strategically within the K-12 education
community, to develop and deliver the classroom module.