* 1749634
* Collaborative Research: Individual and Collective Dynamics of  Marangoni Surface Tension Effects between Particles
* ENG,CBET
* 06/12/2017,08/31/2021
* Hassan Masoud, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 216,298.00

The principal goal of this research is to investigate the motion of active
particles at fluidic interfaces due to a gradient of surface tension stemming
from the discharge of a surface-active agent, a surface reaction, or from the
release of heat by the particle. Powered by converting chemical energy into
mechanical work, these self-propelled "Marangoni" particles, both at the
individual level and as a collection, can bring to bear functionalities that
resemble those of biological organisms. The findings of this study will
determine the guiding principles for designing miniature self-propelled
particles, which can lead to transformative innovations in robotics,
microfluidics, and biomedical engineering. These tiny surfing robots can
potentially execute missions that are currently very difficult or even
impossible to accomplish. The results of this project will also give rise to the
development of active self-assembly techniques, which can be used for rapid
fabrication of small-scale structured materials. Further, the outcome of this
research will shed light on the role of self-generated Marangoni stresses in the
colonization and survival of antibiotic-resistant infectious bacteria living at
fluidic interfaces. The new insight provided by these studies can thus
facilitate the design of more effective antibiotics. Graduate students supported
by the project will gain advanced training in fluid dynamics, transport and
interfacial phenomena, and high-performance simulations. Educational modules on
Marangoni propulsion and flow-driven self-assembly at interfaces will be created
and showcased during outreach activities, in addition to being integrated into
the existing engineering courses. Active involvement of underrepresented
minority and female students will be pursued via educational and outreach
activities.

This research will establish a fundamental understanding of the Marangoni-driven
motion of active particles alone and in groups, which appear in various contexts
ranging from robotics and manufacturing to biology and medicine. New knowledge
will be created by introducing a comprehensive numerical-theoretical-
experimental framework to examine the hydrodynamics of self-propelled interface-
bound active particles. The successful completion of this project will lead to
the development of a physics-based speed and stability charts for Marangoni
surfers that serves as engineering guidelines for tailoring the system
parameters to elicit the desired performance characteristics in a variety of
applications. Additionally, the outcome of this study will advance the state-of-
the-art in multi-physics computational analysis of particle-laden interfacial
flows by developing a high-performance simulation technique capable of capturing
the intricate interplay between the motion of the active particles, transport of
released species or heat, and interface deformation and dynamics. The specific
objectives of this project are: (i) characterizing the Marangoni propulsion of
single particles in unbounded domains; (ii) investigating the influence of
confinement on the propulsion dynamics of particles; (iii) analyzing the
translational and rotational stability of self-propelled surfers; and (iv)
exploring the self-assembly and collective surfing of active particles.