* 1749440
* CAREER: Controlled Processing of Self-Assembly in Single Crystal Oxide Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Alp Sehirlioglu, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 06/30/2023
* USD 522,427.00

For a number of materials systems, the properties at the interfaces are critical
to performance. Nanostructured materials for low power electronic materials,
logic devices, and megnetoelectrics, which are used as sensors and local energy
harvesters, offer the potential for low-cost, high-performance materials and
devices. These materials and devices have numerous applications, including
national security and defense. To better understand how to engineer these
materials, this Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) Award supports
research to understand and control the building blocks for nanostructured
functional materials. This research seeks to reveal the mechanisms controlling
atomic-scale ordering and local transport mechanisms, and developing the means
to tune them. Both the research and education components of this work will make
symmetry in the atomic world visible - through outreach programs engaging
elementary school teachers, the researchers will introduce concepts of atomic
symmetry though interactive visualization activities using
holography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The origin of the self-assembly in single
crystal nanoscale oxides is a subject of debate and has been attributed to both
compositional and structural variations, mainly octahedral distortions. In this
work, single crystal oxides which undergo self-assembly to form a superstructure
in a checkerboard pattern of nanometer-sized domains are investigated to
elucidate the mechanisms of self-assembly. Epitaxial growth of these materials
with various mechanical boundary conditions provides control over the
superstructure and thus the properties. Unique parameters that are not available
in bulk processing allow understanding of the fundamentals of transport
mechanisms, and also allow tuning and isolation of different types of
conduction, leading to metastable structures, and revealing lower-dimensional
conduction paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.