* 1749635
* CAREER: Software Reliability and Security Risk Assessment: Modeling and Algorithms
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Lance Fiondella, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 08/31/2024
* USD 614,957.00

Consistent growth in the software sector of the US and world economies is a
driving force for global prosperity and stability in the form of trillions of
dollars in revenue and millions of rewarding careers. The spread of computing
has increased society's dependence on reliable and secure software to ensure
national security and system safety. Producing reliable and secure software is
difficult because of its growing complexity, which poses serious challenges to
many large companies and government organizations. Quantitative models to assess
software reliability and security can assist organizations to deliver software
systems on time and within budget.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merits
related to the science of software reliability and security risk management
include: multi-stage models to guide software acquisition and integration,
multi-phase algorithms that combine numerical techniques to enhance the
performance of model-fitting procedures without compromising stability, and an
open source application to automatically apply software reliability methods,
strengthen collaboration within the international research community, and
promote education and dialogue between the research and practitioner
communities. The open source application will crowdsource the contribution of
models and algorithms, establishing a common platform for participants to
implement results, hybridize modeling, and conduct algorithmic
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multi-stage models will be applicable to
scientific phenomenon and engineering activities that are too complex to
accurately characterize with standard methods from probability. Multi-phase
algorithms will be applicable to model-fitting in the many areas to which
statistics is applied. The open source tool possesses the potential to hybridize
results from the past 40 years as well as future discoveries, providing insight
on how to leverage the international research community. The open architecture
will provide a medium for collaboration and rapid research transition in a
format that is immediately usable by the intended audience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The open source project is hosted through an Educator
account of the GitHub online service
(https://github.com/LanceFiondella/srt.core), including sample input data sets
for the models developed, the source code of the open source tool, and
educational materials. The major research findings will be published in open
access journals and also made accessible on the project web site
(https://sasdlc.org/lab/projects/srt.html). The project repository will be
maintained as long as GitHub educator accounts remain a free online
service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.