* 1749257
* Collaborative Research:  Sociolinguistic variation in post-Katrina New Orleans
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Nathalie Dajko, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 02/29/2024
* USD 114,321.00

What are the effects of displacement and migration on language? Population
movement world-wide is at an all time high, and projections suggest that it will
only increase over time. Improving our understanding of the social consequences
of population movements can result in better policies for addressing their
impacts. Places exist not just as physical locations, but as ideas in our minds
about what it means to be authentically local; language in particular is a major
factor in conceptions about locality and identity. New Orleans boasts a unique
historic development and demographic distribution, in addition to featuring
distinctive linguistic practices. A city with a long history of in-migration and
diversity, since Hurricane Katrina in 2005 New Orleans has been undergoing a
major demographic shift. The recovery process following the hurricane resulted
in the displacement of locals, an influx of outsiders, and a number of
sociopolitical developments that have accelerated ongoing processes of
gentrification throughout the city. New Orleans is thus ideally situated for an
examination of the linguistic effects of displacement and identity in a post-
disaster context. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study represents the first large-
scale, systematic study of sociolinguistic variation conducted in New Orleans.
The investigators will conduct over two hundred interviews with lifelong
residents of different ethnic backgrounds and neighborhood origins to create a
corpus of linguistic data comprising the largest and most diverse sample ever
collected in the city. They will then analyze the use of locally significant
sociolinguistic variables (3 phonological, 10 syntactic, and 4 lexical) across
these speakers. The researchers will examine how the use of these features
correlates with ethnic identification and place affiliation. They will situate
their interpretation of the results in terms of the sociopolitical and
demographic shifts following Hurricane Katrina, proposing further hypotheses for
how these factors influence language variation and
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.