* 1749539
* CAREER: Enabling Adaptable, Object Oriented, Real-time Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Lukasz Ziarek, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 02/29/2024
* USD 499,999.00

The increasing need for real-time guarantees in mobile embedded systems poses a
unique set of challenges, including changing software, just-in-time (JIT)
compilation, and dynamic interactions between applications of differing
criticality levels. This project develops techniques to provide adaptability to
software systems that require stringent correctness and timing guarantees. The
novelty of this work is in the development of new techniques to ensure the
correctness and timeliness of adaptive software, new programming models to ease
the development burden of adaptive software, and the development of an execution
platform for adaptive software. The impacts of this work will be felt by
providing predictable execution in mobile applications for sensing, personalized
health care, command and control, and automotive domains, as well as providing
professional development on the topic of mobile programming to teachers in the
Buffalo Public School district. Additionally, this award supports the training
of Ph.D. students and integration of research into educational
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates language level,
compiler, and run-time techniques that enable the construction of adaptive real-
time systems. The project develops a novel, partitioned run-time, including
support for executing multiple real-time and non real-time applications, cross
application communication abstractions with concrete predictability guarantees,
as well as partitioned virtual machine-level services, such as JIT compilation
and garbage collection. The run-time is expressive enough to support Android's
APIs and execution model, yet affords predictability guarantees necessary for
real-time support. Furthermore, the project develops a series of validation
mechanisms that ensure real-time guarantees for mobile systems, and constructs a
programming model that expresses adaptability in real-time
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.