* 1749961
* GEM Student Support Workshops for Historically Black Colleges and Universities
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Marcus Huggans, The National GEM Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2019
* USD 45,001.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) supports conferences and workshops that seek to increase the representation
of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) students at HBCUs in
graduate school and the workforce. In that regard, the National GEM Consortium
will conduct a workshop on the campus of six HBCU campuses for undergraduate
STEM students to enable them to compete for competitive graduate fellowships
such as the National Science Foundation Graduate Fellowship Program; position
them for acceptance to graduate school; and establish peer networks on each
campus. The workshop will model the successful GEM GRAD Labs and integrate
strategies designed to reduce attrition and increase students' time to degree by
focusing on financial options such as fellowships, internships, and research
assistantships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will adopt a format that has
been used successfully in outreach programs designed to broaden the
participation of underrepresented minorities in STEM. The format is portable and
designed to optimize the participation of students on the six targeted campuses.
The workshop expects to impact about 600 undergraduate STEM students who will be
better positioned to pursue graduate programs and careers. The format could be
replicated at other institutions and provide the impetus for sustaining this
activity as an infrastructure enhancement.