* 1749368
* Syntax-Prosody in Optimality Theory
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Junko Ito, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 12/31/2021
* USD 272,879.00

Syntax is the set of linguistic rules, principles, and processes that govern the
structure of sentences. Prosody deals with syllables, rhythmic groups of
syllables known as "feet", and larger units of speech that contribute to
intonation, tone, stress, and speech rhythm. The syntax-prosody interface is the
study of how syntactic structures are realized in prosodic form in different
languages. The fundamental problem in syntax-prosody research is to precisely
predict, for any kind of syntactic structure in a given language, what kind of
prosodic parse it will be assigned by the language's grammar. Languages are
known to show wide variation in this respect. The tools and analyses developed
in this project will enable researchers to explore and explain the extensive
cross-linguistic variation observed in the relation between syntactic and
prosodic structure, and will thereby extend the basic science of human language,
cognition, and learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to approach the problem
in a rigorous and precise way, it is necessary to consider the full set of
imaginable prosodic structure candidates for any syntactic input, a task for
which no formal tool has so far been developed. Automation is essential since
the number of prosodic structure candidates increases exponentially, as length
and syntactic complexity increase: Given a particular understanding of what
constitutes a legitimate prosodic structure that reflects widely shared
assumptions, 3 words receive 48 different parses, 4 words 352, 5 words 2880,
etc. The aim of the project is to develop a software program SPOT (Syntax-
Prosody in Optimality Theory), a JavaScript application that provides both
exhaustive generation of the prosodic candidates, and automatic evaluation of
each candidate in terms of a well-defined hierarchy of constraints. Beyond its
immediate goals in linguistics, the program has clear application possibilities
in natural language processing, speech technology (recognition and production,
translation), as well as in second language research and teaching (e.g., to
explicate the differences in syntactic and prosodic structure between the first
and the second language).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.