* 1749183
* CAREER: Toward an inorganic calcite reference frame for interpreting the stable isotope composition of biogenic carbonates
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* James Watkins, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 08/31/2024
* USD 600,644.00

Carbonate minerals grow from aqueous solutions in a wide variety of settings at
or near Earth's surface. As they grow, they incorporate impurities from the
environment in ways that are sensitive to temperature, solution acidity or
alkalinity, and solution chemistry. Such relationships allow Earth scientists to
use carbonate rocks for reconstructing changes in the chemistry of the oceans,
biosphere, and atmosphere through geologic time. Although such reconstructions
are based on sound theoretical and experimental principles, many important
details have yet to be worked out, in part because different environmental
variables can interfere with one another. This project will carry out a detailed
set of experiments where carbonates are grown in the laboratory under extremely
well-controlled conditions, enabling the team to determine how any one
environmental variable leaves its imprint in a carbonate crystal. The results
will improve our ability to extract paleo-environment information from carbonate
rocks and could potentially lead to better forecasts of how the Earth will
respond to ongoing anthropogenic inputs of carbon dioxide to Earth's atmosphere.
The research will be integrated with teaching and hands-on outreach activities
that introduce crystal growth and paleoclimate concepts to K-12 students and
undergraduate seniors majoring in geology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
partitioning of stable isotopes between carbonates and water depends on whether
the crystals grow slowly, under near-equilibrium conditions, or rapidly, under
far-from-equilibrium conditions. When crystals grow rapidly or when crystal
growth is biologically mediated, as is often the case in nature, oxygen and
carbon isotope partitioning can be affected by reaction kinetics between the
growing crystal and dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC), and also by reaction
kinetics among the DIC species and H2O in solution. Building on their recent
successes towards deconvoluting these kinetic effects, the research team has
four objectives for the project: (1) determine how varying salinity influences
oxygen and carbon isotope behavior, (2) determine how a variably-equilibrated
DIC pool is expressed in the oxygen and carbon isotope composition of
carbonates, (3) compare the behavior of two different carbonates, calcite and
aragonite, and (4) apply the insights gained to interpreting natural stable
isotope variations in carbonate travertines, tufas, corals, veins, nodules, and
sediments. The approach uses a state-of-the-art experimental apparatus for
growing crystals at fixed pH and growth rate. The crystals and solutions are
then analyzed using mass spectrometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.