* 1749342
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Articulatory Dynamics of Sibilant Convergence &amp; Change
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Alan Yu, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 07/31/2020
* USD 13,299.00

The goal of this dissertation research is to contribute to the scientific
understanding of sound change, focusing on the way in which some sound changes
are asymmetrically distributed. That is, given that the phonetic motivations for
a sound change may be present in multiple phonological environments (the
adjacent sounds), why is the change observed in one environment and not the
others? This project will address this question through an examination of
/s/-retraction, an ongoing sound change in American English in which /s/ is
pronounced as /sh/ in /str/ words (such that 'street' is pronounced as
'shtreet') but rarely in /spr/ and /skr/ words ('scream' is not pronounced as
'shcream' and 'spree' is not pronounced as 'shpree'). The results of this
project will most directly influence the scientific understanding of
/s/-retraction narrowly and sound change and its initiation and propagation more
broadly, but can potentially contribute to developments in related fields and
industries. By examining individual variation, these findings may offer insights
into first and/or second language acquisition and may aid in the development of
speech recognition systems that are faster and more accurate for a greater
number of users, especially those with non-standard
accents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine participants' production
and perception of /s/ in these environments in order to better understand the
observed asymmetries in /s/-retraction. For this project, participants will
listen to auditory prompts containing /s/ in different phonological environments
corresponding to visually presented images, and in turn give oral instructions
for the computer to select the correct image. This design has two important
components: firstly, it is a lexical decision task, meaning that the participant
has to select the best meaning (represented by the images) given the possibly
ambiguous or unexpected acoustic signal (auditory instructions). Secondly, the
task encourages phonetic accommodation, the process by which a speaker begins to
sound more like their interlocutor (the model talker giving instructions), which
can provide insight into how sound changes propagate across a speech community.
Throughout the experiment, three simultaneous measurements will be collected:
audio recording, ultrasound imaging of the tongue, and eye gaze tracking.
Ultrasound imaging will elucidate the varying articulations of /s/ in different
phonological environments and will also provide novel evidence for the
articulatory reality of phonetic accommodation. Eye gaze measurements will
provide information about listeners' use of /s/ variation in real time. These
measurements will be collected simultaneously in order to examine the
relationship between participants' production and perception of /s/ in these
environments.