* 1749294
* CAREER:  Mechanisms Underlying the Relation between Mathematical Language and Mathematical Knowledge
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* David Purpura, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,680,378.00

Successful development of numeracy and geometry skills during preschool provides
a strong foundation for later academic and career success. Recent evidence shows
that learning math language (e.g., concepts such as more, few, less, near,
before) during preschool supports this development. The purpose of this Faculty
Early Career Development (CAREER) project is to examine the process by which
math language instruction improves learning of mathematics skills in order to
design and translate the most effective interventions into practical classroom
instruction. The first objective of this project is to examine if quantitative
and spatial math language effect the development of different aspects of
mathematics performance (e.g., numeracy, geometry). The second objective is to
examine how quantitative math language versus numeracy instruction, either alone
or in combination, effect numeracy development. The findings from this study
will not only be used to improve theoretical understanding of how math language
and mathematics skills develop, but the instructional materials developed for
this study will also result in practical tools for enhancing young children's
math language and mathematics skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
focused on evaluating the role of early math language skills in the acquisition
of early mathematics skills. Two randomized control trials (RCTs) will be
conducted. The first RCT will be used to evaluate the effects of different types
of math language instruction (quantitative, spatial) on distinct aspects of
mathematics (numeracy, geometry). It is expected that quantitative language
instruction will improve numeracy skills and spatial language instruction will
improve geometry skills. The second RCT will be used to examine the unique and
joint effects of quantitative language instruction and numeracy instruction on
children's numeracy skills. It is expected that both types of instruction alone
will be sufficient to generate improvement on numeracy outcomes compared to an
active control group, but that the combination of the two will result in
enhanced numeracy performance compared to either alone. Educational goals will
be integrated with and supported through engaging diverse groups of
undergraduate and graduate students in hands-on research experiences, training
pre- and in-service teachers on mathematical language instruction, and building
collaborative relationships with early career researchers. Intervention
materials including storybooks developed for the project and pre- and in-service
teacher training/lesson plan materials will be made available at the completion
of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CAREER program is a National Science
Foundation (NSF)-wide activity that offers awards in support of junior faculty
who exemplify the role of teacher-scholars through outstanding research,
excellent education, and the integration of education and research within the
context of the mission of their organizations. This project is supported by
NSF's Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) program. DRK-12 seeks to significantly
enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers through research and
development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12
program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and
development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for
proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.