* 1749266
* CAREER: Enhancing Critical Reflection on Data by Integrating Users' Expectations in Visualization Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Jessica Hullman, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 07/31/2019
* USD 104,038.00

Interactive graphs, charts, and other visual representations of data are
increasingly common in public life. People bring their own expectations and
assumptions about the data and situations these visualizations represent, though
most visualizations do not take these expectations into account. Comparing these
expectations to actual data is a powerful tool for checking those assumptions,
developing better understanding of situations, and making better decisions. To
support such expectation visualizations, the project team will use a combination
of experiments, software development, and design activities to develop toolkits
and best practices for developing visualizations that allow viewers to
represent, interact with, and see feedback on their own predictions about the
data. The work will focus on helping people better understand scientific
research and expert analysis around topics such as health decisions that might
impact their own lives. The work will also support a broader educational goal of
data literacy education, through course modules that can be inserted into
introductory informatics and data science courses and a new course on thinking
with data, and outreach goals through developing a research and development
platform where designers, researchers, and developers can work together to
improve expectation visualization techniques.

To do this, the project has three main research goals. The first is to develop a
suite of empirical findings on the effects of expectation visualization, through
a series of experiments on how predicting data, receiving personalized feedback
on those predictions, and reflecting on gaps between predictions and data affect
people's later memory of the data and future expectations. The second thrust
builds on the first, using these empirical results along with design studies and
comprehensive reviews of existing tools and literature to build a design space
with software examples characterizing key decisions in designing expectation
visualizations. These decisions will include a range of techniques for
graphically eliciting people's expectations, contextualization techniques that
help people learn to use those techniques and constrain their choices
appropriately, and feedback or reflection techniques that help call attention to
places where expectations did and did not match the underlying data. The third
thrust is to put these principles into practice by developing applications to
support the communication of uncertainty in experimental results, the reduction
of spurious pattern discoveries in data analysis, and the integration of problem
context and expert analysis with the visualization itself.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.