* 1749143
* Examining Native Language Variability and its Effects on Second Language Processing: An Event-Related Potentials Investigation of Referential Dependencies
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2018,11/30/2023
* Alison Gabriele, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 11/30/2023
* USD 434,380.00

This project examines the extent to which there is a link between language
abilities in a first and second language with the goal of providing a better
understanding of the factors that predict successful reading comprehension
across languages. Although language skills are critical for both economic
security and national security, the U.S. is in a foreign language 'crisis,' with
only 30% of high school students and 8% of college students taking foreign
language courses (A National Security Crisis, 2012). Improving our ability to
predict successful language learning will provide a better understanding of the
skills that need to be reinforced in order to provide a stronger foundation for
language learning, allowing the development of pedagogical practices that can
potentially increase the number of successful learners. The project will address
theoretical debates regarding whether or not the processing of a second language
is fundamentally different from the processing of a native language by taking a
unique approach in which both the first and second languages are examined within
the same individuals. This project will provide educational opportunities within
both the university and the larger community. At the university level, the
project will provide training opportunities for undergraduate students from
under-represented minority groups. At the community level, the researchers will
give presentations at local high schools and at the public library in which the
social, cultural, educational, economic, and cognitive advantages of being
bilingual will be discussed and information about the resources available for
language learning will be provided, emphasizing resources for both English
native speakers and immigrant populations who may be interested in resources for
maintaining their home languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project examines the
processing of pronouns such as "she" in short stories as a test case for complex
language processing. Linking a pronoun such as "she" with a noun that has come
much earlier in the discourse has long been recognized as challenging for both
native speakers and second language learners but the two bodies of research have
proceeded independently. The current study examines the processing of pronouns
in two groups of learners, English-speaking learners of Spanish and Spanish-
speaking learners of English, testing all participants in both their first and
second languages. The project uses event-related potentials (ERP), a brain
imaging measure that allows the examination of the precise mechanisms that are
used during language processing. All participants will also take an extensive
battery of individual difference measures which assess both linguistic and
cognitive skills. The goal is to develop a better understanding of the contexts
and conditions under which native speakers and second language learners are
successful in reading comprehension. In utilizing ERP, a more fine-grained
characterization of the processes underlying comprehension in the first and
second languages becomes possible, leading to a better understanding of whether
the processing of a second language is truly qualitatively different from the
processing of a native language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.