* 1749627
* CAREER: Stress-mediated maternal effects as a facilitator of organismal resilience in fluctuating environments: from mechanisms to function
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Ben Dantzer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 05/31/2024
* USD 804,360.00

Humans and animals alike experience changes in their surroundings. For wild
animals, a failure to respond appropriately to those environmental fluctuations
is a life or death situation. To date, most research on how animals can cope
with changing environments has been a theoretical exercise. This project will
integrate concepts from evolutionary biology, ecology, and animal physiology to
critically evaluate how wild animals can adapt to fluctuations in their
environment. It will use an experimental approach with wild North American red
squirrels to evaluate if elevations in maternal stress levels enable pregnant
females to induce changes in the physiology, behavior, and reproductive
characteristics of offspring that enable them to better survive altered
environments. From a broader perspective, this will aid the understanding of how
early life stress can alter the physiology and behavior of mammalian offspring
and if these effects are long-lasting; both of these are crucial questions in
biomedical studies of humans. The educational activities of the project include
crafting novel assessment methods to evaluate the effectiveness of undergraduate
teaching in the behavioral sciences, the design of a new first-year
undergraduate course in animal behavior to increase the retention of
undergraduate students from underrepresented groups in the STEM pipeline, and
development of a new graduate course that integrates concepts from evolutionary
biology and neuroscience to better understand the biological and cultural
origins of differences between females and males. The project will also engage
public stakeholders by providing new training opportunities for high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students and developing new after-school activities
for elementary-aged students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plasticity in behavior and characteristics
associated with growth, reproduction, and survival (life history traits) may
allow animals to persist through changing environments. Parental effects are a
type of trans-generational phenotypic plasticity where the parental phenotype or
environment induces plasticity of offspring characteristics. Parental effects
could allow adaptive adjustments in offspring phenotype in anticipation of
specific environments. Alternatively, the long-lasting changes in offspring
physiology caused by parental effects could inhibit adaptive responses to
changing environments. The main aim of this project is to identify why and how
parental effects orchestrate changes in offspring phenotypes in wild North
American red squirrels (Tamiasciurus hudsonicus) and determine whether they
facilitate or constrain adaptation to changing environments. This project will
use a series of field experiments combined with laboratory measures of
physiological characteristics to address three specific knowledge gaps about
parental effects: the mechanisms responsible for parental effects, their
evolutionary consequences in nature, and how these consequences vary across
environments and the sexes. This work will expand educational opportunities for
students at multiple levels and develop a novel assessment method for tracking
the effectiveness of animal behavior education for
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.