* 1749786
* Workshop:  International collaboration to advance biomanufacturing; September 7-8, 2017; Brussels, Belgium
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2018
* William Bentley, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2018
* USD 49,794.00

Industrial biotechnology and biomanufacturing have the potential to benefit from
advances in basic research and technology such as synthetic biology, cell free
synthesis and nanomanufacturing. However, leveraging advances in basic science
such that they have an economic impact has been slower in the area of
biomanufacturing than in some other manufacturing areas. This is in part due to
the challenges of engineering biology, where processes such as evolution and
adaptation ensure the survival of species in their native environment, but
hinder the development of robust, reproducible processes within bioreactors. The
workshop will bring together leaders in the field from the US and Europe to
address these challenges. The results of the workshop will be disseminated
broadly. In addition, this meeting will provide the foundation for international
collaborations between researchers in the US and Europe in the area of
biomanufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to address the challenges
associated with translating advances in synthetic biology, cell free synthesis,
nanomanufacturing and other areas of basic science into advances in
biomanufacturing, this international workshop will be convened, with joint
support from the National Science Foundation and the European Commission. The
workshop will bring together leaders in the field from both sides of the
Atlantic to: (1) Explore and identify areas of joint interests, needs, and
opportunities associated with the translation of basic research advances in
areas such as synthetic biology, cell free synthesis and nanomanufacturing (the
engineering of biology) into advances in biomanufacturing and industrial
biotechnology such that they have economic impact; (2) Identify research
questions that could address translational potential of new technologies; (3)
Explore the educational needs to ensure a well-trained and responsible workforce
in the area; and (4) Assess the need for collaboration on issues such as
standards and repositories, and cyberinfrastructure, as well ethical and
societal concerns on an international scale.