* 1749105
* I-Corps: Personalized recommender systems based on semantical clustering
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Zbigniew Ras, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 03/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to build a
recommender system which assigns values to artifacts and will also provide
stakeholders in unregulated markets with better information for reducing risk
and improving trust. The Internet and technology have entirely changed the
nature of interactions between every business sector, including the art
industry, by creating a digital marketplace and introducing additional issues
for markets regulation. The proposed recommender system can be used to predict
value of investment, to provide an objective value of goods in legal
proceedings, insurance cases, and banks as a collateral toll. This supports
financial stability of markets through better decision making and improves the
trust of stakeholders in their investments. It also helps to maintain control of
the commercial aspects of work. For example, the acquisitions departments of
museums would be served by knowing a real value for the artifacts they buy.

This I-Corps project is focused on building a recommender system for assigning
values to artworks using existing datasets and deep knowledge. Art markets are
often misvalued which makes the classical approach to building recommender
systems rather difficult due to unreliable datasets. Classifiers trained on
these datasets often assign inflated prices. A crowd approach is used here which
is expected to give more reliable results. Personalization for this class of
problems can be achieved by assigning semantic distance. The project extends the
group of classical features by adding semantic features from mining comments
given by users, and, for example, from artist biographies, and images of
paintings. For each cluster of semantically similar artists, a personalized
recommender system for art evaluation is built. Wisdom of the crowd will be used
to assign a specific value to an art piece.