* 1749430
* EAGER: Identifying network dynamics promoting memory consolidation during sleep
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Michal Zochowski, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

While the exact physiological function of sleep remains unknown, there is
mounting evidence that it plays an important role in the consolidation of long-
term memories. In particular, it appears that sleep promotes the consolidation
of declarative memories that require a functionally intact hippocampus,
including memories of place. In rodents, place-dependent fear memory is promoted
by sleep and disrupted by sleep deprivation. Sleep deprivation also disrupts a
number biochemical and neurophysiological processes that are thought to be
involved in memory consolidation. These studies have led many to suggest that
sleep promotes long-term memory consolidation by modulating neural network
dynamics and synaptic plasticity within the hippocampus. In experimental
studies, the co-PIs have recently identified changes in hippocampal neural
network dynamics during sleep that are induced by place-dependent fear learning.
In computational modeling studies, the co-PIs have shown that acetylcholine, a
modulatory chemical whose levels vary across sleep states, can change neural
network dynamics in a similar way. The proposed projects take a
multidisciplinary, multi-scale approach to bridge the gap between experimental
and computational results, to identify how effects of acetylcholine on neurons
lead to changes in neural network dynamics to promote learning, ultimately
leading to learning and memory behavior. While the focus is on fear learning and
memory consolidation, the fundamental knowledge of learning-related and sleep-
related brain network dynamics gained by the proposed experiments and
computations will provide valuable insights into mechanisms for all types of
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At present, it is unclear how sleep-related
changes in hippocampal network dynamics might promote contextual fear memory
consolidation. The team's recent experimental studies have shown that contextual
fear conditioning produces long-lasting, sleep-dependent increases in the
stability of hippocampal network functional connectivity patterns. These
results, coupled with the team's recent computational studies describing a role
for acetylcholine in network-wide activity and synaptic plasticity patterning,
have led to the hypothesis that sleep promotes memory consolidation, at least in
part, by dynamically shifting patterns in hippocampal neural network activity
during naturally-occurring rapid eye movement and slow wave sleep brain states.
Sleep-dependent acetylcholine has a primary role in driving these shifts in
network activity through its effects on cellular excitability properties. The
proposed projects use behavioral, physiological, and computational approaches to
tackle the missing links that will show the hypothesized network mechanisms
occur in brain hippocampal networks and participate in fear learning and memory.
Hippocampal acetylcholine levels will be manipulated across wake and sleep
states while recording multi-unit activity in hippocampus to quantify changes in
spike timing dynamics in the context of fear and subsequent sleep or sleep
deprivation. The team has developed a suite of quantitative measures to identify
learning-related changes in network dynamics. In addition, acetylcholine-induced
changes in cellular membrane properties that affect network dynamics will be
measured in hippocampal pyramidal cell and inhibitory interneuron populations.
The results will be used to inform details of biophysical neural network models
to identify specific dynamical mechanisms by which acetylcholine-mediated
changes in network activity dynamics promote network stability, structural
changes and synaptic reorganization associated with learning and consolidation.