* 1749937
* CAREER: Network Geometry for Analyzing Complex Dynamical Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Romeil Sandhu, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 06/30/2022
* USD 89,335.00

In modern technological world, we increasingly depend upon the reliability,
robustness, quality of service and timeliness of exceedingly large
interconnected dynamical systems including those of power distribution,
transportation, and communication. Over the past twenty years, we have witness a
dramatic rise of information in which the analysis of such systems invariably
present challenging big data complexity issues. For example, in transferring
resources and information, a key requirement is the ability to adapt and
reconfigure in response to structural and dynamic changes while avoiding
disruption of service. To this end, we propose to develop fundamental
relationships between network functionality and certain topological and
geometric properties of the corresponding graph. The thematic vision for this
program is based on the recently discovered fact that the geometric notion of
curvature (or how objects deviate from being flat) is positively correlated with
a systems functional robustness or its ability to adapt to dynamic changes.
While the developed theory and tools will be applicable to a broad set of
dynamical systems, we will focus on cancer biology and man-made distributed
malware. The accomplishments of this research will be disseminated through
raising engineering awareness of the proposed research through K-12 outreach,
publications, tutorials in the form of open-source software, and developed
workshops. Specifically, given the rise of data (network) science, there is an
increasing demand for engineers especially in national security areas where U.S.
Veterans may serve an integral role. As such, we will work to directly engage
veterans to engage in aspects of the proposed research while also providing vet
dependent mentoring for better university preparation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
said, to accomplish these goals, the proposed research program aims to study the
intimate connections between discrete geometry, optimal mass transport, entropy,
and control to formulate new approaches to quantify and predict dynamical
properties of complex networks at varying scales. System properties include, but
not limited to, robustness, heterogeneity, and congestion. As such, this
research fills a need by investigating network functionality through the
confluent study of geometry and control that relies upon several observations
with far reaching physical (statistical mechanics) and information theoretic
significance. Specifically, by placing a probability structure on a graph, the
advantage over existing methods is that the space of probabilities on graphs has
much nicer properties than the underlying discrete space alone. The associated
probability measures can then be endowed with a Riemannian structure whereby
geodesic (shortest distance) paths ensue and convexity properties of the entropy
along paths reflect on geometric qualities of the graph. Given this foundation,
we can then begin to develop powerful geometric network tools rooted in optimal
and stochastic control. Altogether, as geometry and control of networks is still
in its infancy, this program addresses the increasing need to develop such areas
as a further tool to understanding complex systems.