* 1749332
* Collaborative Research: Hippocampal Development and Sleep-Dependent Memory Consolidation in Preschoolers
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Rebecca Spencer, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 05/31/2021
* USD 109,815.00

Naps benefit learning and memory in young children. However, children transition
out of naps during preschool years. Whether naps should be encouraged in
preschools, or eliminated to provide more time for early learning, is not clear.
The overarching objective of this proposed research is to examine the role of
sleep and brain development on memory during early childhood, specifically as
children transition out of naps. The central hypothesis of this proposal is that
maturation of memory-related brain regions during this transitional
developmental period results in more information being retained in memory
without interference. This in turn reduces the need for frequent consolidation,
which, ultimately, underlies the transition out of naps. This research will
deepen understanding of how sleep benefits learning and memory in healthy
children, providing benefit to healthy child care, pre-school education, and
children with developmental and mental disorders.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Sleep-
dependent memory consolidation is thought to reflect transfer of memories from
the hippocampus to the cerebral cortex. Although we have previously documented
changes in memory performance as a result of sleep-dependent consolidation in
young children, the neural mechanisms supporting this process have yet to be
examined. This gap is problematic as memory and the hippocampal-cortical network
both undergo significant developmental change during this period. Our goal is to
identify the mechanistic pathway through which brain development and sleep
physiology underlie changes in memory during childhood development. To
accomplish this, we will obtain measures of brain structure, brain function,
sleep physiology, and memory. We hypothesize that age-related changes in the
development of the brain and sleep physiology will result in larger and stronger
memories. Likewise, we expect increased hippocampal functional connectivity to
allow for more efficient memory transfer with sleep, and will be associated with
changes in slow wave sleep. We will use models to test the hypothesis that
changes in hippocampal structure will precede changes in hippocampal function;
these combined changes will lead to changes in sleep patterns; and that improved
sleep will improve memory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.