* 1749551
* Detecting social transmission in the design of artifacts
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Timothy Brady, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 07/31/2022
* USD 443,777.00

Children grow up surrounded by human-made objects (artifacts). These artifacts
are useful not only as tools, but also as a constant source of social
information -- conveying information about the traits and social identities of
people who own them, choose them, or create them. The project will address how
children and adults learn about other people based upon the objects those people
design or create (a capacity known as "intuitive archeology"). The project will
also address how this reasoning develops over childhood. Understanding the
social world is one of the most important challenges of early cognitive
development, as social cognition forms a foundation for everything from learning
language to later academic success. Failure to understand one's social
environment, as in the case of Autism Spectrum Disorder, leads to significant
impairments in multiple domains of life. Researchers will examine how people use
artifacts as a source of social information by identifying and explaining
underlying reasoning processes. This work will enhance understanding of a novel
aspect of social reasoning, which in turn, will facilitate designing future
interventions for atypical social cognitive development. This work will also
enhance understanding of the role of social cognition as a foundation for
positive outcomes in typical development (academic success, and healthy social
relationships). In addition to these societal impacts, the project also involves
training graduate students on all aspects of research, including experimental
and computational modeling techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intuitive
archeological reasoning will be examined. Artifacts' designs are a combination
of socially transmitted ideas (copied or learned from others), and independently
generated ideas (for example, facing a similar problem can lead two people to
independently create similar tools). Reasoning about social transmission serves
as the foundation for many other social inferences, such as inferring a person's
likely social and cultural group membership. Thus, researchers will first
develop a computational model based on Bayesian inference to explain how people
decide whether social transmission of ideas has occurred when observing the
design of artifacts. Second, researchers will examine age-related change in how
children use rich, explanation-based reasoning to judge whether social
transmission has occurred. In the first set of experiments, researchers will ask
both adults and children to infer whether one person copied another (a kind of
social transmission) when designing a simple tool. In the second set of
experiments, researchers will ask for judgments of copying and social
transmission in a more complex artifact design task. Children of various ages as
well as adults will be tested; their patterns of responses will be compared to
the predictions of computational models (of explanation-based reasoning, and
simpler perceptual heuristics). By combining formal computational modeling with
behavioral experiments across childhood, the researchers will assess how
children develop the ability to reason and how this ability changes with
age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.