* 1749612
* Subjectivity in language processing: Linguistic and psychological aspects of perspective-taking
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Elsi Kaiser, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 08/31/2023
* USD 317,164.00

People's opinions, tastes and attitudes differ from person to person, and are
highly subjective. There are many words that reflect subjective attitudes,
including adjectives such as 'fun,' 'frightening' and 'unhealthy.' An important
question is whose perspective or opinion these subjective words are anchored to
--whose opinion it is that something is frightening, or fun, or unhealthy.
Identifying whose opinion these kinds of subjective words reflect is important.
For example, consider a physician deeming a certain individual to be unhealthy
compared to a friend with no medical training conveying the same sentiment.
However, identifying whose opinion a subjective adjective is anchored to is not
always straightforward. The type of sentence in which the word occurs influences
its meaning. If someone states 'The situation was frightening,' that speaker is
often interpreted as the arbiter of what counts as 'frightening,' but if someone
asks a friend 'Was the situation frightening?' then the perspective shifts and
the friend's opinion of what counts as frightening also matters. The current
project aims to improve understanding of how people understand subjective words,
including shifts from one person's perspective to another's perspective, and how
language-based and social-interaction-based factors influence this. This
research may inform theories of language use, as well as the design of
interventions to improve communication in contexts such as health, legal and
educational settings. An understanding of the relation between language and
people's personal opinions/attitudes may also be relevant when dealing with
social tensions due to attitude divergence, as well as investigations of
subjective perspective-taking in nontypical
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to our
understanding of subjective perspective-taking and its interfaces with language.
The research uses both online and offline experimental methods to examine the
mechanisms and representations involved in the interpretation of subjective
linguistic expressions. The researchers will investigate whether and to what
extent subjective expressions of different types trigger perspective-shifts
during language processing, and whether this is modulated by top-down contextual
factors. The project will also gauge the extent to which interpretation of
perspective-sensitive elements is guided by the linguistic context in which they
occur and how the perspective-holder is activated during real-time processing.
Current debate in psycholinguistics regarding perspective-taking primarily
focuses on objective situations where individuals differ in what they know or
can observe directly, whereas much of the recent debate on perspective in
theoretical linguistics has centered on subjective differences between
individuals' opinions and attitudes. The studies in this project will broaden
the empirical basis of work on perspectival processing and will further our
understanding of how humans process perspective-sensitive linguistic
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.