* 1749130
* Religion and the Professional Development of Graduate Students in the Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Christopher Scheitle, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 06/30/2021
* USD 162,254.00

This project studies whether religion presents a social and psychological
barrier for scientists-in-training. Specifically, it examines the association
between science graduate students' religious identities, beliefs, and behaviors
and both their identification as a scientist and their confidence in their
future as a scientist. The hypotheses are tested that any association between
religion and these professional outcomes is explained by religious students'
perceptions of negative stereotypes and stigma, social networks that are less
closed around other scientists, and aspirations concerning family and work.
Findings will increase understanding of the barriers preventing individuals from
entering or remaining in science, which may be social and psychological. This
will benefit efforts to increase the production and diversity of scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two methods are employed to address the questions of the
study. One is statistical analysis of responses to a survey, which will be
administered to a random sample of graduate students from five academic
disciplines and twelve departments for each discipline, stratified by discipline
and departmental prestige. The five disciplines are physics, biology, chemistry,
psychology, and sociology. Key questions concern respondents' religion and
values and assess respondents' identity and confidence as a scientist,
perceptions of stigma, and social ties. The other method consists of fifty semi-
structured interviews to be conducted in five locations where interviewing in
several disciplines is possible. Interview responses will add depth to findings
from analysis of the survey and will facilitate the identification of effective
policies and practices to remove barriers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.