* 1749371
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Use of Social-Pragmatic Cues in Word-Learning by Monolingual and Bilingual Children
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Margarita Kaushanskaya, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 07/31/2019
* USD 18,360.00

The project will investigate how pre-school monolingual and bilingual children
learn new words. In the United States, the largest bilingual population consists
of individuals from Hispanic backgrounds who speak both English and Spanish. The
educational outcomes of Hispanic children lag behind those of their non-Hispanic
peers. This achievement gap starts as early as the age of 3 years and persists
well into the middle-school years. One of the most significant predictors of
academic outcomes is vocabulary knowledge, yet we know very little about the
process by which children actually learn words. Monolingual and bilingual
children tend to come from distinctive learning environments, both socially and
linguistically, and it is possible that they rely on different strategies when
learning words. Hence, it is crucial to investigate how learning occurs in
children who do not share the same learning environment. This research will help
develop successful educational strategies and intervention techniques designed
for young bilingual children, with the potential of narrowing the achievement
gap. Furthermore, the findings will be useful to parents, teachers, and
clinicians in suggesting how best to enable learning in all children.
Theoretically, the project will enhance the understanding of language learning
mechanisms and how they might be shaped by experience.

Research suggests that infants and children exploit social-pragmatic cues during
language learning. However, prior work has primarily tested English-speaking
monolingual children. Yet, because bilingual and monolingual children occupy
distinct socio-linguistic environments, they may exploit such cues differently.
In two experiments, the investigators will examine the use of verbal and non-
verbal social-pragmatic cues in novel word learning in 4-5 year old English-
speaking monolingual children and Spanish-English bilingual children. In all
experiments, a visual world eye-tracking paradigm will be employed in a
laboratory setting to assess learning. In Experiment 1, the investigators will
examine the impact of eye-gaze (a social-pragmatic non-verbal cue) and speaker
reliability (a social-pragmatic verbal cue) on word learning in bilingual and
monolingual children. This will allow researchers to identify whether
monolingual and bilingual children are differentially sensitive to verbal and
non-verbal social cues during word- learning. The research project will also
investigate the impact of multiple cues on word-learning. In natural learning
environments, children are typically presented with more than one cue to help
them learn words. For instance, along with social-pragmatic cues, children also
readily use linguistic cues to support their word learning. While some studies
in monolingual children have specifically investigated the interplay between
social and linguistic cues, it remains unclear how the presence of multiple cues
influences word learning in bilingual children. Thus, in Experiment 2, the
researchers will examine the combined impact of mutual exclusivity (a linguistic
cue) and eye-gaze on word-learning in monolingual and bilingual children. The
findings will shed light on how linguistic and non-linguistic cues are utilized
together by children during word-learning, and whether these cues are weighed
differently by monolingual and bilingual children.