* 1749206
* CAREER:  Soil Microbial Ecology and Evolution in a Warming World
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Kristen DeAngelis, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 987,617.00

Microorganisms are important components of every ecosystem. They virtually never
live in isolation in nature; only as part of communities with other microbes.
Soil microbial communities are major actors in the Earth's elemental cycles, and
their response to environmental change can determine whether microbes help soil
to retain more of compounds such as carbon, or whether it will be emitted in
gaseous forms. As Earth's environment changes, so does the ability for soil to
effectively store carbon, reducing the beneficial ecosystem services that soils
provide, and releasing stored carbon gas into the atmosphere. In a 25-year long
field experiment ongoing in a temperate forest in central Massachusetts,
increases in temperature have resulted in a large loss of soil carbon as carbon
dioxide gas. The loss is mostly due to microbes, with periods of soil carbon
decay punctuated by changes in microbial community composition. This cyclic
nature of soil carbon loss over decades suggests the existence of long-term
microbial control over carbon in soil. In this experiment, increases in
temperature have negatively affected soil fungi but not bacteria, suggesting
that bacteria are adapting to these new environmental conditions, and that
further adaptations to long-term environmental stress are possible. Over time,
the quality of carbon compounds has been degraded, and examination of hundreds
of bacterial isolates showed that the bacteria from chronically heated soils
have an increased ability to metabolize degraded forms of carbon. Going forward,
in this NSF CAREER project, research will examine the ecology and evolution of
soil bacteria from the long-term warming experiment, in an effort to better
predict the effect of environmental stress on terrestrial ecosystems. By doing
much of the research in the classroom setting, this project will also help train
the next generation of students in environmental microbiology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is designed to evaluate the central
hypothesis that soil bacteria have acquired traits associated with adaptation to
decades of chronic increases to soil temperature. The first aim is to directly
measure the plasticity of in situ microbial community traits associated with
declining soil organic matter quality and quantity over decades of chronic
temperature stress. A laboratory incubation experiment will use stable isotope
probing to measure temperature sensitivity of microbes associated with soils
collected from a long-term warming experiment. The field experiment is an
analysis of soils collected from before, during and after the heat is turned off
for three months in the long-term study. Measures of different components of
biomass and microbial products like enzymes and exopolysaccharides will be made
and evaluated for changes due to long-term temperature increases. The second aim
is to understand evolutionary adaptation of individual bacteria to long-term
warming. Isolates will be screened for traits associated with oligotrophy
(adaptation to low quantity substrate) and traits associated with degradation of
complex carbon (adaptation to low quality substrate, including lignin analogs).
The genomes of a subset of species with ecophysiology data will be sequenced for
a study of trait evolution associated with oligotrophy or ability to degrade
complex substrates. These organisms will also be part of a common garden
experiment in an effort to link genomic features associated with long-term
temperature stress to changes in fitness in soils. Altogether, these data will
be used to estimate a rate of evolutionary adaptation for microbial parameters
important to soil carbon modeling. This project will provide graduate student
training in research and teaching, as well as undergraduate and high school
student training in microbial physiology, ecology and genomics. Understanding
bacterial adaptation might help to explain the non-linear pattern of soil C loss
over decades of chronic temperature increase, and would define how environmental
controls over the carbon cycle may act in a non-linear over longer time
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.