* 1749837
* CAREER: Engineering biomimetic environments to elucidate mechanisms of dormancy in brain metastatic breast cancer cells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Shreyas Rao, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2024
* USD 575,193.00

A majority of breast cancer-related deaths worldwide occur as a result of the
cancer spreading to one or more organs, often described as becoming
"metastatic." Accumulating evidence suggests that cancer cells can reside in
vital organs (e.g., brain) in a sleep mode (dormant) for extended periods of
time and could reawaken at a later stage resulting in disease relapse and often
death. However, the mechanisms by which metastatic breast cancer cells in the
brain stay dormant and later become activated are not well understood, making it
difficult to develop new therapeutic strategies. A few experimental models have
been devised for studying dormancy in metastatic breast cancer cells; however,
experimental model systems to study dormancy in brain metastatic breast cancer
cells outside of a living organism (in vitro) are not available. This project
focuses on developing an engineered biomimetic three dimensional in vitro
experimental model of dormancy to study how biophysical, biochemical, and
cellular signals of the brain tissue microenvironment regulate dormancy in brain
metastatic breast cancer cells and define the associated molecular mechanisms.
The technologies developed and insights gained could be broadly applied to
fundamental investigations of neural development, tissue regeneration, and stem
cell engineering as stem cells typically stay in a dormant state until activated
to promote tissue repair, and could be used to study dormancy in other types of
brain metastatic cancers. The education and outreach plans are well integrated
with research and include: providing educational sessions in high schools and in
a "Scientist for a Day" program, initiating a four-day mentored research
experience for students and teachers from Alabama's economically challenged
Black Belt region, providing research experiences for undergraduate students and
enhancing undergraduate and graduate education by developing a course in cancer
bioengineering and tailoring existing coursework to incorporate problems with
biological relevance. These activities are designed with the goal of motivating
pursuit of STEM careers for students from socially and economically challenged
backgrounds, women, and minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
focuses on developing an in vitro model to test the hypothesis that biophysical,
biochemical and cellular cues in the brain microenvironment regulate the
dormancy of breast cancer cells that have metastasized to the brain. Three
dimensional (3D) tissue-mimetic hydrogel scaffolds using hyaluronic acid will be
engineered to replicate biochemical composition, mechanics and cellular
components of the brain. The scaffolds created will provide controllable systems
to investigate microenvironment-tumor cell interactions, to study the mechanisms
controlling dormancy and to test if the dormant phenotype observed in BCBM cells
is reversible by modulating the scaffold environment. The Research Plan is
organized under 4 specific aims: 1) Investigate the influence of mechanical cues
(stiffness and mechanotransduction pathways) in regulating tumor dormancy in
vitro; 2) Investigate the influence of biochemical cues (biomolecules found in
the brain tumor extracellular matrix) in regulating tumor dormancy in vitro; 3)
Investigate the influence of cellular cues (astrocytes) in regulating tumor
dormancy in vitro and 4) Examine known signaling pathways (e.g., p38 and TGF-
Beta) regulating dormancy in the biomimetic environment in vitro and identify
additional pathways using a systems biology approach (proteomics and genomics),
i.e., to elucidate the mechanisms governing dormancy in the engineered
biomimetic scaffold, linking microenvironmental factors to the ultimate cellular
phenotype: "dormant" or "proliferative."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.