* 1749243
* Polar Data Planning Summit: Coordinating International Data Management, Mediation, and Sharing Activities in Support of Polar Observing, Science, Decision-making, and Arctic People
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Maribeth Murray, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 09/30/2020
* USD 49,547.00

The Polar Regions are undergoing significant environmental and social change.
Changes in the Arctic in particular have implications for the prosperity,
welfare, health, and national security of the United States and all nations.
Understanding, adapting to, and possibly benefiting from these changes requires
that scientists, governments, Arctic residents, and society as a whole work
together to enhance understanding and generate action at scales from local to
international. In support of understanding and action, the importance of polar
data and its proper management are increasingly being recognized by governments,
the science community, and society. The Polar Data Planning Summit will bring
together key actors from around the world to contribute to the design and
implementation of and integrated and well-defined polar network that enable
access to high- quality data, expertise, and information. This will place the
United States in a leadership role in developing a data network that will
support enhanced scientific understanding, national security, meeting
stakeholder needs, and improved agency operations.

The Polar Data Planning Summit will host more than twenty representatives from
key polar data programs and projects from around the world. An international
steering committee will work with the local organizing committee to establish
and agenda that prioritizes concrete work planning and particularly the
coordination of various activities being carried out under different projects.
The result will be a collectively developed road map outlining a world-wide
system that will provide researchers, Arctic residents, decision makers and
others with access to the vast majority of polar data. This will include a
coordinated, integrated work plan identifying goals, objectives, and associated
existing and emerging funded projects and programs. The outcomes of the Summit
will be disseminated at major meetings such as the POLAR 2018/Arctic Observing
Summit 2018 meetings in Davos, Switzerland, and the next Arctic Science
Ministerial expected in the Fall of 2018.