* 1749772
* CAREER:Investigating how internal states, learning, and memory shape olfactory coding
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Krishnan Padmanabhan, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2023
* USD 659,999.00

A central principle of neuroscience is that sensory stimuli are represented as
patterns of neuronal activity that ultimately give rise to behaviors.
Interestingly, even when a stimulus is fixed, such as the odor from a food
source, behavioral responses can be diverse, almost necessarily influenced by an
assortment of factors ranging from the animal's internal state to memory. These
collectively determine which one of many possible behaviors will be selected. In
the odor example, the decision to approach the food source may be influenced by
the degree of satiety vs. hunger, the valence of the odor (were these odors
"good" the last time they were encountered?), any memory the animal might have
about lurking predators (a calculation of risk versus reward), or an efficient
strategy for search the animal has learned. These are examples of the array of
information that gets integrated to select "the correct" behavior for survival
in a complex world. Recent evidence suggests that control points for behavioral
flexibility can happen as early as the level at which sensory information is
first processed. In this model, feedback or top-down projections from higher
processing areas directly alter patterns of neuronal firing in primary sensory
regions. As a result, these feedback projections affect behavior by manipulating
how stimuli are encoded in primary sensory regions. Thus, animals respond
differently because they encode the world differently. This project uses an
array of experimental and computational tools to advance understanding of this
top-down modulation of sensory information. The project also includes the
implementation of a computational neuroscience course for senior undergraduate
and graduate students, and of a Virtual Reality program that enables students,
including K-12 and local community college students, to visualize dynamics of
neural networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates central
modulation of peripheral sensory processing as a mechanism of influencing
behavioral endpoints. To study this question, two things are required: A
feedback circuit in the brain that 1) encodes for complex representations
including memory, fear, and anxiety for instance, and 2) targets primary sensory
regions. Recent studies have identified a direct feedback connection from the
ventral CA1 (vCA1) region of the hippocampus (that encodes fear, internal state,
social information, and learning) to the main olfactory bulb 1 synapse from
where odors are first detected in the mouse. This connection provides a compact
experimental system with which to interrogate how internal states and/or
learning and memory influence the neuronal representations of sensory stimuli at
the earliest stages. By using this circuit, this project: (1) examines the
patterns of connectivity between vCA1, the olfactory bulb and other known target
regions to identify the networks involved in this feedback control; and (2)
determines how vCA1 feedback reshapes the activity of neurons in the main
olfactory bulb in response to odors. For the first aim, newly developed
retrograde tracers are used to label connections from vCA1 to the bulb in tandem
with automated whole brain reconstruction methods to identifying the structural
logic of feedback circuits. For the second aim, optogenetic technology is used
to control vCA1 activity while recording the activity of large populations of
neurons in the main olfactory bulb, and thus to identify the physiological
effects of feedback projections and the role feedback plays in encoding
information about odor identity and concentration. This project is co-funded by
the Mathematical Biology program in the Division of Mathematical Sciences and
the Physics of Living Systems program in the Division of Physics of the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.