* 1749528
* Workshop titled "Toward a Research Agenda for Cloud 3.0"
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Aditya Akella, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2018
* USD 49,999.00

This award funds a focused workshop with the goal of bringing together leading
researchers and practitioners in networked systems to develop a new networking
research agenda for "Cloud 3.0", focusing on rethinking from the ground-up
networked systems infrastructure within the datacenter and beyond.

Background: In recent years we have witnessed two dramatic transformations of
the IT industry. First, virtualization, and private data centers, enabled
organizations to use limited compute resources in a more flexible and cost-
effective fashion. Second, cloud computing, and public clouds, enabled
organizations to outsource their IT infrastructure, vastly reducing capital and
operational expenses. We are now poised for the third dramatic shift:
"serverless" platforms, or "Cloud 3.0", which has the potential to reinvent both
hardware and software architectures. With Cloud 3.0, application developers just
bring code and data without worrying at all about the infrastructure (e.g.,
configuring and spinning up cloud resources). Application developers define even
the most complex applications as a set of simple stateless functions, or
lambdas. An infrastructure provider (e.g., a public cloud operator) handles all
the complex "details" (e.g., acquiring resources, managing failures, ensure good
user experience, etc.). This model offers many benefits including development of
innovative applications at much greater speed, rapid adaptation to user demand,
improved cost-effectiveness, etc. Several large online service providers have
begun offering platforms for serverless computation, touting this as "the future
of the Cloud".

The current approach to supporting such Cloud 3.0 applications, infrastructure,
and networking is to re-purpose existing hardware and software, protocols, and
algorithms. But there are several places, especially in cloud networking, where
existing technologies are a poor fit for Cloud 3.0. For example, at the hardware
level, recent research in disaggregated network designs has the potential to
further erode the hard boundaries defining servers as well. Similarly, new
approaches to rethinking network protocols, abstractions, application
programming interfaces (APIs), and algorithms may lead to more optimal support
for serverless computing. "Cloud 3.0" provides a rich set of opportunities for
interesting core networking, as well as cross-cutting ("networking + X")
research. Topics of interest that are likely to be explored at the workshop
include: new datacenter architectures and networking interconnects; synergy
between Lambdas and disaggregated network architectures; routing and link layer
protocols to support Lambdas? performance, scale up, isolation; programmable
fabrics and control planes that can support agility needed by Lambdas;
revisiting transport and network layer protocol design; revisiting old
abstractions such as the socket A ; Lambda isolation, security, and accounting,
and the necessary support at network.

The principal investigator, along with workshop participants, will author a
detailed workshop report which will outline a networking research agenda for
Cloud 3.0. The report will be made available on the public workshop website. The
website will also include a list of participants, their biographies, and their
one-page pre-workshop write-ups.