* 1749800
* CAREER: Iron Complexes for Hydrogen Generation and Oxygen Reduction
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* William McNamara, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Tong Ren
* 05/31/2024
* USD 402,230.00

SusChEM: CAREER: Iron Complexes for Hydrogen Generation and Oxygen
Reduction&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of clean and sustainable energy
is one of the most pressing issues facing modern society. Solar energy is the
most abundant form of renewable energy on earth, but is limited by a
discontinuous supply. It is therefore critical to develop a way to harness and
store solar energy as an energy dense chemical fuel that is compatible with our
current infrastructure. Through a process called artificial photosynthesis (AP),
sunlight is harnessed and used to split water into oxygen and hydrogen gas.
Hydrogen gas is used directly as a fuel, or is combined with oxygen in a
hydrogen fuel cell to generate electricity. Owing to expensive materials and
inefficient catalysts, hydrogen generation through AP is significantly more
expensive than hydrogen generated from fossil fuels. The use of hydrogen fuel
cells to convert solar fuels into electricity is also limited by the use of
expensive materials (platinum). In this project, Dr. William R. McNamara devises
a photocatalytic system for hydrogen generation using cost-effective iron
catalysts. The use of inexpensive iron catalysts for the efficient reduction of
oxygen gas in hydrogen fuel cells is also investigated. Within this project,
several outreach activities promote the development of future generations of
scientists. Dr. McNamara is conducting an after-school program at a local public
high school with a high concentration of underrepresented groups in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). Through this program students
actively conduct research in a meaningful and accessible way. These activities
advance public scientific literacy while encouraging underrepresented groups to
pursue careers in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding from the
Chemical Catalysis Program of the National Science Foundation supports the
effort of Dr. William R. McNamara at the College of William and Mary towards the
development of inexpensive materials for both photocatalytic hydrogen generation
and the oxygen reduction reaction of hydrogen fuel cells. The immobilization of
robust iron polypyridyl hydrogen generation catalysts on charge-separating
supports (carbon nanotubes, TiO2 and SrTiO3) is characterized using attenuated
total reflection infrared spectroscopy (ATR-IR) and diffuse reflectance UV-Vis
spectroscopy. Hydrogen generation is promoted using an LED photolysis system and
analyzed with gas chromatography. In order to decrease cost and improve the
widespread applicability of photocatalytic hydrogen generation, the use of
naturally occurring humic substances to replace traditional sacrificial donors
is also investigated. Additionally, iron polypyridyl sulfinate catalysts are
examined for the oxygen reduction reaction in hydrogen fuel cells. Rotating ring
disk voltammetry (RRDV) and cyclic voltammetry (CV) are used to evaluate
catalytic performance. Rigorous treatment of the data using foot-of-the-wave
analysis (FOWA) is also employed to better understand mechanism. Funding from
the NSF provides for the training of 15 different students (primarily
undergraduates) in this multi-disciplinary research effort. Additionally, Dr.
McNamara conducts an after-school research program at a local public high school
with a high concentration of underrepresented groups in science. Consistent with
the broader impacts of this project, these activities promote the engagement of
underrepresented groups in STEM disciplines and increase public engagement in
the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.