* 1749175
* FOundations of Secure and TrustEd HardwaRe (FOSTER) Workshop
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Siddharth Garg, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Kundu
* 08/31/2018
* USD 44,966.00

Semiconductor microchips are the brains inside all of the electronic devices
that pervade our society. To control costs, microchips are often designed and
even manufactured off-shore. Outsourcing the design and fabrication of
semiconductor microchips comes at the expense of their security. For one, an
off-shore microchip foundry can copy or steal the chip's blueprint, and sell
copies of the chip in the black market. Perhaps worse, the foundry can also
modify the chip's blueprint in stealthy ways, such that modifications go
undetected and the chip misbehaves in harmful ways. The vulnerabilities affect
the bottom-lines of commercial U.S. chip design companies, but perhaps more
critically, threaten the integrity of electronic components used in defense
equipment and critical infrastructure. There has been more than a decade of
fruitful academic and industry research on solutions to counteract these threats
to the design, manufacturing, and supply of electronic components. However,
there is still no common consensus on questions of critical importance. For
instance, what are the most pernicious attack vectors, in the near and far term?
And, how can we quantitatively compare different defense mechanisms in terms of
the security they offer? The time is ripe to bring together experts from
government, industry and academia to lay the foundations for the next phase of
hardware security research and reach a broad consensus on the most critical
challenges, identify promising defense mechanisms and establish methodologies to
evaluate solutions. The FOSTER Workshop is aimed at meeting this challenge. The
format of the workshop will encourage deep and open discussion between key
stakeholders, and its outcome will be a comprehensive report that lays out a
roadmap for research and transitioning research outcomes to
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Globalization of the IC design flow
has reduced design complexity and fabrication cost, but has introduced several
security vulnerabilities. A rogue agent anywhere in the IC supply chain can
perform the following attacks: reverse engineering, hardware Trojans insertion,
counterfeiting (specifically, recycled ICs), and IP piracy. These attacks cost
the semiconductor industry billions of dollars annually, undermine national
security and put critical infrastructure in danger. Despite the severity of this
problem, current commercial IC design tools, for the most part, do not consider
security as a first-class design metric. More than a decade of hardware security
research has been instrumental in identifying and analyzing the key problems in
this area and proposing a diverse array of solutions that address different
attack surfaces. As hardware security research moves to a new phase of maturity,
there is an urgent need to synthesize multiple threads of research into a
synergistic security-aware EDA tool-flow that will enable the next generation of
trusted hardware platforms.The FOSTER Workshop aims to address this need. The
workshop will bring together leading experts from industry and academia to
address the following foundational topics: (1) characterizing the hardware
security attack surface; (2) identifying formal, quantitative metrics to
evaluate and benchmark security solutions; (3) identifying the most promising
defense mechanisms and understand how different solutions can work
synergistically. The outcomes of the workshop will be of interest to EDA tool
developers, fabless semiconductor design companies, silicon foundries, test
companies, embedded system companies, computer and communication security
companies, and US government agencies, and will eventually benefit trustworthy
electronics for healthcare, defense, finance, transportation, and automotive
applications.