* 1749178
* Student training in linguistics and cultural anthropology
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2019
* Holly Cashman, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2019
* USD 24,000.00

This award is to support graduate student travel to an interdisciplinary
international conference on language and gender; it provides support for
graduate student travel to the upcoming meeting of the International Gender and
Language Association (IGALA) in Gaborone, Botswana in June 2018. Participation
in this conference will enable graduate students to present their original
research, receive feedback on their work from senior scholars in their field,
attend papers, panels and keynote lectures on a variety of topics by a diverse,
international group of researchers, and build professional connections by
networking with fellow researchers of gender, sexuality, and language,
particularly those from southern Africa, where the conference will be held. The
conference theme of Gender and Language in Multicultural Contexts, and given the
conference location, we expect southern Africa to be especially well-represented
in terms of paper topics and participants. The travel awards will be used to
encourage the participation of US-based graduate students despite the high cost
of travel to the conference site, and they will particularly aim to ensure the
participation of scholars from underrepresented minority groups. As has been
reported by recipients of previous funding, travel to international conferences
would have been out of reach financially without support, and these
opportunities enabled participants to initiate research collaborations, make
contacts crucial to their successful completion of fieldwork, and disseminate
their research in scholarly outlets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IGALA is the world's
largest and most prestigious conference on language and gender; attendees have
come from North and South America, Europe, Africa, the Middle East, Asia and the
Pacific Islands, Australia and New Zealand. The association's most recent
meeting - IGALA 9 in 2016 in Hong Kong - attracted a total attendance of well
over 200 people and featured more than 150 papers by 105 faculty and 85
students. At least fifteen of those students were from the US, thanks to funding
support from NSF. The upcoming meeting has the potential to maintain that number
of US-based graduate student researchers with support. IGALA conferences
consistently draws the most prominent figures in the field in disciplines
including linguistics, linguistic anthropology and social psychology, and the
conference welcomes both established and up-and-coming scholars.