* 1749324
* CAREER: Supporting Elementary Science Teaching and Learning by Integrating Uncertainty into Classroom Science Investigations
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Eve Manz, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 05/31/2024
* USD 984,646.00

This is a Faculty Early Career Development Program project responsive to a
National Science Foundation-wide activity that offers the most prestigious
awards in support of early-career faculty who have the potential to serve as
academic role models in research and education. It was submitted to the
Discovery Research K-12 program, which seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics by
preK-12 students and teachers through research and development of innovative
resources, models, and tools. The goal of this study will be to improve
elementary science teaching and learning by developing, testing, and refining a
framework and set of tools for strategically incorporating forms of uncertainty
central to scientists' sense-making into students' empirical learning. The
framework will rest on the notion that productive uncertainty should be
carefully built into students' empirical learning experiences in order to
support their engagement in scientific practices and understanding of
disciplinary ideas. To re-conceptualize the role of empirical investigations,
the study will focus on the transitions between the experiences and processes
students seek to understand, classroom investigations, evidence, and explanatory
models as opportunities for sense-making, and how uncertainty can be built into
these transitions. The project's underlying assumption is that carefully
implementing these forms of uncertainty will help curriculum developers and
teachers avoid the oversimplified investigations that are prevalent in K-8
classrooms that stand in stark contrast to authentic science learning and the
recommendations of the Framework for K-12 Science Education (National Research
Council, 2012). Accordingly, the project will seek to develop curriculum design
guidelines, teacher tools, professional development supports, and four
elaborated investigations, including sets of lessons, videos, and assessments
that embed productive uncertainty for second and fifth graders and designed for
use with linguistically, culturally, and socio-economically diverse students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis of this work is that if specific forms of
scientific uncertainty are carefully selected, and if teachers can implement
these forms of uncertainty, elementary students will have more robust
opportunities to develop disciplinary practices and ideas in ways consistent
with the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) (Lead States, 2013). Employing
Design-Based Research, the three research questions will be: (1) What
opportunities for sense-making do elementary school empirical investigations
afford where we might strategically build uncertainty?; (2) How can we design
learning environments where uncertainty in empirical investigations supports
opportunities for learning?; and (3) In classrooms with sustained opportunities
to engage with uncertainty in empirical investigations, what progress do
students make in content understandings and the practices of argumentation,
explanation, and investigation? The work will consist of three design cycles:
Design Cycle 1 will involve two small groups of six teachers in adapting their
curricula to incorporate uncertainty, then describe how students engage around
uncertainty in empirical investigations. Design Cycle 2 will involve the same
small groups in implementing and refining task structures, tools, and teacher
instructional strategies. In Design Cycle 3, teachers and researchers will
further refine lesson materials, assessments, and supports. The project will
partner with one school district and engage in design research with groups of
teachers to develop: (1) a research-based description, with exemplars of
opportunities for student sense-making within empirical investigations at both
early and upper elementary grades; (2) a set of design principles and tools that
allow teachers to elicit and capitalize on sense-making about uncertainty in
investigations; and (3) four elementary investigations elaborated to incorporate
and exemplify the first two products above. These materials will be disseminated
through a website, and established networks for supporting implementation of the
NGSS. An advisory board will oversee project progress and conduct both formative
and summative evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.