* 1749701
* CAREER: Multicellular Biological Neural Pacemaker
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Liang Guo, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 04/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Much of human physiology is controlled by electrical stimulation of and by the
nerves. Although electronic implants that replace natural stimulation of muscles
and nerves, such as the cardiac pacemaker and vagus nerve stimulator, offer a
unique means for treating certain diseases for which no other effective therapy
exists, many of their complications, such as harmful immune responses and
unsustainable power requirements, preclude the development of a lifetime
solution. To radically resolve the debilitating issues associated with these
electronic neural implants, this CAREER project proposes a new neural implant
technology using the patient's own cells. As a proof of concept, this project
will create an entirely new type of circuit design, called a multicellular
biological neural pacemaker (BNP). The BNP will use cardiomyocytes, the muscle
cells that control the beating properties of the heart, as the power source and
signal generator. The "generator" will stimulate motor neurons, which in turn
can excite muscle cells. The core problem of this design is obtaining
synchronized rhythmic activity between the motor neurons and the cardiomyocytes.
To establish feasibility, this "wiring" problem will be addressed by genetically
engineering functional channels, called gap junctions, between the cell types
while they are cultured together. If successful, this transformative technology
can be extended broadly to applications ranging from the development of a
biological heart pacemaker, to treatment for Parkinson's disease, and to muscle
stimulation. Complementary to the research goal, this project will carry out a
diversified series of educational activities, including building a competitive
interdisciplinary research team, organizing a campuswide Neuroengineering
Journal Club and a Neurotechnology Seminar Series, and organizing an annual
symposium on biocircuits at the Materials Research Society Spring
Meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of the long-term career goal to establish
a research program on the science and engineering of autologous neural implant
technology toward the ultimate substitution for electronic neural implants, the
focus of this project is to prove this concept through an example biocircuit
design of multicellular biological neural pacemaker (BNP). The feasibility for
such a design will be investigated using an in vitro coculture system designed
to validate the hypothesis that motor neurons can be electrically synchronized
to cardiomyocytes via genetically engineered gap junctions. Specifically, this
project will: (1) study how cardiomyocytes and motor neurons adapt to a
coculture; (2) form functional gap junctions among motor neurons and
cardiomyocytes using lentiviral transduction; and (3) recapitulate the results
with hiPSC-derived motor neurons and cardiomyocytes. This work will lay the
foundation for building this multicellular BNP. Here, in vitro demonstration of
intercellular functional wiring for the design of the BNP as an example living
implant suggests the possible application of autologous neural implants for
medical treatment. Furthermore, this approach of engineering cellular
inputs/outputs (I/Os) for wiring atypical heterogeneous biocircuits will spark
great interests in the scientific community for cellular I/O engineering and
development of application-specific integrated biocircuits. With synthetic cells
and specifically designed intercellular I/Os, it will be possible to build, from
bottom up, more complex heterogeneous biocircuits of advanced functionalities,
thus greatly expanding the engineering capability of biology for a variety of
exciting applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.