* 1749570
* CAREER: Verifying Distributed System Implementations
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Zachary Tatlock, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 03/31/2024
* USD 557,999.00

Billions of people depend on distributed systems every day for health care,
banking, transportation, and more. Despite costly testing efforts, these complex
services still fail in practice, leading to data loss and major service outages
that threaten everyone's convenience, finances, and safety. This project is
developing the tools and techniques necessary to verify (mathematically prove)
safety and reliability for distributed systems implementations under any
combination of network and machine misbehaviors. The intellectual merits are to
develop compositional verification techniques where the programmer can
independently prove correctness for applications and reliability for fault-
tolerance components. The broader significance and importance are to provide
rigorous reliability guarantees for the core computational infrastructure
society depends on and to train a new generation of engineers who will create
high-performance, verified distributed systems
implementations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to make verification
tractable by developing verified system transformers which automatically wrap
simple systems with fault tolerance mechanisms guaranteed to preserve
equivalence. This approach separates concerns of application correctness from
fault tolerance which eases proof effort and enables greater code reuse.
Industrial practitioners are already using an early prototype verified system
transformer as a guide in exploring designs and alternate implementations. An
outcome of this project is an extensive library of such transformers covering a
broad range of critical distributed system features including reconfiguration,
ring maintenance, and software update.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.