* 1749566
* EAGER: Understanding the Impact of Making on Veterans in Pursuing STEM Degrees
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Karina Arcaute, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2019
* USD 99,000.00

This project will use Maker pedagogy to develop workshops to test its potential
for improving the effectiveness of learning pathways in STEM disciplines for
military veterans. The workshops will provide training and educational awareness
in engineering topics and will include computer-aided design (CAD), rapid
prototyping, 3D printing, fundamentals of bio-inspired robotics, and additive
manufacturing technologies. The project will address the nation's need for
workforce to learn the most current and emerging skill sets. The workshops will
be held at Old Dominion University in the Hampton Roads area of Southeastern
Virginia, which serves a wide population of women, underrepresented minorities,
and veterans entering into the engineering and technology workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will develop and deliver two Maker
Workshops serving military veterans to foster their STEM knowledge and careers
and to develop their interest and introduce the skills needed for opportunities
in advanced manufacturing. The project will carry out formative and summative
evaluation that will support the development of an educational model that can be
implemented in different institutions across the country with veteran or adult
student learner populations. Evaluation will focus on veteran workshop
participants' attitudes, behaviors, and skills, using observations from data
collected through surveys and instruments, and teaching related activities.
Project results and resources will be disseminated through conferences held by a
wide range of Veterans' organizations and the American Society of Engineering
Education, as well through relevant educational and professional journals.