* 1749419
* RAPID: Physiological and molecular mechanisms that explain reproductive-female-specific skeletal growth in a highly cooperative mammal, the Damaraland mole rat
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Jenny Tung, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 108,853.00

This RAPID award takes advantage of an ongoing experiment in the Kalahari Desert
of South Africa on the Damaraland mole rat, a highly social mammal that
cooperatively raises its young. The goal is to test hypotheses about how
breeding drives bone growth and remodeling in females. Two bones that do and do
not elongate in reproductive female mole rats (lumbar vertebrae and femur,
respectively), and the same bones in nonreproductive females, will be compared
for bone growth and bone-derived stem cell activity, mineralization potential,
gene expression, and responsiveness to hormonal signals. The project will
provide new information about how hormonal signals and hormonally-mediated gene
expression changes result in bone growth that is related to fitness in this
unusually cooperative mammal. Results will be broadly applicable to
understanding the control of skeletal remodeling and growth in mammals. The
project involves training of a postdoctoral fellow and volunteers at the
Kalahari Research Centre in South Africa, and public education at the North
Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide novel insight into the physiological and genomic targets of
social evolution in the Damaraland mole rat. In females of this eusocial
species, secondary skeletal growth (lumbar vertebrae elongation and widening of
the pelvic girdle) is a function of reproductive activity and results in
increased litter sizes. The project will investigate gene regulatory differences
in bone-forming mesenchymal stem cells that explain this breeding female-
specific growth phenotype. It will test the hypothesis that estrogen and
insulin-like growth factor signaling differentiate reproductive females and non-
breeders, and bones that experience secondary growth from those that do not.
Differences in stem cell gene expression and chromatin accessibility at
estrogen-receptor transcription-factor binding sites will be quantified. By
elucidating the physiological mechanisms underlying permanent, secondary
skeletal growth in mole rat females, the results will lead to a better
understanding of how skeletal growth in adult mammals, including humans, is
controlled.