* 1749895
* CAREER: Principled and Practical Software Shielding against Advanced Exploits
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Michail Polychronakis, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 499,899.00

The exploitation of memory corruption vulnerabilities in popular software is
among the leading causes of system compromise and malware infection. While there
are several reasons behind this proliferation of exploitable bugs, the reliance
on unsafe programming languages such as C and C++ and the complexity of modern
software play a major role. The continuous discovery of previously unknown
(zero-day) vulnerabilities in browsers, document viewers, and other widely used
software, and the lack of effective defenses against recent exploitation
techniques that leverage memory disclosure vulnerabilities, necessitate the
development of additional defense mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
objective of this project is the design of software shielding techniques and
their practical applicability to commodity software and systems. The key
innovative aspects of the investigated techniques include: i) principled design
that considers the strong adversarial models imposed by the latest exploitation
advancements, i.e., disclosure-aided exploitation and data-only attacks, against
which effective countermeasures remain an open problem; ii) novel code
specialization and data protection techniques, to introduce process-level
unpredictability and limit the exposure of critical data; iii) hardware-assisted
implementation by leveraging recent and upcoming processor features to minimize
the performance impact of the applied protections; and iv) focus on practical
considerations, such as operational compatibility and non-disruptive deployment.
The outcomes of this research effort are expected to improve the state of the
art in defenses against advanced exploits, and achieve substantial practical
impact by shielding existing vulnerable applications against exploitation,
benefiting both end users and security researchers. The project also provides
students the opportunity to conduct research in cybersecurity, and fosters the
integration of cybersecurity into high school education through hands-on
workshops for students and seminars for science
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.