* 1749815
* CAREER: Unraveling Online Disinformation Trajectories: Applying and Translating a Mixed-Method Approach to Identify, Understand and Communicate Information Provenance
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Kate Starbird, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/2024
* USD 550,000.00

This project will improve our understanding of the spread of disinformation in
online environments. It will contribute to the field of human-computer
interaction in the areas of social computing, crisis informatics, and human
centered data science. Conceptually, it explores relationships between
technology, structure, and human action - applying the lens of structuration
theory towards understanding how technological affordances shape online action,
how online actions shape the underlying structure of the information space, and
how those integrated structures shape information trajectories.
Methodologically, it enables further development, articulation and evaluation of
an iterative, mixed method approach for interpretative analysis of "big" social
data. Finally, it aims to leverage these empirical, conceptual and
methodological contributions towards the development of innovative solutions for
tracking disinformation trajectories.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The online spread of
disinformation is a societal problem at the intersection of online systems and
human behavior. This research program aims to enhance our understanding of how
and why disinformation spreads and to develop tools and methods that people,
including humanitarian responders and everyday analysts, can use to detect,
understand, and communicate its spread. The research has three specific,
interrelated objectives: (1) to better understand the generation, evolution, and
propagation of disinformation; (2) to extend, support, and articulate an
evolving methodological approach for analyzing "big" social media data for use
in identifying and communicating "information provenance" related to
disinformation flows; (3) to adapt and transfer the tools and methods of this
approach for use by diverse users for identification of disinformation and
communication of its origins and trajectories. More broadly, it will contribute
to the advancement of science through enhanced understandings and
conceptualization of the relationships between technological affordances, social
network structure, human behavior, and intentional strategies of deception. The
program includes an education plan that supports PhD student training and
recruits diverse undergraduate students into research through multiple
mechanisms, including for-credit research groups and an academic bridge
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.