* 1749081
* NSFGEO-NERC Collaborative Research: Advancing Predictability of Sea Ice: Phase 2 of the Sea Ice Prediction Network (SIPN2)
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Uma Bhatt, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 12/31/2023
* USD 513,652.00

NSFGEO-NERC Collaborative Research: Advancing Predictability of Sea Ice: Phase 2
of the Sea Ice Prediction Network (SIPN2)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The shrinking
Arctic sea-ice cover has captured the attention of the world. A downward
September trend has accelerated over the last decade, with the 10 lowest
September sea-ice extents occurring in the last 10 years. An essentially ice-
free Arctic during summer is expected by mid-century. Loss of the sea- ice cover
has profound consequences for ecosystems and human activities in the Arctic, so
there is an urgent need to advance sea-ice predictions in all seasons at both
the pan-Arctic and regional scales. A better quantification of the role of
oceanic heat and climate variations in the Pacific sector, new observational-
based sea-ice products, and network activities will advance understanding of
seasonal predictability of Arctic sea ice, the limits of this predictability,
and the economic value of forecasts for stakeholders. The network supported by
this grant will examine origins and impacts of extreme ocean surface warming in
preconditioning the ice cover in the Pacific Arctic for continued major
reductions in sea-ice extent and duration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key finding
that emerged from the earlier Sea Ice Prediction Network (SIPN) effort is that
predictions of September sea-ice extent tend to have less skill in extreme years
that strongly depart from the trend line. The objective of proposed research
under Phase 2 of SIPN (SIPN2) is to improve forecast skill through adopting a
multi-disciplinary approach that includes modeling, new products, data analysis,
scientific networks, and stakeholder engagement. This grant will: Investigate
the sensitivity of subseasonal-to-seasonal sea-ice predictability in the Alaska
Arctic to variations in oceanic heat and large- scale atmospheric forcing using
a dynamical model Community Earth System Model (NCAR CESM) and statistical
forecasting tools, focusing on spatial fields in addition to total extent
summaries; Assess the accuracy of Sea Ice Outlook (SIO) submissions based on
methodology and initialization; Develop new observation-based products for
improving sea-ice predictions, including sea-ice thickness, surface roughness,
melt ponds, and snow depth; Evaluate the socio-economic value of sea-ice
forecasts to stakeholders who manage ship traffic and coastal village resupply
in the Alaska Sector, and engage the public in Arctic climate and sea-ice
prediction through blog exchanges, accessible SIO reports, bi-monthly webinars,
and by making public data sources useful to non-scientists and scientists alike;
and Continue and evolve network activities to generate SIO forecasts and
reporting for September minima as in SIPN and expand SIPN2 forecasts to include
full spatial resolution and emerging ice-anomaly-months (October - November).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will directly engage stakeholders that create
and use sea-ice forecasts in Alaska and lead to improved safety around sea ice.
Work under SIPN2 will also track public awareness and perceptions regarding sea
ice, helping to raise understanding through accessible reports, discussions, and
public data sources useful to non-scientists and scientists alike. Stakeholder
engagement during the research process will potentially facilitate rapid
research-to-operations implementation of the products of this work.