* 1749052
* Collaborative Research:  Functional genomics of plumage ornaments in a warbler
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2021
* Corey Freeman-Gallant, Skidmore College
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 03/31/2021
* USD 73,070.00

One of the grand challenges in animal biology is to understand the influence of
genes on the development of phenotypic and behavioral traits. The plumage of
birds encompasses a spectacular array of ornamental plumages long appreciated
for their beauty, yet we know little about how the color of plumage patches or
their size is influenced by genes. It is generally thought that the plumage
color of male birds is a signal of quality to females choosing mates. Several
hypotheses have now been proposed linking the size and color of plumage
ornaments to various physiological and genetic pathways related to health,
including those involved in cellular metabolism, growth, oxidative stress and
immunity. Any one pathway could provide a general explanation for how bird
colors signal quality in males, but these genetic pathways may interact in
complex ways that can only be understood using genome-wide analysis techniques.
Here the researchers plan to examine these pathways using next generation gene
sequencing of the genome of a brightly colored warbler. The types of pigments in
this bird (black colored melanin and yellow colored carotenoids) are widespread
across species and, thus, will provide a general model for many researchers
studying the development of colorful ornaments. As part of the project the
researchers will conduct workshops on genomics at local colleges, at an
international behavior meeting and, in Belize, for a local zoo and local
conservationists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will use genomic
analyses to test several recent hypotheses for the genetic basis of ornament
expression in a warbler, the common yellowthroat. This warbler is one of a few
species of birds in which females are known to choose mates based on ornamental
traits that are associated with indices of fitness. Interestingly, sexual
selection targets different ornaments in different populations of the common
yellowthroat. In Wisconsin, females prefer males with larger black masks,
whereas in New York females prefer males with larger, more colorful yellow bibs.
The investigators have already shown that mask size in Wisconsin and bib color
in New York are honest signals of similar aspects of male quality in each
population. Based on these results, the investigators plan to use a genomics
approach to determine if: 1) elaborate ornaments are related to the expression
of genes in growth, immunity and oxidative stress pathways, as predicted by
recent hypotheses, and 2) if these traits exhibit molecular parallelism where
the same genetic pathways are most closely associated with the ornament
preferred by females in each location. To maximize the probability of finding
differences and to expand the tests of parallelism, the study will also
incorporate geographic comparisons with other subspecies and a closely-related
species in Belize, which have larger differences in ornament size and
color.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.