* 1749261
* CAREER: Causal Connections Between the Arctic and Mid-latitudes
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Elizabeth Barnes, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 860,018.00

The accelerated warming of the Arctic and unprecedented loss of sea ice in
recent years have spurred a flurry of research and public interest on how these
changes at high latitudes may impact weather at lower latitudes. There is much
disagreement on whether we have already witnessed substantial impacts. The focal
point of these debates is the question "who-is-causing-who", as changes in high
latitudes take place at the same era as those in other latitudes, including mid-
latitudes. The question how to infer the causality from data (observations and
model outputs) is one of the most outstanding issues that the climate science
community needs to resolve urgently. Here, the PI plans to apply causal
discovery techniques, a unique type of statistical and data analysis, to the
question of causal connections between the Arctic and mid-latitude circulation.
These tools will provide insight into the causal pathways connecting Arctic
temperatures to mid-latitude weather, quantify the ability of state-of-the-art
climate models to simulate these pathways, and assess how these pathways may
change in the coming decades. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funded research will
advance our understanding of the two-way links between the Arctic and mid-
latitude weather, which in turn, can lead to improvements in short-term weather
forecasts as well as improvements in predictions of weather/climate variability
in the coming decades. In addition, this project will include the development of
an online "gateway" of accessible explanations of data analysis techniques with
accompanying atmospheric-science-motivated examples for atmospheric scientists:
the Data Analysis Tools for Atmospheric Scientists (DATAS) Gateway. The recent
explosion of climate data and increasing complexity of earth-system models
requires that now, more than ever, atmospheric scientists be equipped with the
necessary skills to make novel and robust discoveries. A joint community effort
is planned for creating, testing, and disseminating the DATAS Gateway material.
These community coordinated research/education activities include peer
contributions and review, graduate student workshops, statistical and gateway-
developer consultants, and integration into current and planned curricula across
seven universities. The DATAS Gateway will not only be a resource for scientists
across the globe, but will also allow for the sharing of ideas and tools, spur
scientific breakthroughs and support five undergraduate researchers. A
sustainability plan will be developed to transition the DATAS Gateway to a
community-driven effort to ensure that it outlives the 5-year horizon of this
CAREER grant. The project as a whole will additionally support a graduate
student and individuals under-represented in STEM by supporting the efforts of
six female faculty (the PI and five collaborators).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.