* 1749252
* CAREER: Geochemical and functional controls of methane-mediating microbes in Amazon peatlands
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2023
* Hinsby Cadillo-Quiroz, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 11/30/2023
* USD 650,013.00

This CAREER project will examine how microorganisms influence the production and
consumption of methane gas in Amazon peatlands. The research will fill an
important knowledge gap in the study of tropical ecosystems and is important for
a better understanding of regional to global environmental change. Creating a
predictive model to understand methane cycling in ecosystems will impact
environmental sciences, ecosystem management and regional atmospheric
predictions. Also, this research has key educational goals and outreach efforts
that will bridge research, education and societal participation. Building on
Inquiry Based Learning (IBL) teaching and training approaches, this project will
generate continuous training and research activity tools centered on studying
microorganisms. All education products will be broadly accessible via online
platforms. The project will also increase participation of undergraduate
students from underrepresented groups in research and biological science
activities. Finally, the project will promote international collaboration and
participation of the public in environmental studies involving microorganisms,
including the research process and sharing of scientific results on tropical
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Amazon peatlands are key regional
contributors of methane flux currently and in the past, however little is known
about the activity of their methane-mediating microbes or how the geochemical
characteristics of seasonal flooding events affect methane flux rates. The
hypotheses to be tested in this study include: i) methane flux is a process
where the strength and predictiveness of biological and environmental controls
vary according to the spatial scale in study; and ii) trait based microbial
modeling increases accuracy in CH4 flux predictions at variable spatial scales
and variable Amazon flood periods. These hypotheses will be addressed by linking
the microbial distribution and the determination of peatland soil geochemical
niches before and after Amazon annual floods, by isolating and testing the
functional capacities of CH4-mediating microbes at standard or simulated "flood"
conditions, and by developing a trait-based model to integrate geochemical and
microbe functional limits on CH4 flux at local (meter) or broader (kilometer)
spatial scales. Multiple products including geospatial mapping of microbes and
niches, catalogs of functional traits in Amazon microbes, and trait based
modeling will be integrated in a site-specific model inclusive of the
physiological and geochemical controls on methane cycling microbes from
contrasting Amazon peatlands. Educational Inquiry-based learning products for
undergraduate education and broad society participation will also be developed
and be made publicly available to further the contribution and dissemination of
results from this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.