* 1749789
* CAREER: Advances in Multi-scale Bayesian Inference and Learning on Massive Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Li Ma, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Massive data present unprecedented opportunities for advancing our understanding
of various scientific and social phenomena. With sufficient data and the
appropriate statistical tools, researchers can now hope to recover structures in
the data that were once deemed too intricate to identify with traditional
"small" data. Extracting complex hidden structures in massive data often
requires flexible nonparametric methods; however, there are several fundamental
challenges that make existing nonparametric methods impractical or inadequate.
At the core of these challenges is a conflict between two essential aspects in
big data analysis: (i) the need for flexible methodology for capturing complex
features and (ii) the cost, both computational and statistical, associated with
this additional flexibility. Effective resolution of this fundamental conflict
requires new paradigms of nonparametric inference. The long-term research
objective of this project is to develop inference paradigms, including theory,
methods, algorithms, and software, for nonparametric inference and learning that
effectively resolve this fundamental conflict. The research will lead to the
development of statistical tools that meet urgent needs for scalable
nonparametric data analysis in a wide range of fields, including biology,
economics, astrophysics, chemistry, and information technology. The project will
address the integration of research with educational activities through teaching
and mentoring of undergraduate and graduate students, and outreach to students
from local colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and
investigate a particularly promising paradigm, multi-scale divide-and-conquer,
to address the fundamental conflict between flexibility and cost. Specific
inference problems to be addressed cover a wide range of nonparametric inference
and learning objectives, and can be organized into three research thrusts: (i)
joint nonparametric modeling of multiple data generative processes; (ii)
characterizing dependency between random variables/vectors; and (iii) response-
domain ensemble supervised learning. Beyond addressing these specific
objectives, the proposed research will introduce theoretical and computational
devices for evaluating and improving the statistical and computational
efficiency of multi-scale divide-and-conquer methods in general. The output of
the research will include practical methods and algorithms for carrying out a
variety of important nonparametric inference tasks on massive data, as well as
general guiding principles for effective multi-scale statistical analysis. The
research output will be disseminated through publications, presentations, and
open-source software to the scientific community, and society at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.