* 1749275
* Advancing Core STEM Research Through Scientific Studies and Capacity Building with Large-Scale Data Resources
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2024
* Felice Levine, American Educational Research Association
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 07/31/2024
* USD 4,299,997.00

This project was submitted in response to EHR Core Research (ECR) program
announcement NSF 15-509. The ECR program of fundamental research in STEM
education provides funding in critical research areas that are essential, broad
and enduring. EHR seeks proposals that will help synthesize, build and/or expand
research foundations in the following focal areas: STEM learning, STEM learning
environments, STEM workforce development, and broadening participation in STEM.
The ECR program is distinguished by its emphasis on the accumulation of robust
evidence to inform efforts to (a) understand, (b) build theory to explain, and
(c) suggest interventions (and innovations) to address persistent challenges in
STEM interest, education, learning, and participation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
line with the goals of the EHR's core research objectives, the American
Educational Research Association (AERA) Grants Program will provide competitive
research grants to both doctoral students - for dissertation work, and early
career education research scientists who conduct secondary analyses of large-
scale national and international data sets from the National Center for
Education Statistics (NCES). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three aims:
The primary goal of the program will enable a diverse talent pool of new and
young scholars to pursue fundamental research of relevance to STEM policy and
practice, utilizing large scale databases. Specifically, the program will focus
on: 1) enhancement of the current dissertation and research grants program; 2)
facilitate linkages among existing datasets and other sources of data; and 3)
build capacity for young, diverse scholars to use and share large data sets.
Further, the program will allow researchers to link and study these large-scale
STEM databases with other sources of Big Data, such as those gathered with
personal digital assistants or through social media. Finally, the program will
support a strategy that promotes communication to researchers and non-
researchers alike.