* 1749727
* CAREER: Genome-enabled investigations into the mechanisms and ecological controls on selenium transformations by fungi
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2024
* Cara Santelli, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 03/31/2024
* USD 855,665.00

Selenium (Se), sometimes referred to as "the essential toxin", plays an
important role in human and ecosystem health. Selenium is a required
micronutrient for most living organisms. At elevated concentrations, however, Se
is a toxic element of increasing environmental concern. Selenium bioavailability
and toxicity largely depends on the form, or oxidation state, of the compound.
Microorganisms, including fungi, play an important role in controlling and
transforming Se chemical speciation by promoting a variety of chemical
reactions. The processes by which fungi promote Se transformations, however, are
largely unresolved, thus limiting knowledge of their specific contributions in
nature. Using a genome-enabled approach, this research will examine and resolve
the relevant fungal biogeochemical processes that transform Se speciation and
ultimately influence the fate and distribution of selenium in nature. Results
from the proposed research will also directly inform new technologies for Se
bioremediation and will be of additional interest to government and local stake-
holders who are regulating or managing Se issues. Through formal student
training and engagement in public science communication in collaboration with
local museums, this project will further engage, inform, and inspire students
and the public on the important role that microorganisms play in maintaining and
improving the overall health of planet Earth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To better
understand the impact of fungi on biogeochemical processes that influence the
fate of selenium in nature, this research will illuminate the currently
unresolved molecular mechanisms and pathways that contribute to the aerobic
reductive transformation of soluble, toxic Se oxyanions (selenate and selenite)
to insoluble Se(0) and organic, volatile Se(-II) compounds by a diverse suite of
environmentally-relevant Ascomycete fungi. The specific research objectives are
to (1) identify the fungal mechanisms of selenate and selenite reduction in oxic
environments, (2) assess the effects of key nutrients and trace metals on fungal
Se transformation mechanisms and reaction products, and (3) investigate particle
size, morphology, and structure of Se biomineralization products with respect to
fungal growth conditions and Se reduction pathway. The genome-enabled approach
will elucidate the genes and proteins that contribute to Se reduction by linking
their expression to specific functions and resulting Se biominerals and
organoselenium compounds. This approach will lead to the development of gene
regulatory networks for these common fungal species, which will be highly
beneficial for predicting the effect of environmental or biological change on Se
speciation and will further benefit the advancement of fungal research in
environmental and biological sciences. This project is jointly funded by the
Geobiology and Low-Temperature Geochemistry Program in the Division of Earth
Sciences and the Systems and Synthetic Biology Cluster in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.