* 1749549
* Conscious separateness, unanticipated convergence: World Englishes
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2023
* John Singler, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/28/2023
* USD 137,689.00

Work in creole studies tends to focus on the relationship of a pidgin/creole to
its lexifier language and to concentrate on morphosyntax to the exclusion of
other components of the grammar. The present study broadens creole
studies/contact linguistics by examining the relationship of two vernaculars to
each other rather than to their lexifier and by bringing phonetics/phonology
into the picture. In the context of research on variation and change in contact
languages, this study is innovative in its two comparisons: language use of two
co-existing contact varieties are compared to each other, and recorded data from
an earlier time period are compared to current speech patterns. This project
contributes to the documentation of under-studied varieties of English. It has
the potential to link to research on World Englishes and their diachronic
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project takes place in Liberia.
Kolokwa (&lt; colloquial) is the pidginized vernacular of the indigenous
majority; it is a modern descendant of West African Pidgin English. Liberian
Settler English (LSE) is the other; it came to Liberia as nineteenth-century
African American English, The two varieties have been in close contact for
almost two centuries, but the vexed, often antagonistic, relationship of the
speakers has promoted the separateness of the two varieties. Even with recent
political upheaval, the country's linguistic ideology has remained largely
intact, particularly in its stigmatization of Kolokwa. The researcher, Dr. John
Singler, compiled parallel corpora of sociolinguistic interviews in 1988-1989,
just before civil war broke out in Liberia: one was with LSE speakers, the other
with Kolokwa speakers. In terms of morphosyntactic features, while each variety
has taken from the other, by and large features from the language of the
powerful group, LSE, have spread to the language of the disenfranchised,
Kolokwa. For phonetics/phonology, the direction appears to be reversed. A pilot
study based on part of each corpus makes the case that Kolokwa had a seven-vowel
system and that LSE has gone from the twelve-vowel system of nineteenth-century
African American English to Kolokwa's seven-vowel system. Dr. Singler will
expand the study to include all the speakers (24 Kolokwa, 16 LSE) and further to
look at variable coda-consonant deletion. Moreover, because the LSE corpus comes
from an atypical Settler community, a new LSE corpus from a more representative
settlement will be generated. Entree into this LSE community will be achieved
through interaction with its quilting group. While carrying out his collection
of the new corpus, Dr. Singler will discuss the relationship of Kolokwa and LSE
in the media and in public forums, in particular to demonstrate the ways in
which the two ostensibly distinct varieties have each given features to the
other, producing a distinctively Liberian result.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.