* 1749290
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Computing agreement in a mixed system - A psycholinguistic comparison of subject and object agreement
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Brian Dillon, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 02/29/2020
* USD 19,108.00

This project investigates speech errors associated with the production of verbal
agreement in Hindi, a widely-spoken language with a complex verb agreement
system. Speaking one's native language does not usually feel like a particularly
difficult or demanding task: in most situations adults do this without
experiencing any noticeable difficulty. Despite this, much research into
language production has shown that it is a highly complex cognitive task, and
that there are many mental processes involved in translating an abstract idea to
a linguistic message that we can communicate with our mouths or hands.
Understanding the nature of these mental processes is important both for
understanding how to develop better treatments for language disorders, as well
as for developing more sophisticated natural language technology. The present
project contributes to a better understanding of how language production
proceeds by investigating speech errors in Hindi. Speech errors provide one of
the most important sources of insight into natural language production. However,
the majority of research into speech errors during language production is
focused on English, potentially limiting the scope of this research. The present
project fills a gap in our knowledge by investigating speech errors in Hindi, a
language that has very different grammatical properties than English. In
addition, the present project increases the visibility of Hindi for
psycholinguistic research. Hindi remains highly understudied in psycholinguistic
research on language production and comprehension, despite its many unique
grammatical properties and the fact that it is the third most spoken language in
the world, with over half a billion speakers worldwide and over half a million
in the United States alone.

Previous research on European languages has shown that speakers will sometimes
produce verb agreement errors in certain grammatical contexts. For example, in
the sentence 'the key to the cabinets is rusty', English speakers will sometimes
produce the incorrect plural form 'are' instead of the correct is due to
interference from the plural noun 'cabinets'. Research has shown that this
interference is highly sensitive to the structural properties of the
'distractor' noun--'cabinets'. However, the precise structural properties that
make a linguistic expression prominent and likely to create interference during
language production are not well understood. Hindi can help shed light on this.
Unlike other studied languages, Hindi has a 'mixed' agreement system: in some
contexts, the verb agrees with the subject (as in English), and in others it
agrees with the object. Here, the researchers will use structured experiments
utilizing two methodologies--the spoken production paradigm and the binary
choice agreement paradigm--to identify the circumstances under which Hindi
speakers produce errors in verb agreement in both subject agreement
configurations and object agreement configurations. In comparing error patterns
for subject agreement and object agreement, this research will shed light on
what factors make linguistic expressions cognitively prominent during language
production. The results will be of interest to psycholinguists developing models
of agreement production and to linguists interested in the grammatical
generalizations that speakers acquire about their native language.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.