* 1749357
* CAREER: Correct-By-Design Control of Traffic Flow Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2024
* Samuel Coogan, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 01/31/2024
* USD 500,100.00

Modern cities accommodate more people than ever before, leading to
transportation networks that operate at or near capacity. In addition, the next
generation of transportation systems will include connected vehicles, connected
infrastructure, and increased automation, and these advances must coexist with
legacy technology into the foreseeable future. Accommodating these rapidly
developing advancements requires smarter and more efficient use of existing
infrastructure with guarantees of performance, safety, and interoperability. The
goal of this project is to develop fundamental theory and domain-driven
techniques for controlling traffic flow in large-scale transportation networks.
Recent advances in inexpensive sensors, wireless technology, and the Internet of
Things (IoT) enable real-time connectivity of vehicles and infrastructure that
offers abundant data and unprecedented opportunities for efficient and optimized
transportation systems. The main technical goal is to develop techniques and
algorithms that are correct-by-design, ensuring that these transportation
systems satisfy required operating specifications. In pursuit of this goal, the
project will first develop models of traffic flow from rich data streams and
then will leverage these models to enable scalable control approaches. In
addition, this project will integrate an ambitious education plan that includes
a redesigned introductory course in control theory for undergraduates. The
course will be restructured to focus on modern challenges in control,
culminating in a Control Grand Challenge design competition in which students
will design a controller for an autonomous, scale-model car and then compete
with their design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve systems that satisfy the
rich design specifications demanded of traffic networks, the project will
especially focus on bringing powerful techniques from formal methods for
verification and synthesis to large-scale physical networks. These formal
methods were originally developed for specifying and verifying the correct
behavior of software and hardware systems, and an important research objective
now is to ensure these approaches are scalable, adaptable, and reliable when
applied to physical control systems. The project will focus on the following
objectives: i) Develop theory and models for the dynamic behavior of traffic
networks that captures domain-specific phenomena such as congestion propagation,
ii) Determine how traffic flow dynamics will change as vehicles are increasingly
equipped with autonomous capabilities, iii) Identify and exploit intrinsic
structure in traffic flow networks to enable scalable formal methods for
verification and synthesis, and iv) Use data available through industry
collaborations to develop probabilistically correct control of traffic flow
networks. These objectives address a growing need for systematic guarantees of
performance in traffic networks as the increasing complexity and interdependence
of transportation systems renders ad hoc approaches insufficient. The research
activities of this project will use real traffic data available through ongoing
collaborations with industry. An expected outcome of this project is a suite of
scalable algorithms that will be tested on a pilot traffic network available
through this collaboration. In addition, the project will establish foundational
theory applicable outside the traffic domain.