* 1749986
* Improved Understanding of Changes in Convective Available Potential Energy and Links to the Large-scale Circulation
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Paul O'Gorman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 02/28/2022
* USD 412,144.00

The build-up of a thunderstorm, from scattered popcorn clouds to a dark towering
storm cloud, is a common sight on a summer afternoon. The vigorous growth of
such clouds is fueled by the convective available potential energy (CAPE) of the
atmosphere. Formally CAPE is the amount of work that would be done by the
buoyancy force on a saturated plume of air rising through the portion of the
atmosphere in which it is lighter than the surrounding air, assuming that no
ambient air mixes into the rising plume. Weather forecasters routinely calculate
CAPE from atmospheric temperature soundings and use it to predict the likelihood
of severe convective storms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer simulations of
greenhouse-gas induced climate change commonly show large increases of CAPE with
global mean temperature, a result which has raised concerns that thunderstorms
may become more common or intense as a consequence of climate change. But the
reasons why CAPE should increase with global temperature are not clear, and the
lack of a theory for the dependence of CAPE on temperature limits confidence in
model results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under previous funding the PI's group
developed a simple model which explains the dependence of CAPE on temperature.
But the theory assumes that the atmosphere is in a state of radiative-convective
equilibrium, a state which approximates the condition of the atmosphere over
warm tropical oceans. The theory is compelling as a starting point but cannot be
directly applied to understand CAPE change over land or at higher latitudes.
Work under this award thus seeks a more general understanding of the
relationship between CAPE and global climate, including the effects of large-
scale atmospheric circulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is conducted
through examination of climate model simulations produced for the Coupled Model
Intercomparison Project, combined with experiments using a cloud resolving model
on a limited domain to test hypotheses. The role of atmospheric circulation is
assessed through calculation and analysis of moist mean available potential
energy (MAPE), the maximum amount of kinetic energy that can be reversibly
produced from the mean state of the atmosphere by transforming to a lower energy
reference state. The MAPE analysis seeks to relate the mean state of the
atmosphere in middle and high latitudes to its potential to generate CAPE
through large-scale circulations. The impact of land surface conditions on CAPE
is another focus of the research, as the strong diurnal cycle of temperature and
moisture plays a key role in the development of convection over land. Further
work considers the impact of changes in CAPE on the Walker circulation, a large-
scale overturning circulation between the western and eastern
Pacific.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has societal as well as scientific value
given the damaging effects of convective storms, including hail, lightning,
tornados, and flash floods, along with indications that their intensity or
frequency of occurrence may increase due to climate change. Results with
practical implications are shared with interested parties through workshops and
other venues, and research results are incorporated into classroom teaching and
other educational activities. In addition, the project provides support and
training to a graduate student, thereby providing for the future work force in
this research area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.