* 1749810
* AF: EAGER: Identifying Opportunities in Pseudorandomness
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2018
* Omer Reingold, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2018
* USD 175,000.00

Pseudorandomness is the theory of generating objects that "look random" despite
being constructed using little or no randomness. The computational theory of
pseudorandomness originated in the foundations of cryptography in the early
1980s and has since developed into a rich subfield of theoretical computer
science in its own right. The notions and constructs studied in the theory of
pseudorandomness have implications for many different areas of research in
computer science, communications, and mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project seeks to identify
novel approaches to some of the most enduring and important challenges in
pseudorandomness as well as opportunities for new applications of
pseudorandomness. The research will be closely integrated with the PIs'
educational efforts. In particular, the PIs will continue to develop new
curricular, educational, and expository material that are made openly available
for others to use. Graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in all
phases of this research, and will be given opportunities to publish and present
their results at premier international conferences. The PIs will also continue
their extensive service to the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project will try to uncover
new approaches to topics such as:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. The RL vs. L problem:
trying to prove, unconditionally, that every randomized algorithm can be made
deterministic with only a constant-factor loss in memory
usage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Cryptography: identifying optimally efficient
constructions of cryptographic primitives from minimal
assumptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Machine Learning: can pseudorandomness help
in making machine learning robust to adversarial noise or to overfitting?