* 1749783
* CAREER: Preventive Robotics:  Learning and Adaptation for Predictive Human Robot Symbiosis
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Heni Ben Amor, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2023
* USD 499,625.00

Deploying assistive technologies that intelligently minimize the risk of
musculoskeletal injury during physical tasks could improve user safety and
significantly reduce the healthcare costs associated with the treatment of long-
term disabilities such as chronic pain. With that goal in mind, this CAREER
project will contribute key innovations that allow robots to reason about the
biomechanical safety of actions performed jointly with a human partner. The
research will focus on the concept of Preventive Robotics, a novel approach to
human-machine collaboration that incorporates the biomechanical well-being of
the human user into robot control and decision-making. In contrast to
Rehabilitation Robotics, which focuses on therapeutic procedures after an injury
occurs, Preventive Robotics seeks to proactively reduce the risk of injury. A
critical knowledge gap in this regard is the absence of a theoretical foundation
that supports human-machine symbiosis - healthy, physical, and bi-directional
interactions between human and machine which can be comfortably sustained over
very long periods of time. The main objective of Preventive Robotics is to
generate assistive robot actions that (a) seamlessly blend with actions of the
human partner to achieve the intended function, while (b) minimizing
biomechanical stress on the human body. Coalescing these two goals will unlock
new potential for robotics to drastically improve public and occupational
health. The project will also involve transition of innovations to a commercial
partner developing intelligent lower-leg prostheses. The research integrates
with an education program targeting K-12 students, undergraduate and graduate
students, and students from underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
these ends, the project will develop a unified Bayesian framework for modeling
symbiotic dynamics among multiple agents using a compact probabilistic and data-
driven methodology. The framework will bridge the divide between predictive
modeling of humans and predictive control of symbiotic human-robot systems. A
Bayesian representation will be used to derive algorithms for learning and
adaptation which include the future biomechanical state of a human user. In
addition, new symbiotic control algorithms will be introduced that utilize
predicted biomechanical variables to steer the human-robot interaction towards
biomechanically safe movement regimes. These control methods will provide new
insights about strongly-coupled systems with reciprocal dependencies, in which
only one system can be actively controlled (e.g., an assistive device or
prosthesis). The new approach will be implemented on a powered-ankle prosthesis
in order to anticipate joint loads and proactively avoid high stresses. The
resulting prosthesis will have the potential to significantly lower the risk of
musculoskeletal diseases such as osteoarthritis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.