* 1749940
* CAREER: Harness the Big Data via Large-Scale Lifelong Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Jiayu Zhou, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 551,658.00

Recent advances in big data infrastructures and algorithm foundations have
unleashed a torrent of data being collected and stored in distributed data
centers all over the world. The ever-increasing availability of these massive
datasets leads to many machine learning tasks that are inherently related.
Therefore transfer learning paradigms have been developed in the past decade to
perform knowledge transfer among tasks to improve their generalization
performance. This project will develop a suite of large-scale lifelong learning
methods to address significant challenges from knowledge transfer on big data.
The algorithms and tools developed in this project will directly impact
biomedical informatics and intelligent transportation systems, as they will be
used to build personalized predictive models from electronic medical records and
traffic state models from big traffic data. The success of this project will be
used to develop a new curriculum that incorporates research into the classroom
and provides students from under-represented groups with opportunities to
participate in machine learning research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The properties
of velocity, volume, variability, and variety that characterize big data have
imposed significant challenges in the traditional lifelong learning approaches.
This project will advance lifelong learning by (1) developing a distributed
life-long learning framework to enable online knowledge transfer on large-scale
distributed datasets; (2) designing effective methods to track temporal drifting
in the task relationship, and leverage human knowledge via interactive transfer;
and (3) investigating strategies that enable the distributed life-long learning
to handle heterogeneities from both feature spaces and learning tasks. The
results of this project will have an immediate and strong impact on Big Data
theoretical and algorithmic foundations, by enabling a large-scale lifelong
learning framework readily available for many Big Data analytics. All findings,
publications, software, and data will be made publicly available at the project
website: http://jiayuzhou.github.io/projects/career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.