* 1749742
* CAREER: Electronic transport and interfacial effects on electrochemical hydrogen evolution reaction for transition metal dichalcogenides
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2018,09/30/2022
* Judy Cha, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 09/30/2022
* USD 580,000.00

Electrochemical catalysis can be used to generate hydrogen from water, thereby
offering a sustainable alternative to conventional processes that generate
hydrogen from natural gas or petroleum. In recent years, a class of low-cost
chemical materials, known as transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs), have been
identified as promising materials for water-based hydrogen production to power
fuel cells and as a raw material for the manufacture of chemicals. Despite their
promise, additional scientific understanding and engineering design will be
needed to maximize the performance of the dichalcogenide materials to levels
rivaling more expensive state-of-the-art platinum-based catalysts. To that end,
the project will explore fundamental aspects of the dichalcogenide materials and
their effectiveness for hydrogen generation utilizing a unique reactor system.
The research will help pave the path to a sustainable energy and chemicals
future while also laying ground work for long-term competitiveness of the U.S.
in the fuels and chemical manufacturing sectors. The research will be integrated
with educational and outreach activities emphasizing participation by under-
represented groups. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project seeks answers to the
extent that electronic transport properties and interfacial effects (rather than
the free energy of hydrogen adsorption) limit the overall rate of the hydrogen
evolution reaction (HER) on TMDCs. A single-crystalline flake nanodevice will be
employed as a HER micro-reactor, which allows precise control of the density and
types of catalytic sites, and accurate measurements of charge transport within
the catalyst, as well as the Schottky barrier at the catalyst/current collector
interface. Three aims are proposed to study how the TMDC electrical properties,
interfacial Schottky barrier, and the hydrogen adsorption free energy change as
a function of 1) the phase transition from the semiconducting 2H to the semi-
metallic 1T' phase of TMDCs, 2) strain engineering of TMDCs, and 3) different
current collectors. The changes in the various properties will be correlated
with the measured HER activities using a standard three-electrode cell coupled
to the individual TMDC nanodevices in sulfuric acid electrolyte solution.
Semiconducting MoS2 and WS2, and semi-metallic MoTe2 and WTe2 nanoflakes will be
used for the proposed research, grown by chemical vapor deposition or exfoliated
mechanically from bulk crystals grown by chemical vapor transport. Beyond
optimization of TMDC materials for HER, the nanodevice platform can be applied
to other electro- and photo-catalysts to correlate their catalytic properties to
critical parameters such as energetics of catalytic sites, equilibrium
electrical properties, interfacial effects, and excited states induced by
photons. The project will link the research to education and outreach activities
via three outreach programs targeting, respectively, the general public (a
weekend Energy symposium at Yale West Campus), under-represented undergraduate
students (a monthly seminar series given by minority faculty members), and local
high school students (a demonstration HER kit and workbook based on TMDC thin
films).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.