* 1749730
* CAREER: Dynamic Polymer Materials with Advanced Polymer Architecture and Carbon Nanotube Reinforcements
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Dominik Konkolewicz, Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2024
* USD 600,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop
polymeric materials with enhanced mechanical properties and electrical
conductivity through judicious choice of molecular structure and nanoscale
reinforcement. Introducing "dynamic bonds" (i.e., chemical bonds that can be
exchanged between different groups) into a polymeric material can lead to self-
healing properties and enhanced stability in case of external damage to the
material. However, this can also lead to permanent changes in shape when
external forces are applied, which could limit utility in applications. The
polymers developed in this proposal will incorporate different types of dynamic
bonds into the same material to enable the combination of self-healable
properties with long-term stability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a need to
understand how the underlying polymer structure impacts the properties of
dynamically cross-linked polymers. The structure of the underlying polymer will
be tuned for this purpose and additional reinforcement will be enabled by
incorporation of carbon nanotubes, which will improve mechanical properties and
electrical conductivity. This research is anticipated to produce materials with
enhanced lifetime and reprocessability due to the healing properties enabled by
dynamic bonding. This will enable the next generation of polymeric materials to
have extended useful lifetime, with reduced replacement costs, improved
performance against mechanical challenges, and enhanced conductivity. The
material synthesis strategies developed in this research could be translated to
additive manufacturing enabling a range of tailor-made materials with complex
structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will also include outreach
activities that place dynamically cross-linked polymers in the hands of K-12
students and develop continuing education activities for K-12 teachers. This
project will also develop educational tools to promote critical thinking and
involvement in classrooms to train the next generation of scientists and propel
them to productive careers in science. Further, this project will engage
students of diverse backgrounds in graduate and undergraduate research, to
foster participation in STEM fields from populations that are traditionally
underrepresented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop well-defined polymers
containing dual-dynamic crosslinking, where both a non-covalent linker that
exchanges rapidly and a dynamic covalent linker that exchanges under external
stimulus are used in one polymer material. This will create materials that
combine the toughness, malleability, reprocessability and self-healing character
imparted by dynamic bonding while retaining mechanical stability and resistance
to creep of traditional thermosets. The research will lead to new materials by
combining dual dynamic crosslinking with polymers of controlled structure and
new strategies for bonding carbon nanotube reinforcements to the matrix.
Polymers will be synthesized with control over chain-length, placement of
crosslinkers along the chain, and density of crosslinkers. Diels-Alder chemistry
will be used to dynamically bond the carbon nanotube reinforcements. Advanced
structures such as interpenetrating networks and segmented polymers will be
introduced to improve mechanical properties. Performance of each material will
be evaluated through a number of mechanical and electrical tests, and lead to
correlation of macroscopic properties with the underlying polymer structure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific objectives of this research are:&lt;br/&gt;1.
Create dual dynamic single and interpenetrating networks with precise control
over chain length and crosslinker placement along the polymer
backbone.&lt;br/&gt;2. Reinforce dual dynamically crosslinked polymers using
dynamic bonds between carbon nanotubes and the matrix.&lt;br/&gt;3. Make
interpenetrating network and single network carbon nanotube composite materials
with precise control over polymer microstructure.&lt;br/&gt;4. Elucidate
structure-property correlations between the polymer architecture and
microstructure and the mechanical and electrical properties of the
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational activities focus on three key areas:
1) Outreach to secondary school teachers and students; 2) Development of new
pedagogies; 3) Increasing diversity in STEM. The first area will include
outreach to K-12 students on polymeric materials with non-covalent and dynamic
covalent crosslinkers, as well as continuing education activities for teachers.
The second area will focus on tools to engage students to reflect on their own
learning, and develop connections between experiments and classroom activities.
The third area will increase involvement of students from traditionally
underrepresented groups in STEM studies and research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.