* 1749541
* Visual Attention and Categorization in Infancy
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2023
* Gregory Reynolds, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 01/31/2023
* USD 536,139.00

Categorization allows us to make sense of the world. Discovering how infants
develop the ability to categorize is important for advancing scientific
knowledge about early cognitive development. This project will analyze the rapid
development of categorization that occurs in mid- to late-infancy. Multiple
measures will be used to determine: (1) the effects of attention on
categorization in early development, and (2) areas of the brain involved in
categorization in infancy. This research will illuminate how attention
influences infant categorization and will use neuroimaging to identify areas of
the brain involved in categorization at different ages in infancy. This project
will have broader impacts by providing insight into long-standing debates about
the basic nature of categorization throughout the life-span and by providing
many important training opportunities. Several graduate and undergraduate
students will be trained in developmental cognitive neuroscience, which will
increase the participation of underrepresented groups in STEM fields.
Additionally, the research team will actively engage in community outreach to
increase public scientific literacy and public engagement with science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three major aims that will be addressed
in two experiments on 6-, 9-, and 12-month-old infants. Aim 1 is to determine
the effects of attention on infant categorization of faces and objects, using
simultaneous measures of heart rate changes associated with attention and
electroencephalogram (EEG) measures of attention and categorization. Aim 2 is to
determine how learning conditions affect infant attention and categorization, by
varying the learning conditions infants experience prior to EEG testing. Aim 3
is to determine which areas of the brain are involved in categorization in
infancy, using computational modeling of EEG data. Infants are expected to show
enhanced brain activity involved in categorization during attention, and areas
of prefrontal cortex are expected to be involved in categorization only in older
infants with more advanced categorization skills.