* 1749666
* CAREER: Investigation of Undergraduate Learning Contexts Considering Ethical, Racial, and Disciplinary Identities of Students in Engineering and Computer Science.
* EDU,EES
* 02/15/2018,11/30/2018
* Sepehr Vakil, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 11/30/2018
* USD 237,207.00

The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program is a National Science
Foundation-wide activity that offers awards in support of junior faculty who
exemplify the role of teacher-scholars through outstanding research, excellent
education, and the integration of education and research within the context of
the mission of their organizations. This project has the goal to investigate how
undergraduate learning contexts may constrain or facilitate productive
interactions between ethical, racial, and disciplinary identities of students of
color in engineering and computer science. The project integrates research and
education by infusing the research in undergraduate and graduate education
courses and by involving undergraduate and graduate students in the work. This
award is supported by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program with co-funding by the
Science, Technology and Society program. ECR emphasizes fundamental STEM
education research that generates foundational knowledge in the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By combining longitudinal ethnographic and design-based
approaches, this study contributes to the understanding of how undergraduate
students of color experience the culture of engineering and computer science
departments, while also exploring new educational possibilities that take
seriously the ethical and sociocultural potential of these disciplines. The
design component of the study, by synthesizing science and technology studies
perspectives along with the benefits of undergraduate research experiences,
creates novel opportunities for students to explore the ethical dimensions and
social justice potential of new technologies. Empirical findings from the design
experiment will help identify design and pedagogical principles that jointly
cultivate multiple student identities within STEM learning environments.
Finally, this project contributes to the scholarly and national conversation on
issues of equity in STEM education in conceptually and methodologically unique
ways. Few studies have considered the role of ethical identity in the
experiences of students of color in engineering and computer science or examined
their experiences over a sustained period and across multiple contexts. Findings
from this study will contribute to fundamental learning sciences research on
identity development in STEM, as well as to the knowledge base about how to
design equitable STEM learning environments.