* 1749919
* CAREER: Chemical Tools to Study Phosphatidic Acid Signaling Integrated with Educational Outreach in the Chemical Biology of Lipids
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Jeremy Baskin, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 06/30/2023
* USD 650,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Jeremy Baskin from the Department of Chemistry and
Chemical Biology at Cornell University to develop chemical probes to study
biological signaling pathways vital to the health and well-being of members of
society, that are mediated by the lipid phosphatidic acid. Lipids are water-
repellant molecules that, in biological systems, can act as energy stores, major
constituents of cellular membranes, and intracellular signaling molecules. In
the latter capacity, signaling lipids such as phosphatidic acid function as
second messengers that cause cells to change their metabolism, gene expression,
and behavior in response to diverse extracellular stimuli. To elucidate how the
locations within the cell where phosphatidic acid is produced relates to each
different physiological outcome, it is critical to be able to visualize and
perturb the production of this key signaling lipid. The proposed research
describes chemical and biochemical tools to both report on and control
phosphatidic acid synthesis, as well as their application to study an important
signaling pathway thought to be under the control of this lipid. This research
to gain a deeper understanding of the chemistry and biochemistry of lipids
integrates with an educational plan that entails hands-on outreach activities on
lipids and biomembranes targeted at underserved populations in middle and high
school, to increase awareness of and interest in science in young women and
underrepresented minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lipid second
messenger phosphatidic acid can, depending on the context, stimulate protein
kinases to cause cell growth and proliferation, polymerization of actin to
promote cell migration, and vesicle budding to increase protein secretion. It
remains a mystery how one lipid signal can cause such diverse physiological
events. The main impediment to dissecting the varied functional consequences of
phosphatidic acid is a lack of tools to visualize and modulate its production
with spatiotemporal control. The research objectives of this proposal are to
develop a chemical method to image intracellular sites of phosphatidic acid
production within live cells, to develop a chemoenzymatic strategy to enable
production of phosphatidic acid on demand at precise, subcellular locations
within live cells, and to apply these tools to probe mechanistic questions about
the role of phosphatidic acid at lysosomes in orchestrating cell growth
pathways. This work will generate both new methodologies for studying lipid
signaling and fundamental knowledge into how a single lipid signaling agent can
direct precise cellular signaling outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.