* 1749864
* EAGER: Probabilistic Models and Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2017,02/29/2020
* Aravind Srinivasan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Maurice Rojas
* 02/29/2020
* USD 129,000.00

The power of randomness in the computational context is one of the key
discoveries of computer science. This project studies algorithms for fundamental
problems that will further explore and use such power offered by randomness. One
example of such a basic problem considered is in facility location: how can we
place facilities at a low cost in order to minimize the total commute time for
the customers? This classical problem has significant modern applications as
well: e.g., in clustering data for machine learning, and in placing services on
the Internet cloud. The PI aims to resolve how best this -- and closely-related
problems in clustering and facility location -- can be solved via new
probabilistic techniques. The PI will also study other such fundamental problems
(e.g., in efficient resource allocation) in optimization through randomized
algorithms, as well as study how such investigations improve and/or develop
broadly-applicable probabilistic techniques.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to have broader impact also through human-resource development. A graduate
student will be directly involved in almost all this proposed research. The PI
has advised two multi-year ``Gemstone" undergraduate research teams: both teams
have had their research published in national conferences. The PI proposes to
start advising a new such team around 2018 and continue to expose them to the
interplay between algorithms, randomness, and networks. Furthermore, the PI will
mentor two high-school students; these students will continue to learn
algorithms, randomness and applications from their basics up to cutting-edge
research. The research of one of these high-school students, co-mentored by the
PI, was invited to compete in the Intel International Science and Engineering
Fair in 2017. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A substantial part of this project will be
on developing improved approximation algorithms through (new techniques in)
randomization: approximation algorithms are those that are provably efficient
and deliver solutions that are within a provable distance from optimal. Two
representative examples of problems considered in this regard are in facility
location (opening a subset of a given set of facilities in order to minimize the
sum of the facility-opening costs and the total commute-time of the customers,
as well as variants of this classical problem), and assigning jobs to servers in
a general setting, in order to minimize the sum of the completion times of the
jobs (weighted by individual priorities of the jobs). Methodologically, this
project proposes to develop new techniques to carefully "round" infeasible
solutions to feasible solutions via randomization, to further understand the
power of information-theoretic notions (e.g., when one has a range of choices of
probability distribution for the random choices to be made, can choosing a
distribution that maximizes the entropy offer additional power?), and the
interplay between linear-algebraic and probabilistic arguments. The "rounding"
approach is flexible and general: e.g., for the facility location and job-
assignment problems, it is computationally easy to start with near-optimal but
infeasible solutions, and the key open question is how to optimally round to a
feasible solution. Advances in such rounding techniques have had numerous
consequences in approximation algorithms; a key goal of this project is to
contribute to further such advances.