* 1749544
* CAREER:  The consequences of rarity for soil microbiome stability in structure and function
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Ashley Shade, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 01/31/2024
* USD 832,271.00

Microorganisms are the smallest life forms and yet they have large and critical
roles in maintaining the health of ecosystems. Environmental microbial
communities provide essential functions, including the cycling of key resources
like carbon and nitrogen. In soils, microorganisms form diverse communities with
thousands of distinct species, but the role of most of these species is unknown.
In particular, it is not clear how microbial species that are not very abundant
(rare) contribute to community functions. However, rare microorganisms are
thought to be important when environmental conditions fluctuate because they
provide functions that help their ecosystem resist change or to recover quickly.
This project will investigate the diversity and functions of rare microorganisms
in a soil ecosystem impacted by a long-term disturbance, and determine how they
contribute to the system's resilience to this disturbance. The research will
provide insights into the critical role of microbial diversity for environmental
resilience, which has implications for broad national interests in energy and
food security, environmental conservation and remediation, and the management of
ecosystem services. The project will advance the fields of ecology and ecosystem
science by investigating the links between microbial diversity and functions in
the environment. It also will benefit society by providing classroom education
in quantitative methods and training members of the scientific workforce in
leading-edge technologies used in biology and
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three aims of this research are to: 1)
quantify the contributions of rare microbial taxa to community stability after a
long-term environmental disturbance; 2) evaluate the abilities of rare microbial
taxa to a) persist given disturbance and b) respond to specific environmental
changes that result from the disturbance; and 3) determine the impact of
competition between rare and abundant microbial taxa on community stability and
functions. The Centralia, Pennsylvania soil ecosystem is the site of a long-
burning coal seam fire that will serve a model severe disturbance for this work.
For Aims 1 and 2, surface soils will be collected annually from established
sites along a fire-impact gradient so that community changes over time due to
the influence of fire can be quantified. Soil microbial communities will be
assessed using genetic markers of phylogenetic and functional diversity obtained
from untargeted DNA and RNA sequencing. Rare microbial taxa will be identified
using bioinformatics and their contributions to community stability will be
quantified with ecological statistics. For Aim 3, bacteria isolated from field
soils will be arrayed into synthetic microbial communities to assess outcomes of
competition between rare and abundant microorganisms. Microbial community
"goods", which include small, excreted molecules like enzymes and antibiotics,
will be measured using sensitive mass spectrometry to determine how competition
impacts their production. Together, these efforts will provide insights into the
ecological roles of rare microbial taxa, and microbial biodiversity more
broadly, for community stability and function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.