* 1749299
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Syntactic Ergativity in West Circassian
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2020
* Ksenia Ershova, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 03/31/2020
* USD 15,645.00

A central question in linguistic research on the structure of sentences is how
to identify the subject of a sentence, and whether this can be done in a uniform
way for all languages. In many languages (e.g. English and Japanese), the
subject can be identified as the most prominent element in a sentence, according
to many grammatical phenomena. However, so-called ergative languages present a
puzzle to this relatively stable cross-linguistic picture, since in these
languages, the object, rather than the subject, behaves as the most prominent
element according to some of those same phenomena. Two broad approaches have
been taken in dealing with ergative languages. The first consists in claiming
that ergativity is a surface phenomenon; that is, it is not a reflection of deep
structural differences between ergative and nonergative languages. The second
approach claims that ergative languages are in fact structurally different from
nonergative languages, in that the subject is not always the most prominent
element in the sentence. Settling this debate will be an important step towards
gaining a better understanding of the range of possible variation in the
structure of human languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important step in
addressing this debate is the close investigation of languages that have been
claimed to be ergative, since many of them remain relatively understudied. The
present project focuses on one such language: West Circassian, of the Northwest
Caucasian family. Based on previous descriptions of the language, the PI and co-
PI adopt the second approach described above as their initial hypothesis in
accounting for ergativity in this language. In order to test this hypothesis,
the co-PI will work with native speakers of West Circassian in the Republic of
Adygea, Russia. The data to be collected will primarily comprise recorded
conversations with speakers and oral narratives. Whether the hypothesis is
confirmed or not, the project will present a valuable contribution to our
understanding of the limits of linguistic variation, as well as to our knowledge
of currently understudied aspects of West Circassian.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.