* 1749017
* CAREER: Hybrid Experimental-Computational Modeling Framework for Transformative Research and Multidisciplinary Education in Cardiovascular Biomechanics
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Ethan Kung, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 06/30/2024
* USD 513,729.00

Cardiovascular disease, or heart disease, is the leading cause of death in the
United States. There are many types of heart disease, but all of them affect the
mechanical performance of the heart in some way -- resulting in a heart that
struggles to adequately pump blood to itself and/or the rest of the body. Many
devices are being developed to address the mechanical affects of heart disease,
but proving that they can work safely and effectively before they are implanted
in patients can be a challenge. In addition, cardiovascular surgeons would like
to be able to identify the best implant for a particular patient based on his or
her anatomy and disease-effects. High-quality engineering models offer a
potential solution for addressing these challenges. However, there are
significant gaps in the currently available technology for modeling of
cardiovascular disease. Despite significant advances in computational and
laboratory simulation models, the ability to take advantage of these advances in
a unified framework is still beyond reach. This project will help pioneer a new
generation of cardiovascular biomechanics models capable of bridging
computational and experimental approaches. The research objective is to
implement and validate a complete, hybrid framework that integrates experimental
(simulation) mechanics with computational physiology. This new framework will
selectively harness the strengths while bypassing the limitations of the
individual modeling approaches used. This advance will transform current medical
device development and treatment planning methods, serving to reduce the amount
of animal and human testing necessary, improve clinical decision support, reduce
development costs, and expedite the availability of medical products to
patients. The educational objectives based on this research include a pipeline
of related programs spanning K-12 through graduate school, providing
enhancements at every level, with a particular emphasis on increasing the
inclusion of minority students. These educational enhancements will enrich STEM
education and train the next generation of multidisciplinary engineers to tackle
the most pressing medical needs of the aging US population (cardiovascular
health), establishing a sustainable pipeline for continued training of young
minds in biomedical STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will combine a realistic, computational physiology model with fluid dynamic
simulations that will capture the autoregulation response of the heart and allow
the integration of actual medical devices within the hybrid system. By
developing a hardware-in-the-loop system that combines computational and in
vitro modeling, called a Physiology Modeling Coupled Experiment (PMCE), the
project will advance cardiovascular modeling as a whole. The first aim is to
develop robust coupling methods to interface the computational and experimental
domains, including: multiple experimental-computational interfaces;
discontinuous flow and pressure waveforms; and simulations that include
compliant elements. The second aim is to develop a generalized computational
physiology model that accounts for autoregulation, and will therefore produce
realistic hemodynamics that can be related to patient characteristics such as
body size, body mass index, age, fitness, and metabolic state. The third aim
will be to validate the hybrid model using clinical data that describes real
world hemodynamics with various implants, including left ventricular assist
devices, transcatheter aortic valve replacement, and Fontan cardiopulmonary
assist systems. The integrated educational activities will transition from
public outreach at the K-12 level, including STEAM exhibits at the Artisphere
Festival in Greenville, SC, through programs focused on transitioning to
college, to undergraduate research, and transitioning to graduate school. All
educational activities have established objectives, and the PI will assess the
effectiveness of these activities so that changes can be made if
appropriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.