* 1749610
* CAREER:  Quantifying Wind Hazards on Buildings in Urban Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Catherine Gorle, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 06/30/2024
* USD 570,000.00

Two-thirds of the weather and climate disasters that have occurred in the United
States over the past ten years were extreme wind events. Wind-resistant design
of buildings plays an important role in securing the nation's welfare and
prosperity through reduced building damage, fatalities, societal disruptions,
and business discontinuities during these extreme events. Considerable
challenges arise as an increasingly large portion of the nation's building
inventory is located in urban environments with exposure to extreme wind events.
Interference effects, caused by interactions between different building
geometries, can increase the local wind speed on buildings by 50% or more
compared to the undisturbed atmospheric boundary layer wind speed. Routine
calculations for design wind loads do not account for these interference effects
and, therefore, significantly can underestimate the wind loading on buildings
and result in inadequate building design. The goal of this Faculty Early Career
Development Program (CAREER) award is to advance fundamental understanding of
wind flow phenomena for the design of resilient and sustainable buildings and
urban environments through establishment of computational frameworks that can
quantify and, where possible, reduce the uncertainty in computational
predictions of these phenomena. The capability to make well-informed decisions
based on computational predictions and uncertainty quantification will lead to
optimized designs for more wind-resilient and, thus, safer buildings and cities.
High school, undergraduate, and graduate students and high school teachers will
participate in the research program. The experimental and numerical data sets
resulting from this research will be leveraged to establish active learning
modules for wind engineering for high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students. Workshops held during years two and five of the award will support the
education of a diverse community of engineers to understand the complexity of
urban flow and wind loading phenomena and the strengths and weaknesses of
computational models, wind tunnel tests, and field experiments. The research
will use the NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure
(NHERI) Wall of Wind facility at Florida International University and archive
project data in the NHERI Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will establish computational models to
quantify the influence of the surrounding built environment on the local wind
speed and turbulence and the resulting interference effects on the wind loads on
buildings in urban environments. The research plan will involve a comprehensive
program of field measurements, wind tunnel tests, and computational fluid
dynamics (CFD) simulations with uncertainty quantification and data
assimilation. The Engineering Quad on Stanford's campus, which is representative
of an urban environment, will serve as a test bed for implementing the research
plan. Rather than pursuing a traditional deterministic investigation, novel
stochastic methods will be explored to enable comparison of experimental and
numerical results with confidence intervals. Specific focus of the research will
be on: (1) using data assimilation algorithms to reduce uncertainty related to
the inflow boundary conditions, (2) systematic quantification of the effect of
geometrical simplifications, and (3) using multi-fidelity algorithms to reduce
turbulence model form uncertainties. The research results will provide essential
new information on the fitness-for-purpose and integration of models with
different levels of fidelity and will indicate the potential of leveraging urban
sensor networks to improve the accuracy of the predictions. The research program
will result in a fundamentally improved understanding of interference effects
and enable considerable advances in CFD modeling for urban flow and wind
loading. More broadly, the novel computational strategies resulting from this
research will benefit other sustainable urban design problems influenced by
wind, such as street canyon and building ventilation, outdoor and indoor air
quality, harvesting renewable energy resources, and urban planning for heat
island mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.