* 1749395
* CAREER: Origami-Inspired Reconfigurable Surfaces that Enable Controllable Radiative Properties
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Brian Iverson, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 04/30/2024
* USD 504,751.00

Modern telecommunications, astronomical discovery, and national security rely on
space-based objects (e.g. satellites, probes, spacecraft, telescopes, etc.) that
operate in extreme thermal radiation conditions. The goal of this CAREER project
is to provide a way to control the amount of heat the surface of a space object
radiates by changing the surface shape. Radiation of thermal energy affects
surface temperature. Sun motion (e.g. orbit or daily solar cycles) results in a
wide range of radiation conditions. This work will provide a way for a surface
or component to respond to changes in the sun location and achieve a desired
heating or cooling rate. An educational companion to the scientific objectives
of this project is the creation of the Broadening Undergraduate Education in
Science and Technology (BURST) Program to be implemented for the development of
undergraduate researchers. Educational development activities for undergraduate
classmen participating in the Spacecraft Group at BYU will culminate in the
participation of BURST projects (undergraduate research) to assist students in
the pursuit of a graduate education and provide a mechanism to explore the
research project. Activities performed with students in the Spacecraft Group
include outreach to underrepresented minority high school students by assisting
with college preparation, K-12 STEM activities with low-income schools, and the
creation of a website for access to data and instructional
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER project is to provide
dynamic control of radiative surface properties using origami-inspired surfaces.
Actuation of origami can enable control of surface topography and corresponding
cavity geometries to regulate net radiative heat transfer in response to changes
in the radiative environment. Intrinsic radiative surface properties are static
and therefore unable to adapt to changing thermal environments. Dynamically
controlling the net radiative heat flux by controlling radiative properties
would enable thermal management of surfaces where radiation is a dominant mode
of heat exchange with the environment. Origami-inspired surfaces, comprised of
tessellations (a tiled plane comprised of one or more geometric shapes), are
able to provide an adaptable surface topography to modify the apparent radiative
surface behavior. As the tessellations that comprise the unfolded surface
collapse on each other during folding, deep grooves are formed which trap
radiative energy due to the high-aspect ratio of the cavity. Controlling the
cavity angle through mechanical actuation results in control of the degree of
black-like behavior. To achieve the goal of providing thermal management through
controllable radiative properties, the following objectives in the study of
origami-inspired surfaces (e.g. Modified V-groove, Miura-ori, and Baretto Mars)
will be pursued: 1) quantify and model emission of thermal radiation; 2)
quantify and model absorption of thermal radiation; 3) predict and validate the
net heat transfer rate at these surfaces; and 4) establish undergraduate
research preparation through training activities that culminate in a research
experience. Tools and analysis methods developed by this work will enable design
for radiative thermal management through simple actuation methods and provide
predictive relations for radiative behavior of angular
topographies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.