* 1749374
* Soft Matter Simulation and Theory of the Crystal Assembly of Globular and Membrane Proteins
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2022
* Patrick Charbonneau, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2022
* USD 270,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Division of Materials Research and the
Chemistry Division contribute funds to this award. This award supports
theoretical and computational research and education into the crystallization of
proteins, which are molecules that are essential to all life forms. Protein
crystallization is a key step in determining their structure. Knowing the
structure of a protein, in turn, is crucial for understanding its role in
biology. Proteins indeed interact with each other and their environment through
fine-tuned features. Limited knowledge of protein structures hinders the
comprehension of biological molecules and the ability to discover new drugs that
interacts with them. The research team will identify how weak yet directional
interactions lead to the complex processes through which certain classes of
proteins can form crystals. It will also study the materials properties of the
ordered lipid phases used for crystallizing those proteins that reside within
the membrane of cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award also supports the
education of students at Duke University, and the PI's participation in various
outreach activities within the state of North Carolina and nationally. Through
close collaboration with experimental scientists, the findings of the research
team will also be tested and used by the protein crystallization community. As a
complement to this work, the PI will lead a joint industry-academia consortium
aiming to automatize image analysis of protein crystallization experiments,
which should dramatically accelerate the experimental process and data
gathering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Division of Materials Research and the Chemistry
Division contribute funds to this award. This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education on the soft matter theory and computational
modeling of the crystallization of globular proteins and of the lipidic
assemblies central to in-meso crystallization of membrane proteins. Both
processes are key for protein-structure determination through crystallographic
techniques yet are challenging to control experimentally and thus could benefit
from additional insight from physical models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, the research team will examine how weak, non-covalent yet
directional interactions lead to the complex crystallization behavior of
different classes of proteins. They will study the crystallization of globular
proteins that: (i) dimerize, (ii) display an inverted solubility, and (iii) are
composed of multiple subdomains. All three cases fall beyond the canonical
description of protein crystal assembly. By developing theoretical and
computational soft matter models that capture the essence of these richer types
of protein crystal assembly, the research team will guide parallel experimental
efforts by collaborating researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team
will also examine the formation of lipidic mesophases, which are commonly used
for the in-meso crystallization process of membrane proteins but whose
microscopic role is incompletely understood. The project will use state-of-the-
art numerical tools for determining the phase behavior of various lipid models
and examine how membrane proteins embed and order within these ordered
phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award also supports the education of students
at Duke University, and the PI's participation in various outreach activities.
Through close collaboration with experimental researchers in the field of
protein crystallization, the findings of the research team will also be tested
and broadly implemented. As a complement to this work, the PI will also lead a
joint industry-academia consortium aiming to automatize image analysis of
protein crystallization experiments, and thus remove the biggest bottleneck in
the systematic analysis of these experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.