* 1749078
* The Role of Diet in Arctic Adaptations
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Tammy Buonasera, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 336,271.00

Dr. Shelby Anderson, Portland State University, and Dr. Tammy Buonasera,
University of California-Davis, will carry out research on past aquatic resource
use in the Arctic. Aquatic resources are central to modern Iupiaq and Inuit
culture. The importance of aquatic resources (e.g. fish, seal, whale) extends
far beyond food and consumption, providing social, spiritual, community
connection, and sustenance. When, why, and how this way of life developed
remains one of the most enduring questions in Arctic archaeology. This research
will be the first extensive study of ancient Arctic foodways through lipid and
isotopic analysis. The project will provide long-term data on northern food
systems and human-animal interactions that are of interest to northern
Indigenous communities, biologists, and paleoecologists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drs. Anderson and Buoansera will study the role of
processing of animal products (bone, fat, and oil for food and fuel) in the
development and expansion aquatic focused subsistence over the last 4500 years.
During this period, archaeological evidence points to the emergence,
intensification, and spread of a maritime focused subsistence economy in the
North. The evidence for this is indirect; archaeologists infer aquatic resource
use from the appearance of seasonal coastal habitation and specialized marine
hunting technology in archaeological sites from this time period. This project
will study direct evidence of past aquatic resource use by undertaking lipid and
isotopic analysis of ceramic cooking vessel residues and sediments from
archaeological sites. Research will address the question of what types of foods
were processed and consumed over the last 4500 years in Arctic Alaska. Project
activities include: 1) a petrographic study of pottery technology and
production, 2) an experimental study of pottery manufacturing and cooking, 3)
lipid and compound specific isotope analysis (CSIA) of ceramic and sediment
residues, and 4) analysis of residues from key modern species to inform
interpretation of residue results. This project will begin the process of
constructing a regional residue reference database that is critical for future
lipid and isotopic research in the North. The project will provide a student
training opportunity and a Master's thesis. Lastly, this research is addressing
key questions about the antiquity and nature of Arctic aquatic resource use and
food processing practices that are of broader interest to communities,
archaeologists, biologists, and paleoecologists working across the circumpolar
region and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.