* 1749018
* CAREER: Generating Generativity: Modeling and Fostering Creative Collaborations in Enterprise Social Media Using a Cyberinfrastructure for Smart Innovation (CSI)
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2024
* Wietske Van Osch, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 01/31/2024
* USD 526,793.00

This project aims to develop predictive models of the multi-level drivers,
processes and sociotechnical practices of effective collaborations based in
Enterprise Social Media (ESM), leveraging the unparalleled amounts of archival
data stored in them. The recent proliferation of ESM promises to create better
opportunities for generative collaborations, yet organizations struggle to
establish fully active systems and reap the promised benefits. Following the
paradigm of persuasive system design, this project aims to build and evaluate a
feedback system, the Cyberinfrastructure for Smart Innovation (CSI). The CSI
extracts near real-time data from groups inside the ESM, visualizes their social
dynamics and activities, and suggests actions beneficial to their generativity.
Research will be carried out in three phases: Phase 1: Create a fundamental
understanding and predictive models of distinct forms of generative
collaborations and their effectiveness through the algorithmic curation and
statistical analysis of six years of ESM archival data from the partner
organization, Steelcase Inc.; Phase 2: Develop a suite of design guidelines for
the CSI using formative and summative user-centered research methods; Phase 3:
Evaluate the causal impact of the CSI on generative collaborations, through
quasi-experiments within real-world innovation teams at Steelcase and self-
reported evaluations with a sample of its client organizations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enterprise Social Media represent an essential research
context given the innumerable anecdotal claims about the merits of ESM for
generativity, but there is a pronounced lack of scientific research validating
such claims and explaining when and how these merits occur. This research
project aims to make five major intellectual contributions: (1) Improved
understanding of the multilevel antecedents of generative collaborations in ESM;
(2) Expansion of existing organization science literatures by providing
unobtrusive, mixed-method, and sociotechnical insights into processes of
generative collaborations; (3) Extension of extant ESM research on the actual
impact of these systems; (4) Production of the proposed persuasive feedback
system (CSI) intended to foster improved ESM-based generative collaborations;
(5) Rigorous empirical testing of the causal effect of the CSI on generativity
in real-world groups. An integrated education and research program will include
a new research seminar where students will work to adapt the CSI for improving
the effectiveness of group work in problem-based learning settings, thereby
creating a second, non-industry testbed for the CSI and enabling the discovery
of fundamental theoretical principles that abstract from generative
collaboration to learning contexts.