* 1749981
* CAREER: Coded Caching for Wireless Content Delivery Networks: Challenges and Opportunities
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Soheil Mohajer, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2024
* USD 538,000.00

The continuously increasing demand for broadband data has produced overwhelming
network traffic and, despite steady improvements in wireless communication
technology, data rates continue to fall short of the exponential growth in
demand. As such, opportunistic transmission strategies based on network
characteristics, demand profile, and content type, can help meet expectations.
The major contributor to this traffic explosion is broadband video,
characterized as being repeatedly requested by multiple users and having highly
variant temporal traffic. Such properties provide an opportunity for caching the
data at local storage units closer to users during the off-peak hours of the
network, to reduce network traffic at peak hours. Recent developments in coded
caching offer a promising solution for high data rates. This research will study
challenges and benefits of employing caching in practical communication
networks, and pursue a solid theoretical foundation for adopting caching as a
universal resource in data delivery networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will target the fundamental theory and practical aspects of caching in data
delivery networks by addressing several practical concerns. While caching gain
degrades in real networks with time-varying channels, asynchronous and delay
sensitive requests, and without a central coordinator, coding techniques will be
used to improve the gain of caching. In addition, a rate-distortion theoretic
framework will be developed to characterize the fundamental trade-off between
cache size, delivery rate, and reconstruction quality, alongside efficient
coding schemes to achieve this tradeoff. Following the success of multi-antenna
communication systems, the interaction between caching gain and spatial
diversity will be studied. A successful completion of this part will lead to an
optimum resource (cache size, power, and rate) allocation as well as
transmission scheduling in non-homogeneous Multi-Input-Multi-Output (MIMO)
networks. Finally, software to simulate caching techniques for a wide range of
networks and applications, and supporting both research and education, will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.