* 1749582
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Linguistic Variation as a Marker of Ethnic Identity in High School Setting
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Marianna Di Paolo, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 01/31/2020
* USD 9,303.00

The last half century has seen a major wave of migration from Pacific Island
nations to primarily English-speaking countries like the United States. This
population shift, often accompanied by a shift from heritage languages to
English, can lead to the development of new ethnic identities and dialects of
English. Yet little is known about how Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific
Islander (NHPI) teens in the U.S. construct identity. This study will
investigate how NHPI teens use linguistic and other behavioral resources to
construct identity in the context of U.S. public high schools. Because strong
ethnic identity has been shown to improve general well-being and scholastic
achievement for minority students, the results will be a valuable resource for
educators and community leaders. The research will also add to the understanding
of how ethnicity relates to social network and other aspects of identity,
contributing to the fields of sociolinguistics and cultural anthropology.
Specific research questions include: (1) To what extent do the NHPI students in
the study identify with specific ethnic groups, with a panethnic Pacific
Islander group, and with the local population as a whole? (2) How do the density
of the NHPI population and the general level of diversity affect identity
formation? (3) What linguistic and nonlinguistic practices construct and
reinforce each of these identities? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will be
conducted in a metropolitan area of Utah, the state with the highest percentage
of NHPIs in the contiguous U.S. It utilizes ethnographic and sociolinguistic
methods in a study of NHPI and non-NHPI students in two public high schools with
different ethnographic compositions. Quantitative analysis will focus on
phonetic features below the level of speaker awareness, such as the
pronunciation of vowels in still and steel and of final consonants in long and
was. The social meaning of variation will be sought in the ethnographic work,
drawing on speaker perceptions and ideologies. In addition, the study tests
predictions from cultural evolutionary theory about the importance of diversity
and migrant population size on the use of ethnic markers.