* 1749184
* Standard Grant: Investigating the "Grand Challenge" Solutions of Agro-Food Technology
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Charlotte Biltekoff, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 492,358.00

The proposed research project focuses on the food-technology sector in the San
Francisco Bay Area. It will examine the interests, principles, social
relationships, and institutional forces that are guiding the sector as a whole
within the region. The project will use multiple methods including database
construction, network analysis, surveys of patents, observations of trade
meetings, and interviews to shed light on how entrepreneurs are anticipating
public resistance or support in the design and marketing of their products. The
results of this project will have the potential to lead to reconsiderations of
problem framing, product design and marketing. It may serve to encourage
philanthropists and public institutions to invest in solutions most likely to be
efficacious, equitable, and widely embraced. It may also serve to generate a
more nuanced public engagement with these technologies that steer clear of the
extremes of knee jerk rejection and uncritical celebration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate a broad array of novel food,
supply chain, and agricultural technologies. The aim of the project is to
produce understanding of the challenges facing the agro-food system. It will
examine the discursive frames and enabling assumptions that underpin technology
deployment, and it will explore how these technologies are being shaped by
institutional collaborations and in response to imagined publics. Specific
research activities include constructing a database of existing and pipeline
technologies, producing a social network analysis of influences and connections,
observing the self-representations of both the sector and individual products at
industry trade meetings and other events, and interviewing a broad array of
entrepreneurs and collaborating scientists and funders. By subjecting the
assumptions and promises of a broad array of novel technologies to robust social
analysis and sharing the results with the industry and its champions, this
project will help technology entrepreneurs and their collaborators to acquire a
better understanding of the nature of their own interventions, how they align
with their own stated aims, and the underlying issues that might inform public
perception and resistance to the disruptions they
propose.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.