* 1749514
* CAREER: Development and evolution of phenotypic plasticity in aphids
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Jennifer Brisson, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,040,000.00

Many organisms rely on signals from their environment to influence how they
develop, a phenomenon called phenotypic plasticity. This project uses the
environmentally-cued production of winged or wingless variants in pea aphids to
examine the developmental genetic basis of plasticity, as well as to investigate
the genetic basis of plasticity variation within and between species. This
integrative research uses a variety of approaches, including genetic mapping,
genomics, gene knockdown, pharmaceutical manipulations, and careful
developmental observations. This research will significantly advance knowledge
of the molecular mechanisms that control phenotypic plasticity and the genes
responsible for the evolution of that plasticity. The research team will include
graduate, undergraduate, and high school students. Community engagement
activities will broaden the impact of the research and broaden the training of
the students. The team will offer a summer course to high school students, and
will present the research outcomes to the general public and to high school
audiences. Moreover, a participation-based teaching module developed from the
research will be implemented in a core undergraduate genetic course, helping to
train the next generation of scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
addresses the fascinating and understudied problem of how developmental
processes are influenced by environmental cues to cause phenotypic diversity
and, importantly, how those processes evolve. The research comprises three
objectives that capitalize on the powerful comparative framework provided by the
environmentally-cued wing dimorphisms of aphids, working from within to between
species investigations. The first objective is an in-depth molecular
investigation of wing morph determination within a single species, the pea
aphid. The research team will discover the molecular mechanisms that control
wing morph determination in this species, testing the interactions of three
candidate pathways using RNAi and pharmaceutical manipulations. Second,
variation in the strength of the plasticity response exhibited by different pea
aphid genotypes will be examined. The research team will identify the genes
responsible for this intraspecific variation using genetic mapping and gene
expression analyses. Third, the focus will shift to comparing species that
exhibit differences in the developmental timing of their plasticity responses.
The research team will use gene expression analysis, RNAi, and pharmaceutical
manipulations to ask how wing morph determination mechanisms have changed
between species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.