* 1749053
* I-Corps: Computational systems to deliver proper injectable treatments
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Jerry Nesamony, University of Toledo Health Science Campus
* Standard Grant
* cindy walkerpeach
* 09/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is that it will
potentially reduce fatal errors associated with compounded sterile preparations
(CSP). This will save lives and save money by preventing dose errors and wastage
of costly medications and accessories when CSP's are incorrectly made. This
I-Corps project will also explore similar problems that can also have life
threatening consequences. The project will help to discern how various types of
errors encountered in industrial processes can be minimized by integrating
technology and human intervention at various workplaces. The product will help
to gain understanding about how machines and people interact so as to design
better workflow practices related to the CSP preparation and other relevant
health care/industrial processes. The design of the technology allows usage in
virtual simulation centers and other educational settings to train technical
personnel, students, and professionals.

This I-Corps project involves a computational decision support system (CDSS)
product that was developed to address severe shortcomings in compounded sterile
preparations (CSP). Current procedures can result in fatal errors, inappropriate
techniques, and noncompliance issues. The first feature of the CDSS is an audio-
visual interface for the compounding technician to identify and pick the correct
materials and accessories to prepare a CSP. The second feature of the CDSS
tracks, monitors, and evaluates the methods used by a technician compounding the
injectable medication through image and video processing. The third feature of
the CDSS checks and confirms the volume of a liquid injection contained in a
syringe. The CDSS product can digitally document all the steps during this
process enabling real time feedback during compounding so that errors can be
corrected immediately. The technology also records the techniques used during
compounding to ensure that proper procedures were followed according to
regulatory guidelines. The CDSS thus provides timely warnings and real time
feedback during preparation of a CSP and documents all aspects of the process
that can be fully integrated with quality assurance (QA) programs.