* 1749677
* CAREER: Wearable Joint Sounds Sensing for Children with Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Omer Inan, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 03/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) is the most common form of childhood
arthritis and affects more than 50,000 children in the US. Symptoms and
progression of JIA vary greatly between individuals, and there are many possible
treatment options depending on the extent of disease. However, diagnosing JIA on
a patient-by-patient basis is difficult because reliable tools for assessing the
condition do not yet exist, and treatment is often a trial-and-error process.
This project will focus on developing wearable joint health-sensing systems that
continuously provide data on joint condition, inside and out of the clinic. The
PI will focus on advancing the ability to measure and analyze sounds produced by
joints during movement. The study will test the hypothesis that joint sounds
decrease as joint health improves with therapy. Sounds collected with the
wearable devices will be analyzed and compared with patients' joint health to
understand possible relationships that can be used to improve diagnostic
capabilities. Research and education are integrated through the incorporation of
undergraduate research teams in the sensing brace design process and
incorporating de-identified dataset analysis in courses at Georgia Institute of
Technology. Additionally, the PI will host K-12 teachers in his lab to develop
science and engineering modules to take back their
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Inan's long-term career goal is to
fundamentally advance knowledge in the field of wearable joint health sensing
and, thereby, enable personalized therapies and devices for patients with joint
disorders, such as arthritis. Toward this goal, Dr. Inan's research objectives
are to: (1) design and implement a sensing brace capable of accurately measuring
the sounds of the joints in the clinic and at home; (2) investigate algorithms
for quantifying differences between the characteristics of joint sounds of
patients with JIA and healthy controls; and (3) conduct a feasibility study in
patients with JIA by sending the sensing brace home and evaluating the changes
in joint sound characteristics measured throughout treatment. The PI's
preliminary data suggests that joint sounds can potentially serve as a
physiological biomarker for patients with arthritis. The project will first
develop a wearable heterogenous sensor array for acoustical sensing with
sufficient battery life. Experiments will collect joint sound data from JIA-
affected and healthy patients. Graph mining algorithms will be applied to
analyze the high-dimensional joint acoustical emissions data and correlate the
data with joint health. At project completion, Dr. Inan will have developed a
new physiological measurement tool for diagnosing and treating JIA patients
based on their specific symptoms and responses to treatment, ultimately
improving their quality of life and minimizing permanent joint
damage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.