* 1749321
* Workshop on sociolectal and dialectal prosodic variation:  Amherst, MA - October 11-13, 2018
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Kristine Yu, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 10/31/2019
* USD 35,873.00

Prosody describes the musical aspects of language, like pitch, phrasing, and
rhythm. Over the past 40 years, we've learned a great deal about how speakers
signal language meaning with prosody: Prosodic cues help listeners better
understand their speaker and are especially important for children learning
language. However, as in many language fields, the majority of studies of
prosody have focused on majority languages and dialects and on speakers who hold
power in social structures. The goal of the funded workshop is to diversify
prosody research in terms of the languages and dialects being investigated, as
well as the social structures that influence prosodic variation. The workshop
will bring together prosody researchers and researchers exploring the role of
sociological variation in prosody, with a specific focus on understudied
dialects and endangered languages, and individual differences based on gender
and sexuality. Invited speakers will (i) raise what questions and areas they
think would especially benefit from prosodic research, (ii) teach prosody
researchers what they need to know to do research in these areas, and (iii)
share insights from their experience engaging with the broader public around
issues of understudied and endangered languages, linguistic bias, and
intersectionality in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to talks from
invited speakers, there will be additional talks, and two poster sessions,
highlighting work related to the special session topic and to topics in prosody
more generally. A satellite workshop centered on African-American English
prosody will bring together participants to contribute analyses of common data
sets and discuss the development of shared data resources and special
methodological considerations such as challenges in prosodic
transcription.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.