* 1749662
* CAREER:  Mechanism of Metallic Conductivity in Bacterial Pili Filaments
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Nikhil Malvankar, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 04/30/2023
* USD 929,475.00

The movement of electrons in biomolecules and materials is central to many
physical, chemical and biological processes as well as to electronics industry.
The PI has found that protein filaments of common soil bacteria can move
electrons similar to metallic systems. In this CAREER Project, the PI will
identify the mechanism underlying this process that occurs over unprecedented
distances. The results of the research could have applications in environmental,
bioenergy, and microelectronics applications. The PI will integrate this
research into a range of educational activities that will inspire and train the
next-generation of interdisciplinary students to tackle challenging problems.
The PI will draw from his own training in biophysics and structural and
molecular biology as well as his experience in technology innovation and
entrepreneurship to reach students at all levels. Specifically, the PI will
first develop a new cross-disciplinary curriculum for undergraduate and graduate
students to introduce key concepts at the intersection of physics, chemistry and
biology that are not covered in traditional courses. Second, the PI will design
hands-on laboratory activity on the science of bacteria-powered fuel cells,
using the feedback from the teachers of New Haven Public School that primarily
serve minority students. Third, the PI will disseminate molecular structures
through a user-friendly software based on First Glance and Proteopedia. Fourth,
the PI will increase participation of underrepresented and minority students
into research by working closely with the Yale assistant dean of science
education and the coordinator for local community and outreach events. Thus,
this CAREER project will integrate highly interdisciplinary research at the
interfaces of physics, chemistry and biology with a diverse educational program
reaching students at all levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electron
transfer is fundamental to many life processes. Existing models of biological
electron transfer rely primarily on tunneling and hopping mechanisms that are
limited to few nanometers, and metallic conductivity has been considered
impossible in proteins. These models cannot explain the remarkable capacity by
bacteria to transport electrons over centimeters, 10,000 times their size. By
introducing a new concept of delocalized conduction via closely stacked aromatic
residues that can account for high conductivity in pili proteins, this CAREER
project at Yale University proposal will expand the intellectual range of
biophysics by building a mechanistic framework for extracellular electron
transport. The overall goal of this project is to identify the mechanism of
extracellular electron transfer in soil bacteria that occurs at rates and
distances unprecedented in biology. Building on the discovery by the PI that
pili protein filaments of Geobacter sulfurreducens show electrical properties
similar to metallic polymers, this project aims to identify the structural,
molecular and biophysical mechanism of metallic conductivity. First, the PI will
identify crucial microscopic transport parameters in pili that led to electron
delocalization. Second, the PI will visualize conformational changes in pili
that drive electron transport. Third, the PI will obtain near atomic-resolution
structures of pili using Cryo-EM. The success of this project could provide
unprecedented new insights into the metabolism and communication of a diversity
of microbial species that regulate our environment and are important for
bioenergy and biofuel strategies. Engineering microbial interactions via
conductive pili could potentially offer control over their physiology and
ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.