* 1749613
* Workshop on the future of coastal and estuarine modeling; June 2018; North Carolina State University
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Clinton Dawson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2018
* USD 70,031.00

Accurate numerical models are essential for improving our understanding of
fundamental physical processes at coastal and estuarine scales, where the
connection between human populations and the ocean are most apparent,
particularly near rapidly expanding coastal megacities around the world. Models
have seen significant advances in the past two decades owing to increases in
computational power and improved numerical methods including unstructured
grids/model nesting, data assimilation, and model coupling. Furthermore,
advances in remote-sensing and in-situ observational technologies have led to
substantially larger and more accurate datasets which have significantly
improved the ability to assess model performance and quantify uncertainty.
However, despite recent advances, a multitude of coastal and estuarine models
have been developed in the past two decades, and there has been a lack of a
unified approach as seen in regional modeling. This workshop will bring together
model users and developers to discuss ways to improve modeling tools for
scientific research in physical oceanography at coastal and estuarine scales.
The budget will provide travel and participation support to U.S.-based early-
career professionals, and there will be an emphasis on attracting
underrepresented minorities and women to attend the workshop. Early-career
scientists will interact with experienced model developers and users in an
environment that focuses on discussion and collaboration, thus helping to
promote a stronger community that will continue to improve the accuracy and
efficiency of coastal and estuarine models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop
will focus on developing an understanding of the advantages and limitations of
the current state-of-the-art in numerical modeling of coastal and estuarine
processes and to form a consensus on key areas of research and development
needed to improve the accuracy and reliability of such models. Outcomes of the
workshop will include the development of a unified understanding of the pros and
cons of different approaches, such as finite-volume vs. finite-element methods,
curvilinear vs. unstructured grids, couplings of ocean, atmosphere, land
(hydrology) models, large-eddy simulation vs. RANS turbulence modeling, as well
as of different model nesting and adaptive-grid strategies. Discussions will
focus on these methods along with strategies for forcing, implementation of
boundary conditions, validation, testing, and uncertainty quantification, with
the potential for development of a unified framework for model benchmarking. The
overarching theme of the workshop will be on the unification of modeling
approaches that are needed to understand emerging science topics of interest to
both model users and developers. A second focus of the workshop will be to
assess how the community can better leverage existing and future computational
technologies to improve model performance in better resolving multiscale
dynamics in estuaries and the coastal ocean. Not only is there a pressing need
for the development of high performance computational strategies for improvement
of individual model performance, but also for the implementation of ensemble
approaches and the development of methods for data assimilation and uncertainty
quantification.