* 1749854
* CAREER: From Data to Knowledge and Decisions for Global-Scale Ecological Sustainability
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Daniel Sheldon, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 550,000.00

Emerging global data resources---for example, from citizen science projects,
animal tracking devices, and earth observation instruments---hold exceptional
promise for monitoring biodiversity, advancing scientific discovery, and guiding
decisions to conserve Earth's natural systems. However, the full potential of
these novel data resources has not been realized. The data is heterogeneous,
high-dimensional, and spatiotemporal. Planning problems for conservation and
sustainable development have huge numbers of states and actions, and significant
modeling uncertainty. This career-development project supports an integrated
program of research, teaching, and outreach to develop new algorithms to convert
data into knowledge and decisions for global-scale ecological sustainability.
The methods are expected to help improve scientific understanding of animal
populations, increase the value of citizen science data, and contribute to
development plans that balance social, economic, and ecological objectives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical research goals are to develop new models and
algorithms for reasoning about large-scale probabilistic models and for network-
based spatiotemporal planning. A new class of graphical models based on
probability generating functions is proposed to cleanly model animal
populations, and to provide a new and flexible class of deep generative models
for general multivariate count data. A novel inference approach based on
automatic differentiation will be combined with existing inference techniques to
support scalable inference and learning. Algorithms that utilize causal
reasoning will be developed to tease apart process from noise in citizen science
data. Algorithms that exploit hierarchical structure in spatiotemporal domains
will be developed to optimize multiple objectives in a highly scalable way to
support sustainable development. The education plan will promote diversity,
train students to conduct computer science research to solve societally relevant
problems, and improve student learning outcomes through a combination of
research, instructional, and mentoring activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.