* 1749609
* CAREER: The Interplay between Combinatorial Optimization and Algorithmic Convex Geometry
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Yin Tat Lee, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 02/28/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Optimization problems, which look for the best solution satisfying given
constraints, may arise in discrete settings, where there is a choice of a
distinct set of possibilities like nodes in a graph, or continuous settings,
where the choices are numbers that can be tuned with fine adjustments. Convex
optimization problems are a special class in which the constraints are simple
enough that continuous problems gain geometric and/or discrete structures. These
structures have been studied extensively over the past century. Some of these
techniques like linear programming have become fundamental tools in all fields
of science. More recently, there have been interesting cases in which continuous
methods have yielded advances in discrete optimization. In this project, the PI
seeks to develop significantly more efficient algorithms to solve convex
problems, especially problems come from graph and combinatorial problems. A
major obstacle to developing nearly linear-time algorithms for both continuous
and discrete problems is the lack of understanding of convex geometry and its
connection to algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on three
key topics and related goals: 1) Algorithmic Convex Geometry: understand how
well convex sets can be approximated by ellipsoids (KLS conjecture), explore
ways to deform an explicit given polytope as a Riemannian manifold and use the
deformations to develop faster polytope sampling algorithms; 2) Combinatorial
Optimization: break the square root iterations barrier for solving linear
programming by understanding the relation between convex geometry and interior
point methods to develop a fine-grained complexity for interior point methods;
3) Convex Optimization: investigate cutting plane methods via the geometry of
localization sets, develop efficient cutting plane methods via algorithmic
convex geometry and explore non-convex optimizations via sampling algorithms.
Improved algorithms for optimization developed via this project through an
improved understanding of these topics can have a broad impact across various
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.