* 1749849
* CAREER: Manganese biogeochemistry and impacts on carbon storage in plant-soil systems
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Elizabeth Herndon, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 12/31/2019
* USD 112,143.00

Soils contain large quantities of organic matter that both improve soil health
and regulate atmospheric carbon dioxide levels by storing carbon (C). Metals
such as manganese (Mn) can influence how much organic C is stored in soils by
impacting plant growth and by helping to either stabilize or degrade organic
compounds in the soil. This research will explore how Mn cycling between soils
and plants influences storage of organic C in terrestrial ecosystems. This
project will also create a network of educational opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students as well as K-12 educators and students. The educational
objectives are to improve science literacy, integrate research with education,
and broaden participation in geosciences by distributing earth science
activities to regional K-12 educators through the Cleveland Museum of Natural
History (CMNH). This project will also provide training for multiple graduate
and undergraduate students who will be integral participants in both the
research and educational components of the project.

Manganese is a biologically important and redox-active trace metal that may
exert a poorly recognized control on carbon cycling in terrestrial ecosystems;
however, the mechanisms by which Mn increases or decreases long-term carbon
storage remains unclear. Although substantial research has been devoted to
understanding how iron and aluminum oxides stabilize organic carbon, there is a
scarcity of similar information regarding Mn oxides. Added to this knowledge gap
are uncertainties related to how soil geochemistry regulates plant uptake of Mn,
and how elevated foliar Mn impacts carbon loss and transformation during litter
decomposition. The overarching hypothesis of this research is that vegetation
regulates the geochemistry of manganese in terrestrial systems with secondary
effects on organic carbon storage in soils. The implication of this hypothesis
is that Mn is an unrecognized but significant regulator of the global C cycle.
This research will integrate studies across multiple scales to explore three
major components of manganese biogeochemistry and associated impacts on carbon
cycling in the critical zone: (1) geochemical controls on rates of Mn cycling by
forest vegetation; (2) influence of elevated foliar Mn on the quantity and
chemical composition of organic C released during litter decomposition; (3)
influence of Mn oxides on the storage or transformation of organic matter.
Results will be integrated into a quantitative framework describing Mn-C
interactions in plant-soil systems and lay the groundwork for future exploration
of manganese biogeochemistry and coupled metal-organic interactions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.