* 1749518
* Collaborative Research: Origins of Recursive Mathematical Knowledge in Childhood
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* David Barner, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 07/31/2022
* USD 287,682.00

This project will investigate how children between the ages of 3 and 7 years
learn about the rules that govern counting. The main goal of this project is to
examine how the verbal structure of counting in different languages affects
children's ability to learn core math concepts like recursion and infinity.
Therefore, the work will have a broad impact on understanding how the structure
of symbolic systems taught to children affect their ability to learn core STEM
concepts. The project will foster interdisciplinary research, and will create a
collaborative bridge between the University of California-San Diego, a PhD
granting university, and Skidmore College, where research is conducted as part
of undergraduate training. This will promote new forms of training on both
campuses, spanning Psychology, Cognitive Science, Linguistics, and
Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will examine how the structure of
the verbal count list - which differs across languages - affects how children
learn core mathematical concepts. To accomplish this, researchers will assess
how high children can count, and assess the ability of children to generate the
next number in a sequence of numbers when not counting. These two assessments
will allow the researchers to determine whether children have acquired a
recursive +1 rule (the "successor function"). Researchers will test whether
learning this recursive rule leads children to infer that numbers are infinite.
Finally, using similar methods, the researchers will examine whether learning
that numbers are infinite might lead children to infer that other domains, like
space and time, are also infinite. Therefore, the researchers will determine how
learning a concrete system of counting rules might lead children to learn about
abstract entities (such as infinity) that can never be directly experienced.
Using simple behavioral methods, the project addresses a central property of
mathematics education with important implications for educational practices in
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.