* 1749542
* RUI: Methodological and theoretical advances in the perception of multiracial individuals
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2018,03/31/2023
* Debbie Ma, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 03/31/2023
* USD 367,126.00

Over the past five decades, the number of individuals in the U.S. identifying as
multiracial has increased exponentially. In 2000, the U.S. Census began allowing
individuals to indicate more than one race. From 2000 to 2010 alone, such
responses increased by 32%, to 9 million. Yet, research suggests that the
American multiracial population has grown much faster than the public's ability
to perceive individuals as multiracial. For example, a person identifying as
both African American and Caucasian will tend to be seen by others as African
American only. One explanation is that people have not yet added a concept of
multiracialism to the monoracial categories that are woven into the American
social fabric. This disconnect between the real and assumed racial identity of a
large and rapidly growing segment of the American population carries adverse
impacts that have been well-documented by researchers. This project investigates
how human minds process and racially categorize the faces of multiracial
individuals. It also examines how experiences shape the capacity to view people
as multiracial. A better understanding of the cognitive and social influences on
the perception of multiracial individuals can be used to help reduce
stereotyping, contribute to a more positive identity formation, and foster more
harmonious interpersonal relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project first
seeks to establish a set of "best practices" for experimentation using
multiracial faces. One set of experiments examines differences in how people
judge real versus computer-generated multiracial faces. These studies also
consider how the categorization of multiracial faces is affected by the range of
presented race options. Statistical modeling techniques are used to determine
the precise features of a face that lead others to perceive it as multiracial
and to create a set of multiracial faces that can be used by other researchers.
The second aim of the project is to determine whether multiracial faces
constitute a unique category in the minds of perceivers, or if they are
perceptually similar to members of a dominant monoracial category. The third aim
is to test whether certain personal attributes or life experiences are
associated with a higher likelihood of perceiving multiracialism in others. As a
Hispanic-Serving and an Asian American and Native American Pacific Islander-
Serving Institution, California State University, Northridge offers an excellent
opportunity to integrate this research project in the training of undergraduate
and Master's students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.