* 1749255
* Collaborative Research: A Dyadic and Dynamic Model of Supportive Conversations as Interpersonal Emotion Regulation
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2018,12/31/2023
* Susanne Jones, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 12/31/2023
* USD 82,436.00

Decades of research shows that people benefit from social support. Those with
richer social networks experience lower rates of disease, live longer lives, and
enjoy better mental health. Even though the benefits of supportive relationships
are well established, less is known about how and why those outcomes occur. This
project focuses on common stressful events that people experience every day, and
the conversations people have with others to cope with those events. It is
expected that conversations about everyday stressors help people think and feel
differently about their problems, which may help account for the short- and
long-term health benefits so commonly found. This project develops a new method
for the coding and analysis of conversations about personal problems. Tools will
be developed to train laypersons and professionals in how to be most helpful in
supportive conversations, ultimately benefiting people's health and well-
being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses data from four previously
conducted studies in which 461 people disclosed a personal stressor to a
stranger, friend, or dating partner. The project analyzes the discloser's
reactions to the partner's messages by examining the ways in which the discloser
expresses thoughts and feelings through language. Videotapes and transcripts of
these conversations allow detailed coding of every utterance of the partner's
responses. The coding system is capable of distinguishing among many different
statements and expressions that commonly occur in such conversations. Detailed
analyses of these conversations will illuminate the turn-to-turn effects of
supportive messages on a distressed person's thoughts and feelings. The analyses
will also clarify how dynamics within conversations influence the distressed
person's thoughts and emotions. This project will contribute to future research
aimed at developing machine-coding systems for categorizing and quantifying
aspects of enacted social support, while also compiling data-analytical tools
that will enable researchers to investigate the dynamics of dyadic interaction
more generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.