* 1749679
* CAREER: Impact of Turbulence on Mechanisms of Combustion Instability
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Jacqueline O'Connor, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Combustion instability is an issue that affects many critical power and
propulsion technologies, including jet engines, power-generation gas turbines,
rockets, boilers, and process furnaces. Significant questions remain about how
turbulence alters flame behavior during instability. In particular, in high-
performance engines, does the turbulence/flame interaction change the
instability feedback mechanisms and do the present numerical models include the
correct physics? The proposed work addresses these questions using a systematic
experimental approach to examine various key aspects of combustion instability.
Advanced laser diagnostics will be used to image the flowfield and the flame,
unlocking the coupling between turbulence and the instability feedback loop. The
PI will also work with many other early-career faculty to effectively
disseminate the results of this research and enhance the educational experience
of students. In particular, the PI will facilitate an online network of early-
career researchers to share research and teaching materials. This will ease the
transition into faculty careers and promote high-quality thermofluids education
at universities across the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
goal of the proposed work is to understand the impact of turbulence on three
critical components of the thermoacoustic feedback loop: the hydrodynamic
instability of the flowfield that determines the susceptibility of the flow to
external disturbances; the coupling mechanisms that drive heat release rate
oscillations; and the mechanism by which these disturbances create heat release
rate oscillations in non-flamelet regimes. This systematic approach uses theory-
based experimental design to probe the ways in which turbulence impacts flow
stability, coupling-mechanism physics, and flame behavior within the framework
of combustion instability. The overarching intellectual merit contribution will
be made in the formulation of the combustion instability regime diagram that
describes the behavior of flames during thermoacoustic instability over a range
of operating conditions. In following this framework, this work will have
significant impacts on fundamental understanding of turbulent flames and
combustion instability, the ability to predict combustion instability in
industry-relevant devices, and the PIs career development. The results of this
work will also feed into the development, implementation, and dissemination of
case studies for undergraduate and graduate audiences. The case studies will
focus on combustion-related issues, exposing a range of students to the
importance of combustion in society; case studies will be disseminated through a
network of early-career faculty through an online portal. The development of the
case studies is rooted in theory-based educational design, including best-
practices for the formation of online content, research-based techniques for
improving recruitment and retention of under-served student populations, and the
robust development of a community of practice for early-career faculty centered
on incorporating combustion science into the
classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.