* 1749465
* The microbiome and condition-dependent signals in primates
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2024
* Christine Drea, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2024
* USD 409,507.00

The microbiome, made up of trillions of bacteria and other microbes that live
within animal bodies, is increasingly recognized as being beneficial for its
host. This project will study lemurs and their microbiomes, to understand the
role that the microbiome plays in normal host functions such as scent marking,
and the ways that scent and the microbiome may change when a lemur is ill or
injured. The results will advance fundamental knowledge about the role of
microbes in physiological maintenance and signaling in primates, as well as the
costs to animals of administering broad-spectrum antibiotics and the mitigation
of these costs by replenishing microbial communities. The project will thus have
applied benefits for optimizing animal welfare and medical practices around the
use of antibiotics, with relevance to humans. The research will contribute to
the education and professional development of undergraduates, post-graduates,
graduate students, post-docs, and faculty. Beyond publications, scientific
presentations, collaborations, and public outreach activities, all findings will
be shared with the Duke Lemur Center and Primate Microbiome Project, for broad
dissemination and support of primate conservation strategies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There remain fundamental gaps in what is known about the
relationships between microbes and animal wellness, broadly defined,
particularly in non-model, non-laboratory species. Therefore, two integrated
studies (in socially housed, semi-free ranging lemurs) examine the connections
between host health (during wellness, injury, and antibiotic treatment), various
microbial communities (in the gut, on the skin, and in specialized scent
glands), and host olfactory signals. Study 1 examines the chemical quality and
behavioral discernability of glandular secretions collected opportunistically
over the course of a decade, from male and female lemurs, before, during, and
after naturally occuring injuries, treated with or without antibiotics. It tests
if injury alone negatively impacts signals, in a manner detectable by others,
and if microbial depletion via antibiotic treatment exacerbates signal loss.
Study 2 further examines the symbiotic relationships between hosts and their
bacterial communities during antibiotic treatment and microbial transplant. It
tests if these treatments, respectively, disrupt and restore host health (e.g.
energetics), various microbial communities throughout the body, scent signals,
and information transfer between animals, with long-term follow up revealing the
pathways and conditions of recovery. These collaborative studies combine
traditional methods of care with behavioral assessment, various state-of-the-art
techniques in chemical, physiological, and genomic analyses, and
bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.