* 1749069
* EAGER:  Collaborative:  Quantifying Information Leakage in Searchable Encryption
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Alexandra Boldyreva, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 06/30/2019
* USD 75,000.00

Cloud storage is currently experiencing explosive growth as more and more
businesses and organizations store large amounts of data on cloud servers.
Encrypting such data provides security against untrusted servers or malicious
intrusions. However, standard encryption has the drawback of compromising
functionality and efficiency and it is so strong that its ciphertexts are not
searchable. For this reason, searchable encryption (SE) has become an important
research area, aimed at providing weaker forms of encryption that balance
security, efficiency, and functionality goals. SE schemes have already been
deployed in practical systems like CryptDB and there is strong demand for more
such solutions. However, recently published high-profile attacks call into
question whether such systems can in fact be used safely. More generally
speaking, it has proven very difficult to understand the security implications
of using SE in practice. This project aims to bring clarity to the current
rather challenging situation seeking to analyze and quantify the amount of
leakage of sensitive information that can occur under various SE schemes in
practice, thereby offering guidance to both cryptographers and practitioners
about when and how such schemes can be used safely.

The approach of this project is interdisciplinary, coupling the provable
security analysis of cryptographic schemes with quantitative information flow
(QIF) theory, building on the expertise of the principal investigators in their
respective areas. A technical challenge is that the adversaries considered in
provable security are computationally bounded, while those considered in QIF are
information theoretic. Yet, the security of an SE scheme is often formulated as
computational indistinguishability from an "ideal object" which can be modeled
as an information-theoretic channel, and whose leakage can then be analyzed
using QIF techniques. In particular, notions of channel capacity allow worst-
case bounds on information leakage to be established, and since refinement is a
partial order it is possible to show that one SE scheme never leaks more than
another, regardless of the adversary's prior knowledge or goals. The project
seeks to carry out such analyses on a number of pertinent SE schemes, including
deterministic encryption and order-preserving encryption. The goal is to
establish new cryptographic foundations and metrics for measuring and comparing
the security of different searchable encryption schemes and their usage.