* 1749548
* Developmental Consequences of Early Life Adversity
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* James Heckman, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 07/31/2024
* USD 805,182.00

The project will investigate the pathways by which early adversity affects
outcomes later in life. Investigators will examine whether and how negative
consequences of early adversity may be transmitted across generations. The
project will enhance basic understanding of the epigenetic processes by which
early adversity generates negative developmental consequences, and it will
expand knowledge about the potential for such epigenetic changes to be
transmitted interegenerationally. The ultimate goal, and broader impact, is to
shed new light on underlying mechanisms of transmission, in order to inspire new
policy approaches aimed at reducing, and potentially reversing, long-term
deleterious effects of early life adversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exposure to
environmental factors can get under one's skin and alter how one's genes
function. There is growing interest in how changes in gene functionality may
account for the association between early adversity and later outcomes.
Moreover, little is known about whether those changes in functionality can be
reversed or whether they can be transmitted across generations. Using pre-
existing data on health and behavioral outcomes as well as pre-existing
biological/genetic samples obtained from multiple generations of differentially
reared macaques, investigators will explore mechanisms and developmental
processes involved in linking early adversity to subsequent outcomes later in
life. The goals are to examine the developmental consequences of early adversity
and underlying epigenetic mechanisms; and to test the intergenerational
transmission of adversity. Because macaques share 93% of their genome with
humans, the study will help clarify how early life adversity affects later
outcomes in humans. The methylation profile of DNA will be analyzed, and RNA
will be extracted in order to examine gene expression. Investigators will
conduct bioinformatics analyses to assess biological characteristics of
differentially expressed gene sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.