* 1749580
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Online Processing of Noun Phrase Ellipsis
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Masaya Yoshida, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/29/2020
* USD 9,132.00

Comprehending language seems easy; however, we know that language comprehension
involves complicated cognitive processes. This seems to be harder when part of a
sentence is omitted or elided, such as in "Derek's key to the boxes must be on
the table and Sue's is probably on the carpet." The sentence does not say that
Sue's key to the boxes is probably on the carpet, but we are still able to
understand exactly that. This project focuses on one kind of elided
construction, called Noun Phrase Ellipsis, in which the noun phrase (like "key
to the boxes") is elided. The crucial part in understanding how this kind of
structure works is to discern what kind of information can be retrieved from
memory at the stage when the readers notice that something is missing. The
studies proposed here aim to test longstanding questions in psycholinguistics:
(1) what is the nature of memory representation; and (2) what information is
retrieved from memory during active sentence processing?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
employing eye-tracking experiments, this project investigates the retrieval
process in Noun Phrase Ellipsis, which we find includes detailed structural and
morphological information. Pairing ellipsis constructions with agreement
attraction should illuminate the process, distinguishing the observed effect
from other syntactic structures. In addition, it also seeks to determine at
which stage that information influences the processing of ellipsis
constructions, compared to other kinds of noun anaphora. This project will
enable us to identify potential sources that interfere with resolving different
types of dependencies with respect to memory retrieval mechanisms. This will in
turn enhance our understanding of the difficulties experienced by second
language learners and those with specific language
impairments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.