* 1749779
* CAREER: Advancing Knowledge of Atomization: Numerical Methods, Physics Extraction, and Reduced-Order Models
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Mark Owkes, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,002.00

Atomization is the process that breaks apart a coherent liquid structure into
small droplets and occurs in many engineering devices including fuel injection,
fire suppression, and painting systems. However, there is a current lack of
knowledge on the physical processes that occur in an atomizing jet, which has
impeded improvements to atomization systems. Simulations of atomization have the
potential to provide this knowledge, but have not been impactful due to the
massive datasets produced and the challenges of extracting useful information.
This work will: 1) advance numerical methods allowing accurate simulations of
more systems, 2) further the usefulness of simulations by extracting the physics
of important processes, and 3) using new knowledge to developing physics-based
models for use by engineers designing new atomization
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advancing knowledge of atomization will be
achieved with three research objectives. The first will extend numerical method
capabilities to predict the rupture of a liquid sheet using length and time
scales based on physics and provide consistent and conservative transport of
gas-liquid and fluid-solid interface. The second objective will make simulations
results more useful by creating tools to extract atomization physics from
massive datasets. The tools will compute statistics on the primary breakup
instability and droplet ancestries that quantify how injected liquid breaks into
small droplets. The third objective will develop physics-based reduced-order
models using new knowledge on atomization. Additionally, an Atomizing Droplet
Ancestry Database will be shared with other researchers developing atomization
models. Overall, this work will provide a set of methods, tools, and knowledge
that will allow engineers to build more precise
atomizers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.