* 1749407
* Sustained Activity Mechanisms for Neurally Encoding Linguistic Structure
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Ellen Lau, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/29/2024
* USD 386,628.00

The project will examine how the human brain implements the short-term memory
representations necessary for comprehending language. In particular, the
proposed experiments will investigate how sustained increases in neural activity
contribute to language understanding, by recording brain activity as adults
comprehend structured sentences. In so doing, this work will speak to questions
about the role of sustained neural activity in short-term memory in cognition
more broadly, which is currently the subject of much debate in the field. The
basic research proposed here will ultimately pave the way for a better
understanding of the language deficits associated with working memory problems
in neurocognitive disorders such as aphasia and schizophrenia, as well as
providing more fine-grained neural measures for evaluating language
comprehension abilities in populations undergoing first and second language
acquisition. The project will also provide numerous training opportunities for
students in a technical and highly interdisciplinary research area that draws
upon the fields of linguistics, cognitive psychology, computational linguistics,
and cognitive neuroscience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key methodological element
of the current project is the use of multimodal neuroimaging, which integrates
data from a range of techniques (electroencephalography, magnetoencephalography,
and functional MRI) in order to precisely identify relevant neural activity both
in time and in brain space. These techniques are used to evaluate prior
proposals that sustained activity in several brain regions (left inferior
frontal cortex and left posterior temporal cortex) is what allows humans to
represent relations between different parts of a sentence during language
comprehension. Critically, the project builds on foundational work from
linguistics and computational linguistics to devise structured language
materials that can effectively probe different hypotheses about these neural
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.