* 1749489
* CAREER:  The impact of spatial-positioning mechanisms on the metabolic interactions and emergent properties of synthetic bacterial communities
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2023
* James McKinlay, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,151,144.00

Microbes constitute a large portion of the Earth's biomass. In the majority of
environments, microbes live as interacting communities. However, not much is
known regarding how microbial worlds communicate, evolve, share resources, and
interact with other organisms. This project will address how bacteria position
themselves within microbial communities to cooperatively trade nutrients with
neighboring cells or alternatively steal nutrients from neighbors. Such cross-
feeding interactions influence important processes, including human health and
element cycling. Cross-feeding communities can also be harnessed to degrade
pollutants and convert renewable resources into useful products, such as
biofuels. The results from this project will thus have broad benefits by
informing on natural microbial interactions of environmental and medical
relevance and by generating principles for the engineering of bacterial
communities as a technology to benefit society. This research will involve
direct participation of regional high school students, including
underrepresented minorities. Additional high school students will gain research
experiences through a collaboration between the research team and high school
teachers, which will bring experiments to classrooms. This project will also
generate an innovative storytelling platform that will provide an intuitive
framework upon which to communicate detail-intensive and traditionally unpopular
topics in metabolism and biochemistry to learners of all ages.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine how bacteria optimize their
location within cross-feeding communities that pit cooperative cells against
exploitive (cheater) cells. Current theory indicates that clustering of
cooperative cells can keep cheaters at bay. However, this theory does not take
into account mechanisms that bacteria use to sense and swim towards nutrients
and to adhere to surfaces and other cells. A lack of knowledge on how motility
and adhesion influence metabolic interactions and community structure hampers
not only our general understanding of microbial community behavior but also our
ability to design useful synthetic communities. The objective of this project is
to determine the impact of motility and adhesion on subpopulation dynamics in
cross-feeding communities and on emergent properties, such as hydrogen biofuel
production. The objective will be achieved using both experimental and
computationally-simulated communities. One community will pair ammonium-
excreting cooperators and ammonium-consuming cheaters of a single species,
Rhodopseudomonas palustris. A second community will pair R. palustris with
Escherichia coli in an obligate cross-feeding relationship wherein ammonium from
R. palustris is exchanged for carbon nutrients from E. coli. This mutualism will
also be challenged with an R. palustris cheater. In each case, the effects of
motility and adhesion on cooperator and cheater fitness and community structure
will be determined using environmental and genetic conditions that either permit
or restrict motility and adhesion. This project will thus provide a much-needed
molecular understanding of spatial bacterial community behaviors of
environmental, medical, and industrial relevance.