* 1749207
* CAREER: Battery-inspired electrodes for efficiently desalinating water or harvesting salinity gradient energy
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Christopher Gorski, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

PI Name: Christopher A. Gorski &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1749207
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research will be to address two major
national issues: provide the public with access to clean water and affordable
electricity. The research focuses on developing devices like batteries that can
use electricity to desalinate water. In addition,these devices can also produce
electricity by mixing seawater with freshwater, a key benefit to coastal areas
of the United States. The research aims to optimize the materials used in these
devices through scientific inquiry. The goal of the education plan is to improve
student learning related to water and energy issues. The PI will study how pre-
existing misconceptions prevent learning, and identify ways to improve
understanding and employ alternative teaching methods to correct misconceptions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focuses on novel, battery-inspired
electrochemical cells that can be used to desalinate water or generate
electricity from salinity gradients. Several electrochemical technologies have
been proposed for these purposes in the past, but their performances have been
too low to significantly impact the water and energy sectors due partially to
their reliance on carbon electrodes. The central hypothesis of the research is
that using battery-inspired metal-based electrodes will lead to dramatic
improvements in system performance. This hypothesis is supported by preliminary
results demonstrating that the classes of proposed electrode materials can
greatly increase the energy efficiency of desalinating water and increase the
amount of electrical power produced from salinity gradients relative to existing
technologies. To test this hypothesis, the PI will focus on four classes of
metal-based electrode materials known to interact with sodium ions in water. The
overall goal of the research is to construct a framework for rationally
selecting electrode materials for desalinating water and harvesting salinity
gradient energy. To achieve this goal, the proposed research will use a
combination of electrochemical methods, material characterization techniques,
and aquatic chemistry measurements to methodically investigate the relationships
that exist among the materials? (1) charging mechanisms, (2) electrochemical
properties, and (3) performances in desalinating water or harvesting salinity
gradient energy. The PI will also assess how trace elements and fouling agents
present in real waters affect electrode performance. The goal of the education
plan is to identify student misconceptions related to electrochemistry, energy
production, and water quality and treatment and to test the effectiveness of
inquiry-based teaching methods for overcoming them. A misconception is
conceptual knowledge that is inconsistent with commonly accepted and provable
scientific consensuses. Overcoming misconceptions is critical for developing
deep conceptual knowledge that is important both for professional work and daily
life. The proposed work will leverage the PI?s ongoing outreach and educational
efforts to identify and repair misconceptions among engineering students
studying electrochemistry and grade 6-8 students studying water and energy
issues. The research is transformative in that it will lead to a fundamental
understanding of faradaic electrode material charging mechanisms, which can be
applied to the design and modification of materials used for desalinating water
and harvesting salinity gradient energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.