* 1749501
* IIS: EAGER: Benchmarks for Autonomous Unmanned Aerial Vehicles in Agriculture Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 12/15/2017,11/30/2021
* Christopher Stewart, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 11/30/2021
* USD 224,993.00

Drone technology and aerial imagery can be developed to help farmers meet future
demands to increase crop yield and lower costs without using more land. Access
to the technology, to the fields, and to permits to fly and capture imagery can
limit the pool of developers, however. This project devises benchmarks that
capture, characterize and share empirical data collected from autonomous
unmanned aerial vehicle (AUAV) systems deployed in agricultural settings. It
curates and shares AUAV data on the Ohio State TDA Data Commons which will
enable research across disciplines, and will host an Agriculture Analysis in the
Cloud workshop which attracts computer scientists, geoscientists, farmers and
agricultural engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A revealing example of application
is the task of crop thinning, which prevents competition between plants by
applying herbicide selectively to weeds and weak crops. Manual thinning is
physically demanding and can cost up to $100 per acre. An autonomous UAV system
for crop thinning will need to be able to process imagery to identify crowding
in various plant types. If over-crowding is detected, the AUAV can lower and
hover to capture hi-res images suitable for classification of strong crops, weak
crops and weeds. This project creates a reference implementation of an AUAV
systems that detects crop thinning, capturing both low and high resolution
imagery. Researchers can mimic this AUAV system to perform holistic tests with
different hardware and software, and use this benchmarked data to explore
approaches for on-board or on-line classification of crowding and crop strength
without access to farmland for flying AUAVs. AUAV power can also be recorded, to
help explore decisions on charging vs sampling less data.