* 1749785
* CAREER: Bug Tolerant Networking: Enabling Highly-Available Network Infrastructures through Semantic Transformations.
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Theophilus Benson, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Software-defined networking (SDN) is a key enabling technology facilitating the
transition to a next generation of software defined infrastructure incorporating
virtualized network functions, 5th generation cellular networks and advanced
wireless communication technologies, and edge computing. Despite SDN's crucial
role ahead, the networking research community still needs key techniques and
tools to maintain highly available and resilient networks; SDNs are prone to
software design and implementation errors that can have catastrophic
consequences, e.g., network failures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses these needs by introducing a novel paradigm that advocates overcoming
software `bugs-by transforming the bug triggering inputs into 'safe' inputs. To
support this paradigm, the project will develop designs, abstractions and
algorithms to identify, isolate, and transform the triggering inputs into safe
inputs in a systematic and principled manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will examine several research thrusts to enable practical bug-tolerant networks
including to (1) introduce frameworks and designs that guarantee bug recovery
and forward progress by transforming bug-triggering inputs into different, but
equivalent inputs; (2) design an abstraction and cross-layer network
transactions that provide atomicity and consistency during and
after&lt;br/&gt;recovery from triggered events; (3) develop algorithms that
maximize the efficiency of the proposed frameworks by statically analyzing
control and data plane source code, and modeling protocol interactions; and (4)
generalize techniques beyond current SDN paradigms (e.g., OpenFlow) to
emerging&lt;br/&gt;and future paradigms with stateful data planes and expressive
interfaces (e.g., P4).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.