* 1749530
* CAREER: Developing a Spatial-Temporal Predictive Framework for the Drinking Water Microbiome.
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Ameet Pinto, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 03/31/2022
* USD 519,791.00

Every gallon of drinking water contains millions of microbes that are referred
to as the drinking water microbiome. Water utilities perform extensive
monitoring in the water distribution system to ensure that the drinking water
microbiome remains safe as it travels from the water treatment plant to the
household tap. Although these monitoring practices are designed for early
detection of microbial contamination, any attempt to fix a problem identified by
monitoring will be inherently reactionary. This project seeks to revolutionize
the current United States drinking water monitoring system of "detect and
mitigate" towards a proactive one of "predict and correct". This project aims to
develop a computer model that will allow water utilities to predict future
microbial contamination events across the water distribution system, thus
providing an opportunity to prevent contamination events before they occur.
Integrated with the research activities will be an education program that
includes training of K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students in state-of-the-
art microbiome characterization and interpretation to attract them to STEM
careers. The goal of this education program will be to prepare future water
scientists and engineers with expertise in microbiome research and
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The career development plan will advance the
safety and health of drinking water by integrating experimental and
computational microbial ecology into drinking water microbiome research and by
leveraging this research through education and outreach to engage a diverse
student body in microbiome research and practice. The research goals of this
project are (1) to establish a long-term observatory to monitor high-resolution
drinking water microbiome dynamics in Boston?s water distribution system, (2) to
develop a novel framework to apply econometric and ecological models to these
dynamics, and (3) to systematically integrate the two modeling approaches for
comprehensive spatial-temporal forecasting of the abundance and composition of
the drinking water microbiome. The research plan combines state-of-the-art
integrated analyses and novel modeling approaches to develop a quantitative
predictive framework for the drinking water microbiome. This predictive
framework will (1) help water utilities preemptively estimate and eliminate
future drinking water microbial risks, and (2) serve as foundational knowledge
for model-informed quantitative management of the drinking water microbiome.
This research is integrated with an education and outreach plan designed to (1)
attract and train undergraduate and graduate students in microbiome research and
practice, using pedagogical approaches designed to enhance participation of
students from underrepresented minority groups in STEM research, and (2) raise
public awareness of the drinking-water microbiome through K-12 initiatives. The
objectives will be accomplished by developing innovative microbiome-focused
curricula in environmental engineering using a Course-based Undergraduate
Research Experiences (CUREs) approach in collaboration with Wentworth Institute
of Technology and Wellesley College and a K-12 learning activity for Boston area
students through the Center for STEM Education at Northeastern University. The
project will advance the shared aspirational vision of the drinking water
research community and the microbiome-centric drinking water quality management
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.