* 1749200
* CAREER: Multi-Scale Models of Urban Congestion Dynamics to Support Advanced Congestion Management Strategies
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Vikash Gayah, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 04/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Reducing urban traffic congestion improves overall transportation system
efficiency and reliability in support of improving the nation's economy, the
environment and the societal welfare. The objectives of this Faculty Early
Career Development Program (CAREER) award are to: 1) investigate relationships
that exist between congestion dynamics at the local (e.g., individual
intersections or roadways) and regional (e.g., city-wide) spatial scales; and,
2) use this knowledge to identify strategies that can effectively combat urban
traffic congestion at individual intersections, along corridors and across
entire regions simultaneously. The relationships between local and regional
congestion dynamics will be integrated into a novel multi-scale congestion
modeling framework for optimizing and refining contemporary traffic control
policies as well as supporting the development of advanced congestion management
strategies that will become available as connected and automated vehicles are
integrated into urban environments. The proposed research will be integrated
with a set of educational activities to advance our knowledge in traffic
management and promote national prosperity and welfare. Specific education
activities include collaboration with local transportation agencies who will
provide data to verify the identified relationships and support real-world
project-based learning activities and demonstrate a holistic, multi-scale view
of traffic congestion. These activities will be shared through the creation of
an electronic repository of undergraduate course materials on traffic
operations. The PI will also develop interactive, online simulations to
demonstrate the relationships between local and regional congestion dynamics and
integrate these into "Expanding Youth Horizons" STEM outreach workshops targeted
to local female middle school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
integrate novel models of regional congestion dynamics that relate network
productivity and accumulation--the network Macroscopic Fundamental Diagram
(MFD)--with existing link-based modeling paradigms. These two disparate
approaches will be combined by identifying and quantifying interdependencies
between local and regional network properties and congestion dynamics along each
of these spatial scales. Theories and methodologies will be developed to unveil
network characteristics and local congestion patterns that are conducive to the
existence of reproducible and predictable regional congestion models for
realistic urban traffic networks. This includes the identification of the
building blocks necessary to characterize regional traffic network performance
for networks made up of hierarchical streets and that serve heterogeneous
traffic streams. Insights obtained for these heterogeneous network structures
will also serve as the basis to study and design more sophisticated systems,
particularly multimodal traffic networks with multiple unique and interacting
vehicle classes. Integration of this regional MFD approach with existing link-
based modeling paradigms will provide a framework that facilitates automated
traffic control policies to coordinate regional and local traffic
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.