* 1749210
* HBCU-DCL: Collaborative Workshop Between the Experimental Centric Pedagogy and Mobile Hands-On STEM Projects
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2019
* Kenneth Connor, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 04/30/2019
* USD 100,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU) Experimental Centric
Pedagogy (ECP) project, with the collaboration of the Mobile Hands-On STEM
(MOHS) project supports a joint workshop that will explore broader impacts and
intellectual merit of ECP within the context of the successful features of a
Minority Serving collaboration. This workshop pursues expansion of an pedagogy
that is adaptive to a wide variety of fields and that engages and stimulates
interest by a large population of under-served minority students enrolled in the
13 engineering programs. The guiding hypothesis is that engineering education
works best in a learning environment in which experimentation plays a central
role. The MOHS project pursues complementary activities including mobile hands-
on student learning environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop that is
hosted by the HBCU ECP and MOHS groups will work with engineering practitioners
and expand the scope of the learning pedagogy. Also, they seek to reach out to
Hispanics Serving Institutions to understand the opportunities to expand beyond
HBCUs. This includes exercises classifying educational activities using Blooms
Taxonomy and SWOT analysis. The workshops seeks to outline several previously
identified areas of need for using ECP including; systems engineering and
integration, design of plans teaching troubleshooting and debugging; and can it
be used beyond the original HBCUs and become inclusive like working with
Hispanic Serving Institutions; does the pedagogy support authentic engineering
experiences. Participants will be invited from a wide range of diverse
backgrounds to establish how best to bring ECP to other communities. This
project will add to our understanding on how an experimental centric pedagogy
impacts underrepresented minorities in engineering education and may influence
our future workforce of engineers in the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.