* 1749059
* The Effects of Climate and Population Density on Agricultural Production
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2021
* Joan Coltrain, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2021
* USD 215,894.00

The transition to food production represents one of the most significant events
in human history. Growing evidence for the persistence of agriculture through
periods of population collapse and environmental change suggests that the
transition to food production is a tipping point from which human populations
cannot return, but at least one case study provides evidence to the contrary.
The Fremont in the Basin-Plateau region of Western North America farmed maize
for nearly a millennium, from about 1550-650 years ago (AD 450-1350), then
abandoned agriculture and their farming villages a few centuries prior to
European contact. Farming ceased earlier in some regions of the Fremont
landscape than in others but by AD 1350 most of the characteristics of
settlement pattern that identified the Fremont as an archaeological complex were
no longer present. At European contact groups living in the eastern Great Basin
and on the northern Colorado Plateau had returned to mobile hunting and
gathering. Reasons for both the origin and demise of Fremont farming have been
hotly debated, but a consensus is lacking. This project will generate extensive
data on diet, climate and demography in order to address the rise,
spatiotemporal variation in reliance on maize and fall of the Fremont complex,
which will serve as a model system to explore the dynamics that lead to
agricultural collapse. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several approaches will
be used to reconstruct the variables that likely determined the investment of
Fremont populations in maize agriculture and their decision to return to
foraging. Demography - the size and distribution of human populations - is one
critical factor. Summed radiocarbon dates from Fremont contexts will be used as
a proxy for prehistoric population densities. Research has shown population
growth puts pressure on wild resources and can be a driver of reliance on
domesticates. Thus, variation in the size and structure of local Fremont
populations may address variation in reliance on maize. Modeling agricultural
suitability will further inform this work. Key climatic variables that affect
maize productivity such as precipitation, growing degree days, soil moisture and
soil chemistry are critical to the success of maize farming. Modern data will be
temporally adjusted with tree-ring chronologies to reconstruct paleo-climate
across the Fremont region. Finally the bone chemistry of a large collection of
Fremont individuals will be analyzed to determine spatiotemporal variation in
the dietary importance of maize. Once all the data are assembled the relative
influence of each factor will be evaluated. The resulting analyses will examine
how an individual's reliance on maize agriculture varied as a function of each
explanatory variable while holding time, space and other confounds
constant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.