* 1749352
* Testing a Goal-Commitment Model of Compassion
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2023
* Michael Poulin, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 04/30/2023
* USD 406,363.00

People are often exposed to the unfair suffering of others. Learning of starving
children, encountering victims of natural disasters, or knowing of others'
economic hardships brings out in people a strong emotional reaction most
commonly described as compassion. The experience of compassion typically leads
to a desire to help. Yet, people do not always act on those desires. Instead,
the experience of compassion sometimes causes anxiety and motivates people to
protect their own interests and to avoid being helpful to others. This project
considers some fundamental properties of social cognition that may help to
account for these divergent responses to compassion -- to help or not to help.
The main focus is on the concept of goal commitment. The desire to help may not
translate into actual helping unless one decides on a way to put that goal into
action. This project aims to identify simple but effective approaches to assist
people in acting on their desire to help suffering others. A series of
experiments test whether thinking about helping goals as commitments rather than
mere desires will lower the barriers to helping. Close relationships, families,
groups, and entire societies depend upon people's willingness to make sacrifices
on behalf of others. By shedding light on the mechanisms for such behavior and
the conditions under which it is likely to occur, this project may open up new
possibilities for research and interventions that promote helping behavior in a
variety of settings.

Witnessing the undeserved suffering of others frequently elicits multiple
conflicting goals. One such goal is the desire to help suffering others. A
competing goal is the desire to protect one's self and one's resources of time,
money, or effort. Based on theoretical models of goal pursuit, this project
focuses on the role of goal commitment in resolving such multiple conflicting
goals. Five studies test the prediction that committing to a helping goal will
lead people to reduce their concerns with self-protection goals, thereby
reducing self-focused anxiety and increasing helping behavior in the form of
charitable donations. The studies examine the effects of exposure to suffering,
goal commitment, and the cost of helping on charitable giving. The studies also
feature assessments of physiological threat as a supplement to self-report
measures of distress and anxiety. In the absence of goal commitment, it is
expected that exposure to suffering will increase anxiety and fail to elicit
donations. In the presence of goal commitment, it is expected that exposure to
suffering will not increase anxiety and will promote donations. By examining the
connections between compassion and anxiety reduction, the research could inform
interventions that increase the health benefits of social engagement.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.