* 1749917
* CAREER: Learning Multi-Level Narrative Structure
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Mark Finlayson, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 05/31/2024
* USD 660,000.00

Why do certain stories, but not others, resonate so powerfully with certain
populations? Stories (a.k.a. narratives) are powerful: where rational argument
fails, a single story can drive home a point, change a mind, and even change a
life. What specific structures underlie the power of narrative, and what new
artificial intelligence (AI) techniques are needed to learn these structures
automatically so we can leverage them in applications? This project seeks to
develop these new AI techniques to automatically uncover and confirm the
fundamental structures underlying narrative, developing and testing with data
drawn from the domains of education and culture. This work will be of broad
relevance to developing more intelligent machines, understanding the mind and
brain, and improving education. It will produce fundamental insights into a
universal form of communication (narrative), providing a potentially
transformative new set of tools to researcher and
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop new machine learning
and natural language processing approaches to learning key aspects of narrative
structure. The basic structure of a narrative involves the plot, a time-ordered
sequence of important events, and the plot can be divided into three levels of
structure: (1) plot pieces, (2) archetypal characters, and (3) narrative arcs.
The PI and his students will first learn to extract these three types of
narrative structure, the third of which (narrative arcs) is as-yet untried,
using novel combinations of existing grammar learning approaches and Bayesian
approaches, specifically the PI's Analogical Story Merging (ASM) algorithm, the
Infinite Relational Model (IRM), and iterative learning. Second, the researchers
will test hypotheses that reflect why specific stories are persuasive to
specific cultures, and apply these insights to improving minority engagement in
STEM and computing in middle-school classrooms in Miami Dade County Public
Schools. Third, the researchers will seek to uncover systematic regularities in
professional education cases (such as business cases, or medical case reports)
that will lead to the ability to make computational predictions as to which
cases should be most effective in the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.