* 1749562
* Student-Author Travel Grant for the International Conferences on Biomedical and Health Informatics and on Wearable and Implantable Body Sensor Networks 2018
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Roozbeh Jafari, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 11/30/2018
* USD 19,970.00

This project is to support doctoral student travel and participation for student
travel support and participation in the doctoral mentoring program at
International Conference on Biomedical and Health Informatics is now on its 5th
edition, while the annual International Conference on Wearable and Implantable
Body Sensor Networks. These collocated conferences provides a supportive
scientific forum for students focusing on computing, health informatics and
engineering in the area of human health. The International Conference on
Biomedical and Health Informatics and International Conference on Wearable and
Implantable Body Sensor Networks will provide a forum for expert and peer
critique of students' research with the goal of improving their science. Student
participants will also have the opportunity to receive networking support and
career advice from internationally-recognized experts. Overall, the travel
support brings together students with experts who might not otherwise engage
with one another and engage in multidisciplinary groups targeting science the
area of human health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal supports doctoral
students by providing a doctoral forum focused on encouraging students to learn
from peers and experts from multiple perspectives to understand how innovative
computing, informatics, engineering and biomedical science combine to make the
most impact in the area of human health. In addition, student participation in a
roundtable provided at the conference enables students to explore their science
and see different career paths for researchers in this area. The International
Conference on Biomedical and Health Informatics and International Conference on
Wearable and Implantable Body Sensor Networks conference exposes participants to
different scientific disciplinary approaches, supports networking with
conference attendees and is designed to support the development of the next
generation of scholars in this area and create a bridge between the scientific
and health disciplines.