* 1749310
* A limiting case of bilingual language identification: the Quichua-Media Lengua lexicon
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2018,11/30/2022
* John Lipski, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 11/30/2022
* USD 249,534.00

How do people who know more than one language recognize which language they are
hearing at a given time? And how much of a language must be heard in order to
make a positive identification? In most circumstances many features, including
sound patterns, grammatical structures, and vocabulary items, simultaneously
distinguish the languages and identification is rapid and seemingly effortless.
Little is known, however, about the relative contribution of each component, and
there are few language combinations that allow for isolating a single feature,
with all other factors being equal. Investigating language processing in
bilingual speakers is important for testing the limits of bilingualism: what
features do speakers use to keep languages apart?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project examines data from bilingual speakers of Ecuadoran Quichua and
the mixed language known as Media Lengua, which consists of Quichua grammatical
frames with all word roots replaced by their Spanish counterparts but pronounced
as though they were Quichua. Media Lengua is related to Quichua much as Lewis
Carroll's poem "Jabberwocky" is related to English, e.g. "'Twas brillig and the
slithy toves did gyre and gimble in the wabe"; the difference is that the non-
Quichua roots come from another real language, Spanish. Quichua-Media Lengua
bilinguals provide a unique environment in which to determine whether speakers
maintain separate lexicons (word repositories) for each language or a single
word-bank with some sort of language-tagging with accompanying grammatical and
phonetic information. The project will employ a variety of techniques to explore
the mechanisms that allow for language identification, reactions to language
mixing when no grammatical differences intervene, and long-term prospects for
mixed languages like Media Lengua. The project will train graduate students in
experimental field methods. The project will enhance the value and prestige of
less commonly studied and often stigmatized languages and language
varieties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.