* 1749177
* CAREER: Breaking and engineering reciprocity in magnetless THz and IR devices using 2D materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Juan Sebastian Gomez Diaz, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 02/28/2023
* USD 500,000.00

The propagation of electromagnetic waves has enabled modern technology and
communication systems. In many practical applications, it is required that these
waves propagate through nonreciprocal channels/devices able to exhibit different
responses when source and observation points are interchanged. This is the case
of isolators that protect sources and antennas from high-power reflections,
circulators able to distribute signals to different outputs, or Faraday rotators
that control the polarization of light. These components are fundamental
building blocks for telecommunications, defense, health care, and space
industries. Unfortunately, breaking reciprocity usually requires bulky and
costly magnetic materials that are not compatible with integrated circuits. This
project proposes novel approaches to break and engineer reciprocity at the
micro/nano-scale by exploiting exciting properties of two-dimensional materials
without requiring external magnetic fields. The findings will be applied to
develop low-cost, compact, and highly-efficient nonreciprocal platforms that
enable novel functionalities and are compatible with integrated circuits and
other optoelectronic components. The main goal is to establish a new paradigm
for nonreciprocal devices, lessening the dependence on magnetic materials and
exploiting unusual responses to reshape many areas of the coming technology. The
educational and outreach efforts will focus on engaging Hispanic students,
ranging from K-12 to college, in science, technology, engineering and math.
Summer fellowships will foster the participation of undergraduate Hispanic
students in a research project about nonreciprocal antennas, allowing graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students to interact and share knowledge and
experiences learnt by implementing similar concepts at different frequencies.
The organization of a workshop about reciprocity will bring together top experts
in the field with graduate and Hispanic undergraduate and high-school students,
enabling technical discussions and broadening the impact of this exciting topic
on all society.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project combines and exploits unique
properties of two-dimensional materials to break and manipulate time-reversal
symmetry in the absence of magnetic bias. First, nonreciprocal responses far
beyond what is currently attainable using magneto-optics effects will be
realized by pumping two-dimensional materials subjected to uniform strain with
circularly-polarized light. This platform will permit to investigate the
response of many systems under effective magnetic bias much larger than those
attained in common laboratories and will enable the practical development of
strain engineering. Such responses will be applied to realize Faraday rotators
and nonreciprocal hyperbolic/phase profile metasurfaces, enabling
functionalities such as one way giant optical forces and nonreciprocal beam
steering/lensing. Second, the ultrafast field effect of two-dimensional
materials will be exploited to judiciously modulate in space and time their
electric properties. Spatiotemporal modulations will be applied to realize low-
loss, efficient, and integrated nonreciprocal photonic and plasmonic platforms
able to enhance the spectrum efficiency and data-rate in the telecommunication
industry. The technology proposed in this project is low-cost, compatible with
integrated circuits, and aims to significantly advance the current frontiers in
the field of nonreciprocity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.