* 1749696
* CAREER: Motivation in Science among Students with Learning Disabilities: Broadening Participation and Persistence
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Samantha Daley, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,018,597.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will pursue integrated
research and education efforts to broaden participation, persistence, and
success in advanced science coursework and career progression for students with
learning disabilities, the largest disability category in United States' public
education. Despite the potential for academic and career success in STEM,
students with learning disabilities participate in advanced science courses and
pursue STEM careers at much lower rates than their peers. The project will focus
on the motivational beliefs of middle and high school students with learning
disabilities as largely neglected but likely powerful influences on science
trajectories, contributing to the goal of fostering an inclusive STEM
educational system and workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will take
place in three phases, addressing multiple perspectives and levels of analysis.
In the first phase, a national longitudinal dataset (High School Longitudinal
Study 2009) will be analyzed to investigate the relationship between
motivational beliefs of high-school students with learning disabilities and
subsequent pursuit of advanced science coursework and careers. In the second
phase, a mixed-methods study with 80 middle-school students with learning
disabilities will investigate how science instructional experiences shape
motivational beliefs. The third phase will focus on the teacher perspective,
working with a cadre of master science teachers to understand teachers'
perceptions of learning disabilities and to co-develop practical resources for
use in science classrooms. The education plan similarly uses multiple approaches
to have impact. These include: 1) integrating project theory and research across
the University of Rochester's masters-level courses for future educators in STEM
and special education, 2) improving doctoral-level research methods courses by
developing courses aligned with the project's varied research methods, 3)
partnering with master teaching fellows who are current science teachers with
the ability to improve STEM outcomes in area schools, and 4) developing
professional development experiences to inform science instructional
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CAREER program is a National Science
Foundation (NSF)-wide activity that offers awards in support of junior faculty
who exemplify the role of teacher-scholars through outstanding research,
excellent education, and the integration of education and research within the
context of the mission of their organizations. This award is supported by EHR
Core Research (ECR) which emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that
generates foundational knowledge in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.