* 1749364
* CAREER:   Rapid continuous molecular evolution to create and probe protein-protein interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Bryan Dickinson, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 12/31/2023
* USD 821,566.00

Engineered biological tools are emerging as critical solutions to some of the
most pressing issues facing society. However, challenges with designing
biological components to perform desired functions remains a primary hurdle to
realizing the full potential of engineered biological systems. Laboratory
molecular evolution - the iterative process of changing the structure and
function of a molecule over time - provides both a lens with which to probe
biology and is an increasingly important laboratory tool for creating functional
molecules. This project will study how biological molecules evolve to interact
with one another by developing and applying new rapid laboratory evolution
systems. This project will provide fundamental knowledge about how biomolecules
evolve to have new functions, with a focus on activities of relevance to the
broader biological community. Additionally, the technologies created for this
project will lead to new approaches for harnessing molecular evolution in the
laboratory as a design tool. The technologies and fundamental insights gleaned
from this project will lead to new approaches to solve biological engineering
challenges. This project will provide educational opportunities for students and
adults in the Chicago area, with a focus on using the topic of engineering
biology to inspire STEM participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As synthetic biology
continues to grow in prevalence in biotechnological, agricultural, and
industrial arenas, the need for methods to create and understand the biological
components of these technologies is also increasing. This project will impact
these needs in several ways: 1) Studying the evolution of molecular interactions
will lead to general, fundamental insights about how to better engineer
proteins. 2) Developing and leveraging new molecular evolution technologies will
lead to new opportunities to use these tools for applied scientific problems,
both for academic and commercial purposes. 3) The evolved protein products from
the fundamental studies in this work will serve as useful tools to understand
protein structure/function relationships. 4) The research will provide a fertile
platform for endowing undergraduates and graduate students with the skillsets
needed to become the next generation of leaders in synthetic biology. 5) The
project will involve work in the local Southside of Chicago to explain the
fundamental concepts, goals, and potential of synthetic biology and motivate
local youth to enter STEM fields. 6) The project will involve work with adult
outreach in Chicago to explain the project to the local community and increase
awareness about how these research efforts will impact society in the coming
years.