* 1749638
* CAREER: A Dynamic-Stochastic Approach to Rainfall and Flood Frequency Analysis Across Scales
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Daniel Wright, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 507,653.00

Floods arise from the interactions between rainfall and ground conditions such
as soil moisture and river channel dynamics. Yet, floods can also be described
as a collection of random processes using statistics in addition to physical
modeling.The relationship between flood severity and likelihood ("flood
frequency analysis") has become a centerpiece in flood risk management practice.
Changes in land use due to urbanization and climate variability implies that
existing data and methods may no longer be valid. Meanwhile, study of the links
between dynamic and statistical behavior of floods has been hindered by the lack
of long-term, high-resolution observations of rainfall, soil moisture, and
streamflow. This leaves us with limited understanding of how factors such as
soil moisture and river channel dynamics modulate extreme rainfall to produce
long-term flood frequency. This research presents a hybrid approach that uses
recent advances in hydrometeorological observations, data processing approaches,
models, and theory to better understand floods in a changing world. It also
proposes several innovative education and outreach initiatives that will reach
K-12, undergraduate and graduate students, and instructors using a combination
of physical-virtual active learning tools, interactive web-based "apps," and
lesson modules to reinforce learning and assess
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will advance understanding of the
role of four-dimensional (surface rainfall rate, time, and x,y spatial
coordinates) storm structure as a driver of rainfall and flood frequency. The
first objective focuses on regional geospatial rainfall structure and its
linkages to rainfall and flood frequencies and trends. The second objective
focuses on the physical drivers of flood frequency including rainfall, soil
moisture, and their interactions. The principal inveatigatgor will use
stochastic-dynamic modeling to establish the cross-scale links between flood
severity and frequency that have thus far proven elusive. The proposed work will
advance understanding of flood variability at multiple, coupled scales and
provides tools that leverage modern computing power, regional high-resolution
rainfall observations, and distributed computational watershed models. Using a
framework for physically-based flood frequency analysis, this research will
provide better insights into underlying drivers and their links to nonstationary
flood frequency and severity. This research has an education/outreach component
to train a diverse and "data literate" generation of professionals able to
create a flood-resilient nation. Activities and teaching modules will also
improve data literacy and geospatial understanding of flood hydrometeorology and
the water cycle among a range of audiences including UW-Madison students, K-12
science fair attendees, high school science teachers and students, water
resources practitioners, and the public. These initiatives are motivated by
recent research showing that diverse teaching approaches including group
activities, technology, and real world examples can reinforce learning and
attract underrepresented groups to STEM. The proposed work will involve graduate
students, undergraduates, and high school educators directly in the development
of education and outreach products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.