* 1749554
* Collaborative Research: The spreading of perceived exclusion
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Vivian Zayas, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 06/30/2023
* USD 362,710.00

Loneliness is a public health concern. People who feel socially disconnected
from others show reductions in psychological and physical well-being. They
behave in more antisocial or aggressive ways and they suffer declines in
cognitive abilities and motivation. Given the pain and harm of being socially
disconnected, it is unfortunate that people often incorrectly perceive others as
being the cause of social exclusion even when they are not. This research seeks
to identify the factors that make people vulnerable or resilient to false
perceptions of exclusion. It will examine people's responses to these social
misunderstandings. The long-term goal is to develop interventions that can help
people identify when they may be falsely perceiving exclusion and how such
misunderstandings can be addressed before they lead to harmful
consequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on a common, but
ambiguous, social dynamic: one-person exclusion. This unfolds when one person
(the excluder) includes another (the included) while excluding a third (the
rejected). Such dynamics are very common in everyday life. They may occur, for
example, when one person (the excluder) invites another (the included) to an
event while not inviting another person (the rejected). Past work shows that
although the included has not contributed to the exclusion, the rejected
incorrectly perceives the included as having exclusive inclinations and likely
to perpetuate exclusion in the future. This phenomenon has been called the
involuntary excluder effect. This project examines one-person exclusion as it
unfolds in naturalistic social settings over time. Using a variety of research
methods and measures (self-report, behavioral, cognitive, and
neurophysiological), the experiments address questions such as: What gives rise
to false perceptions of exclusion? How do rejected persons behave toward those
who are included by an excluder? When might included individuals succumb to
pressures of the social dynamic and become excluders themselves? Ultimately, the
research considers whether social misunderstandings are better corrected by
training people to recognize when their perceptions might be faulty or by
encouraging those caught in the middle of exclusionary dynamics (the included)
to take proactive steps to signal that they are
inclusive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.