* 1749240
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cross-linguistic activation of referential bias in second-language learners of English
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Hyunwoo Kim, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2020
* USD 16,902.00

Bilingualism is the norm in many parts of the world. Understanding how bilingual
speakers derive meaning in context is thus not only an interesting research
question about how the human mind accommodates the regular use of two or more
languages in daily life, but one that has direct implications for applied
language professionals, such as interpreters, teachers, and speech-language
pathologists working with bilinguals. Previous research has shown that
bilinguals' knowledge of one language can affect how they say and interpret
words and sentences in the other. This is called cross-linguistic activation.
The goal of this dissertation research is to contribute to our understanding of
how cross-linguistic activation affects how bilinguals make sense of language in
context, that is, beyond understanding individual words and sentences.

The proposed research will provide insight into the effect of cross-linguistic
activation at a word level on bilinguals' discourse level processing by
investigating how the strength of referential biases associated with Korean
predicates affects Korean-English bilinguals' referential processing in English.
Verb-based implicit causality (IC) creates biases for who will be mentioned
next; e.g., 'John threatened Bill' implies the subject ('John') was the cause of
the 'threaten' event, making it the most likely next referent in the discourse.
Korean, in addition to IC verbs, has a class of (subject-biased) syntactic
causative (SC) constructions, best translated as 'causing X to be Y'. A
preliminary study has shown that Korean speakers have stronger referential
biases with SC constructions than with regular IC predicates in Korean. This
project investigates the extent to which differences in bias strength associated
with SC and IC predicates in Korean influence Korean-English bilinguals' offline
and online reference processing in English. The project will collect data from
Korean-speaking learners of English and native English speakers, using both
written sentence completion (Experiment 1) and visual-world eye-tracking
(Experiment 2) paradigms. In both experiments, potentially modulating effects of
English language proficiency and learning experience on cross-linguistic
activation in referential processing will be assessed.