* 1749300
* CAREER: Understanding Process-Structure-Property Relations in Gas/Supercritical Fluid-Injected Polymer Coextrusion Foam Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Patrick C. Lee, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 02/28/2023
* USD 0.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant will promote the
progress of science by contributing new knowledge related to a novel
manufacturing process for fabricating lightweight multimaterial foam structures
that have a variety of applications in the automotive, aerospace, biomedical,
food and electronics packaging industries. Most new polymeric products contain
two or more polymers and functional additives resulting in desired properties
contributed from each component. The process extrudes multiple materials at the
same time in a single-step process using two or more polymeric materials shaped
to form a multilayer structure for unique applications. These include optical,
mechanical, and gas barrier films, such as brightness-enhancing filters for
electronic screens, ultra-strong safety and security window films, or
elastomeric barrier films for cushioning bladders in athletic shoes. Foams can
be prepared from any plastic by introducing a gas or supercritical fluid within
the plastic during processing. This award supports fundamental research that
will provide needed knowledge about a new coextrusion foam manufacturing
technology for fabricating lightweight composites. This process will also
significantly reduce production costs by decreasing material usage as well as
increasing performance-to-weight ratios through proper engineering of the
material microstructure. This interdisciplinary research encompasses
manufacturing, polymer chemistry, polymer physics and materials science.
Companies manufacturing value-added plastic materials will benefit from the
results. Students from underrepresented groups will participate in the research
and a new program will be developed with a local museum to inspire interest in
polymer materials for K-12 students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The gas/supercritical
fluid concentration-dependent crystal nucleation/growth, crystal lamellae
orientation, and subsequent bubble nucleation/growth behaviors under geometric
constraints pose fundamental challenges in the coextrusion foam process.
Further, the materials and process parameters largely influence the
microstructure and bubble morphologies. These complex, coupled phenomena affect
the properties of the final composite. The objective of this research is to
close the knowledge gap in the understanding of microstructural evolution and
bubble nucleation/growth mechanisms in coextrusion foam processes. The research
team will develop a physics-based model to understand and predict the effects of
the gas/supercritical fluid concentration and the interphase compatibility on
the microstructure evolution of semi-crystalline polymers and will conduct
experiments to verify the model. The team will also perform atomistic and
macroscopic modeling simulations to understand the bubble nucleation and growth
behaviors, and will test the hypothesis that various stress states influence the
solubility and diffusivity by using a newly developed dielectric method. Based
on these research results, the process parameters will be selected to achieve
satisfactory microstructure and foam morphologies without time-consuming trial-
and-error procedures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.