* 1749774
* CAREER: Novel Magnetic Phases in Spin Orbit Coupled Correlated Electron Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2024
* Liuyan Zhao, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 12/31/2024
* USD 729,010.00

Non-technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The practical applications of magnets date
back at least two thousand years to the invention of the compass, and thrive
nowadays in the widely used magnetic information coding and storage. These
applications are based on materials containing specific elements called 3d
transition metals. However, many more types of magnetic phases are predicted to
exist and proposed for applications. One exotic example is the quantum spin
liquid, where the spins directions are never aligned and always fluctuating,
even down to the lowest possible temperature. This could be exploited to make a
quantum computer. Another example is the magnetic multipolar phase, where the
atomic magnets have a more complex multipole structure than just a simple arrow,
that could be used for ultrahigh-speed electronics. This work focuses on a class
of oxides, and will lead to unconventional magnetic phases and ways to control
them for future applications. The PI collaborates with the University of
Michigan Museum of History to perform K-12 education outreach, such as
developing table-top demonstrations, setting up research stations, and
participating in science communication programs, and she mentors undergraduate
and graduate students with twin aims of encouraging broad participation in
research and preparing the next generation of scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;This project is directed at
novel magnetic phases in a new class of materials, 5d transition metal oxides,
where electron correlations and spin orbit coupling coexist at comparable energy
scales. Specifically, the project consists of three closely related research
efforts: (1) developing and utilizing a set of symmetry sensitive optical
techniques, magneto-optical Kerr effect, nonlinear optical spectroscopy, and
Raman spectroscopy, to probe both ground states and excitation of the magnetic
phases in spin orbit coupled correlated electron materials; (2) investigating
the evolution of these magnetic phases under static controls such as chemical
substitution and DC magnetic field, in order to drive quantum phase transitions;
(3) exploring dynamic control over these magnetic phases using electromagnetic
radiation from modern femtosecond pulsed lasers, and realize thermally
inaccessible hidden phases. The discovery of novel magnetic phases in this new
interaction regime sheds light on the understanding of physics that has in
common strong electron correlations and strong spin orbit coupling, and the
successful control over these new magnetic phases guides rational design of new
materials for realizing long sought-after quantum phases and novel
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.