* 1749782
* CAREER: Exploring nucleosome-depleted sequences for novel applications in synthetic biology
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Zengyi Shao, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 02/29/2024
* USD 551,154.00

Fully understanding how chromosomes affect cell behavior is important to many
applications in biotechnology and improving human health. Many DNA segments that
were previously thought to be just filler, or "junk" DNA, have recently been
discovered to influence the cell metabolism in important ways. This project will
study the influence of a specific subgroup of these segments on cell behavior.
In addition, the principal investigator will develop a uniquely-structured
undergraduate research program. She will also mentor next-generation STEM
(science, technology, engineering and mathematics) teachers, and promote the
participation of underrepresented minorities and persons with disabilities in
STEM fields. When completed, this project will have developed new molecular
tools for harnessing the power of biological systems to produce important
products, and helped encourage and prepare highly-skilled students with diverse
backgrounds to engage in STEM careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
addresses the low orthogonality that is frequently encountered between well-
characterized biological components and genetic contexts. The canonical Design-
Build-Test-Learn cycle dissects natural complex biological subjects into
distinct functional parts through a "subtraction" hierarchy. However, the
interplay among multiple layers in new combinations brings about unwanted design
imprecision. Selecting three distinct yeast species as testbeds, the principal
investigator will systematically characterize the highly exposed nucleosome-
depleted genomic regions and create synthetic insulators to counteract genetic
context influence on heterologous gene and pathway expression. The concept of
insulating transcriptional elements to create designed regions that regulate
gene expression with high orthogonality has been applied with some success in
bacterial genetic circuits. Efforts in yeast systems, with a higher degree of
complexity, are very limited. The highly exposed nucleosome-depleted regions
will be further exploited to address lack of stable episomal plasmids faced by
many nonconventional yeasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.