* 1749568
* CAREER:   Circuit mechanisms of cerebellar motor correction
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Abigail Person, University of Colorado at Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 02/29/2024
* USD 800,000.00

Imagine reaching for a glass of water. The sequence of actions 'reach, grip,
return, tip, and sip' is automatic, but without a cerebellum, such precise
actions are impossible. Kinetic tremors, where the limb oscillates around a
target, result from cerebellar damage and resemble the behavior of poorly tuned
feedback error-driven control systems like a bad thermostat, where sensory
readings are too slow to inform the brain that the hand is at its target,
resulting in the limb repeatedly over- and under-shooting its target. This
deficit suggests that the cerebellum normally computes a predictive signal that
bypasses slow feedback to guide movement. Here the neural pathways used to
produce anticipatory motor control are tested using novel technological
applications to manipulate cerebellar output neurons during reaching movements.
The experiments proposed will test this hypothesis using a novel closed-loop
reach paradigm using mice as a mammalian model combined with neural recordings.
The outcomes will clarify the enigmatic role of the cerebellum in online
movement correction. The context of these motor control studies will be taught
to veterans groups with an interest in movement assistive
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Imagine reaching for a glass of water. The
sequence of actions 'reach, grip, return, tip, and sip' is automatic, but
without a cerebellum, such precise actions are impossible. Kinetic tremors,
where the limb oscillates around a target, result from cerebellar damage and
resemble the behavior of feedback error-driven control systems, where slow
sensory feedback results in the limb repeatedly over- and under-shooting its
target. This deficit suggests that the cerebellum normally computes a 'forward
model', i.e. a prediction of body kinematics, bypassing slow sensory feedback to
guide movement. Physiological measurements support this model, where Purkinje
neuron activity correlates perfectly with movement kinematics, yet the utility
of this encoding is obscure at the level of the cerebellar nuclei, which form
the sole output of the cerebellum. This proposal advances the hypothesis that
the forward kinematic model of Purkinje neurons is refined in the cerebellar
nuclei via convergence with a previously unrecognized corollary discharge
afferent that exclusively targets the nuclei. The experiments proposed will test
this hypothesis using a novel closed-loop reach paradigm in mice with awake-
behaving neural recordings and neuronal branch-specific optogenetic
manipulations. The outcomes will clarify the enigmatic role of the cerebellum in
online movement correction and advance high-speed machine vision-based closed-
loop behavioral paradigms. The context of these motor control studies will be
taught to veterans groups with an interest in movement assistive
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.