* 1749911
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Prenatal and postnatal correlates of infant growth and development
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2019
* Claudia Valeggia, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2019
* USD 22,340.00

A growing body of research in biological anthropology and related disciplines
indicates that an individual's early life environment can have long-term effects
on their physiology and well-being. This doctoral dissertation project will
investigate whether maternal nutrition and breastfeeding duration are associated
with the amount and distribution of fat that infants have between birth and four
months of age, in a population with high and rising rates of infant, child, and
adult obesity. Certain fat distributions are thought to be related to the risk
of obesity, and this fundamental research will be important in characterizing
variation in infant growth and development and for comparisons with data from
other populations. The research will contribute to our broader understanding of
human biological variation and adaptations, and the evolution of modern human
life history, and could inform public health research on the global obesity
epidemic. The project will provide research training and scientific education in
a STEM field to graduate and undergraduate students from the U.S., and build
both research capacity and collaborations at the research
site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will use a longitudinal design to
collect data on infant size and fatness in Samoan infants, as they grow from
birth to four months of age, using the "gold standard" dual X-ray absorptiometry
(DEXA) technique. The use of DEXA will allow for measurement of both total body
fat and body fat distribution. She will test whether maternal nutrition during
pregnancy and breastfeeding duration are associated with how much fat infants
have at birth and four months, as well as the body regions where fat is
distributed. Greater fat stored around the organs and less fat directly stored
under the skin is thought to increase the risk for cardiovascular disease in
adults. The data generated in this project may inform the design of future
interventions that target the prevention of obesity at the earliest point. In
addition, findings from this project will contribute to the understanding of how
fat growth in early life varies by population history and the current
environmental stresses a population faces (e.g., highly pathogenic environments
and highly caloric, low nutritional environments), and will be relevant to all
human populations.