* 1749348
* Social Bases of Attitudinal Extremetization: Shared Attention versus Attitudinal Simulation
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Garriy Shteynberg, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 04/30/2023
* USD 351,339.00

In the last 20 years, Americans' social and political attitudes have grown more
extreme. Both the American public and elected officials hold increasingly
divergent and polarized views about economic and social issues. The growing
divergence in social and political attitudes hinders the nation's ability to
solve its pressing problems. This project examines the ways in which attitude
extremetization is a result of the human capacity to share attention-the ability
to sense that one is attending to information with others at the same time.
Prior research shows that sharing attention on information leads to more extreme
emotions and attitudes. It is not known why this occurs. One possibility is that
people are more likely to imagine the attitudes of those who co-attend to
information with them. By imagining the attitudes of many others, one's own
attitudes can grow more extreme. Another possibility is that people are more
likely to pay more attention to the ideas that are the focus of shared
attention. When those ideas happen to represent only one view, the view
dominates one's thoughts, resulting in more extreme attitudes. It is also
conceivable that attitudes grow more extreme under shared attention because of
both possibilities at the same time. Greater understanding of how attitudes grow
more extreme in social groups is vital to efforts to find common ground on the
social and economic challenges of today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is an
adversarial collaboration, in which scientists who disagree work together to
find common ground. Studies often claim to settle an issue, yet scientific
disagreement remains due to differences in the interpretation and understanding
of results. The principal investigator is collaborating with two other
researchers who hold a distinct view of how shared attention renders attitudes
more extreme. The researchers have agreed to work collaboratively on twelve
experiments. They will consult on every aspect of study design, execution, and
analysis, with the goal of reaching a joint understanding of the results. The
experiments test whether thoughts about the co-attendees' attitudes, and co-
attended ideas can have independent, opposite, and combined effects on
attitudinal extremetization under shared attention. Some of the studies take
place in real-world contexts of an online political media channel or online open
college course. The methods, materials, and settings of these studies
approximate the world outside of the laboratory, increasing the likelihood that
the research will support a better understanding of pressing societal
concerns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.