* 1749400
* CAREER: Microscale Deformations Underlying Multiscale Mechanics of Fiber Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Jacob Notbohm, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 04/30/2024
* USD 544,461.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award supports
fundamental research to study properties of materials made of random networks of
microscopic fibers. Applications are most direct in human health, as fibrous
materials form the structure for numerous tissues in the human body. Mechanical
properties of those tissues relate to injury, for example in tearing of
ligaments, and to disease, for example in progression of cancer. Fibrous
materials also have potential engineering applications, as they are light in
weight yet have high tolerance for damage. In both applications--human health
and engineering--it is crucial to understand the relationship between structural
properties, like fiber size and number, and mechanical properties, like
stiffness and strength. This research will establish these crucial
relationships, which will advance treatments to disease and enable engineering
applications for fibrous materials. As many future applications of this research
are in human health, there will be a need for future engineers to be trained in
both engineering and biology. Therefore, an additional objective of this project
is to enable students to apply principles from multiple different scientific
fields to solve engineering problems. For this, undergraduate students in
engineering will practice applying concepts of engineering to problems in
biology and human health. Additionally, high school students in biology will
learn how principles of physics can be used to understand biology. It is
expected that this interdisciplinary training will strengthen the engineering
and scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objective of this
research is to determine how properties of the individual fibers within a
network affect the mechanics under different loading conditions. To accomplish
this, experiments will subject fibrous networks to both global and local loads
and measure the displacements at the scale of the fibers. Results will be
compared for networks having different fiber concentration, length, and
crosslinking. In parallel, a theoretical model simulating the mechanics of how
each fiber bends and stretches will be used to test the state-of-the-art theory
against experimental data. The results will establish the fiber properties,
strain magnitudes, and length scales for which nonlinearity, heterogeneity,
nonaffinity, and plasticity each affect the mechanics. Together, these findings
will establish which deformation mechanisms must be accounted for in a model
that predicts the response of fibrous materials to general loading
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.