* 1749594
* Picture book reading: Investigating a key source of linguistic input for early language development
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Jessica Montag, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2022
* USD 427,933.00

In many homes, schools, and daycare settings, parents and other caregivers
engage young children with picture books. This project examines how differences
in home picture book reading practices accounts for individual differences in
children's language development. This project also involves testing whether
greater lexical and grammatical diversity (a characteristic of picture book
reading) promote word learning. The text of picture books differs from typical
child-directed speech in ways that may be important for language learning. For
example, picture book text often describes people and entities not present in
the here-and-now, and is characterized by narrative structures unlike typical
speech. In addition, the text of picture books contains more unique words and a
greater number of complex sentences than typical speech. This means that
children who are often read picture books may hear words and sentences that they
may not otherwise hear. This project will help researchers understand
trajectories of language development and factors that contribute to language
development for children. The results of this project will have implications for
programs that aim to improve early language outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project tests the hypothesis that the distributional differences between child-
directed speech and texts may explain the observed benefits of picture book
reading. Given the systematic differences between the language contained in
picture book text and typical child-directed speech, exposure to picture books
may provide children with valuable language learning opportunities. To test this
hypothesis, this project first aims to better understand what picture book
reading looks like in naturalistic contexts in real homes. Large scale surveys
about home reading practices will be administered to parents and primary
caregivers. In addition, children and caregivers will be recorded during picture
book reading in order to collect data about caregiver-child interactions. Next,
families will be given sets of simple or complex picture books to read at home,
in order to manipulate the language input that children experience. This
manipulation of the language input will provide a means by which the researchers
can examine the longitudinal effects of picture book reading on vocabulary and
other language outcomes. Given that picture book text is characterized by
greater contextual and syntactic diversity than typical speech, this project
will demonstrate whether these attributes make picture books a particularly good
or poor word-learning tool for children. The results of this project will
advance the understanding of the role language input plays in language
development, and will clarify the manner in which picture books contribute to
language learning trajectories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.