* 1749824
* CAREER: The systematic instability of risk preferences in economic decision-making
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Cary Frydman, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/28/2023
* USD 400,000.00

Decision-making under risk affects a wide array of phenomena from retirement
savings decisions, to entrepreneurial start-up rates, to the pricing of
financial assets. One well-known feature of existing data is that people shift
from risk seeking in some situations (e.g., buying a lottery ticket), to risk
aversion in others (e.g., purchasing insurance). To explain this basic
instability of risk taking, economists have recently proposed new theories in
which attention directly shapes risk-taking. However, empirical work that tests
these new attention-based theories has lagged substantially due to constraints
on data availability. In this CAREER proposal, this problem is addressed by
collecting direct measures of attention in experiments using eye-tracking and
neural data to inform the mathematical modeling of behavior and decision
processes. The work will also use proprietary data from the field to test the
generalizability of the main findings from the controlled laboratory
experiments. Ultimately, the goal of this work is to integrate research on
attention into standard economic analyses, which will dramatically increase
explanatory power of current economic models and inform public policy. The
educational component of this project will target several different levels of
education from middle school students to PhD candidates. The PI will create a
new undergraduate course in neuroeconomics, offer summer research internships to
undergraduates, and train a business school PhD student in cutting edge methods
in behavioral and neuroeconomics. There will also be a significant outreach
component in which the PI will work with a STEM elementary school to broaden
access to basic principles of behavioral economics. &lt;br/&gt;The overall
objective of the proposed research is to develop novel experimental tests of
attention-based theories of economic choice. There are three specific research
goals. First, the PI will conduct an experimental test, using eye tracking data,
to characterize the attention function that maps monetary payoffs into measures
of attention. Under several of the theories to be tested, there is an assumption
that attention to monetary payoffs is deployed in a manner similar to how
attention is allocated to sensory stimuli (e.g., a visual photo). The experiment
will be designed to test these properties, which will provide much needed
guidance for a rapidly growing theoretical literature. Second, the PI will
experimentally test for broader sources of attention allocation to payoffs --
including visual properties of the choice set. The PI will also test for
feedback loops between attention and risk preferences. Third, the PI will test
whether the attention mechanism that affects risk taking in a controlled
laboratory setting can be generalized to high-stakes environments in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.