* 1750744
* CAREER: Toward a theory for smart stormwater systems
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Branko Kerkez, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Many cities across the United States maintain large networks of stormwater
basins, canals, and underground pipes. When it rains, this infrastructure moves
water and pollutants away from buildings to nearby rivers and streams. In many
cities, these stormwater systems are too small or too old, resulting in
dangerous flooding and pollution of downstream rivers and lakes. Upgrading
infrastructure is a costly alternative. Instead of relying on new construction,
the PI will demonstrate how existing stormwater systems can be used more
efficiently and made "smarter" through the use of wireless sensors, valves, and
pumps to address this national issue. This approach will enable automatic
control of stormwater systems to reduce flooding and improve water quality. To
this end, the PI will investigate computational methods to embed stormwater
systems with "intelligence," helping to reduce the cost of improving US
infrastructure while protecting public health and the environment. The PI will
also develop training programs for a new generation of technicians, who will
deploy and maintain smart stormwater systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will
improve the fundamental understanding of the water flow and water quality
benefits that can be achieved through the real-time control of urban watersheds.
Results of this research will lead to a theoretical and conceptual framework to
begin studying the impacts of autonomous technologies on the scale of entire
watersheds. The research hypothesis of this proposal is that "smart" stormwater
systems will vastly shrink the size of infrastructure required to manage runoff
pollution. The hypothesis will be tested across three objectives: (1)
investigate new algorithms, based on dynamical systems theory and reinforcement
learning to control flows across city-scale stormwater systems, (2) study the
distributed real-time control of water quality across the scale of entire
watersheds with a focus on removing of sediment-bound and dissolved pollutants,
and (3) explore how competing water flow and water quality goals can be unified
to resiliently manage urban watersheds in real-time. Results of this research
will allow entire watersheds to be controlled, akin to large distributed
treatment plants, while vastly improving the fundamental understanding of the
benefits, tradeoffs, and performance limits of "smart" water systems. All
findings, data and algorithms will be shared freely with other researchers and
practitioners through an open source web portal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.