* 1750511
* CAREER: CDS&amp;E: Theory, Models and Computer Simulation of Molecular Recognition Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Emilio Gallicchio, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 631,358.00

Professor Emilio Gallicchio of Brooklyn College of the City University of New
York is supported by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models, and
Computational Methods and Chemistry of Life Processes programs in the Division
of Chemistry to develop theoretical models, computational algorithms, and
simulation software to study molecular recognition processes. Molecular
recognition---the ability of molecules to recognize and bind specifically to
other molecules---is a fundamental aspect of all physicochemical processes, and
plays a central role in cellular interactions and biomolecular function. Among
the many examples in nature are the self-assembly of viruses in infected cells
preparing to attack other cells; chemical signals directing embryos to form
specific organs and limbs; and the mediation of thought and memory in the brain
through chemical messenger exchange. In industrial settings, the principles of
molecular recognition guide the development of new drugs, advanced materials,
catalysts and chemical sensors. However, quantitative models do not yet reach
the level of atomic resolution and reliability necessary for designing molecules
that target specific partners. Molecules recognize other molecules based on
static properties such as shape and charge. However, they are also dynamical
entities that perform recognition through the ability of binding partners to
change shape and assume complementary conformations. Dr. Gallicchio is
developing advanced techniques and software to target these complex features and
capture the influence of molecular motion and flexibility on molecular
recognition processes. The research is being carried out with active
participation from Chemistry undergraduate students who, working with partnering
experimental laboratories, interactively test computational predictions against
measurements. The software and method development efforts involve Physics, Math,
and Computer Science students. An important goal of the project is to help
students from challenging socio-economic backgrounds to become the next
generation of broad-thinking scientists, capable of tackling complex problems
from multiple, convergent perspectives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The likelihood of
interaction between two molecular species is related to the standard free energy
of binding, or, equivalently, the equilibrium constant for bimolecular
association. The goal of this project is to develop theoretical models and
computational algorithms to accurately and efficiently compute binding free
energies from first principles, and to understand how free energies are
influenced by molecular properties. A statistical analytic theory of binding
relates physical quantities such as the geometry of the binding site, the size
of the ligand, and the strength of their interactions, to dynamical data
produced from binding free energy simulations. This theory is being used to
improve binding free energy methods through the use of massively-parallel non-
equilibrium protocols, and to build an automated classification procedure for
molecular complexes based on the parameters estimated from the statistical
model. The code developed for this project is being disseminated as high-
performance, automated, freely available, and well-documented software,
supporting a variety of platforms and operating systems, including computational
grids and heterogeneous high-performance computing systems. The ability to treat
dynamical aspects of binding has application to novel chemical synthesis,
mitigation of chemical hazards, drug discovery, and materials design. Research
and educational activities are closely integrated within the project and are
providing deserving students from challenging socio-economic backgrounds with
the scientific and technological skills to enter the modern workforce, while
planting the seeds for growing future generations of research
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.