* 1750575
* CAREER: New Paradigms for Online Machine Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Karthik Sridharan, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 02/28/2023
* USD 550,000.00

We live in a technology-driven world, where users interact with large-scale,
automated systems on a daily basis. Online recommendation systems, search
engines and personalized medicine are just a few examples of systems that use
Machine Learning (ML) algorithms at their core. The long term success of ML as a
field relies on transforming it into an easily usable, seamless technology with
rigorous, provable guarantees on performance. Further, to have a positive impact
on society, ML technologies need to be equipped to handle the social challenges
that accompany any large multi-user systems. The overarching goal of this CAREER
project is to make socially-responsible ML a readily accessible black-box
technology that is applicable in large multi-user interactive systems. In
particular, the project focuses on three concrete challenges. The first
challenge is to make ML a plug-and-play technology by automating the process of
designing task specific ML algorithms. The second challenge is to develop ML
methods for modern applications such as predicting user preferences in social
networks, where data is evolving and complexly interconnected. The third
challenge is to develop theory and algorithms for recommendation systems that
are socially responsible and do not polarize its users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
recent years, exploring inherent connections between probability theory and
sequential prediction problems have lead to a unifying theory and algorithm
design principles for online learning. This CAREER project will build on these
developments. Using the so called Burkholder method from probability theory and
advances in the field of mathematical programming, the project will aim at
automating the process of designing new and effective online learning
algorithms. Building on the recently developed idea of online relaxations, the
project will introduce novel methodology for designing computationally efficient
algorithms for learning from interconnected data points. Finally, using and
extending ideas from classical statistics to deal with control and nuisance
variables, the project will develop new methods for recommender systems that can
avoid polarizing users. The CAREER program will advance STEM education by
developing new educational components related to ML. ``Machine Learning for the
Masses'' workshops will be co-organized with Women In Computing at Cornell aimed
at involving women and underrepresented minorities and exposing undergraduates
to research and job opportunities in the field of ML during their formative
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.