* 1750746
* CAREER: Experimental Investigation of the Transport Properties of Sulfide Melts at Upper Mantle Conditions
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2018,11/30/2021
* Anne Pommier, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 11/30/2021
* USD 593,079.00

This CAREER award is designed as an experimental study to understand how molten
iron sulfides percolate inside the Earth. Molten iron sulfides are crucial
geochemical and geophysical components of our planet's interior. Their mobility
inside the planet has shaped the structure and dynamics of the Earth, and thus,
studying the behavior of sulfides at depth is key to understanding the Earth's
evolution. The measurements of two properties, electrical conductivity and
viscosity, will be conducted on iron sulfide melts over a wide range of pressure
and temperature conditions that are relevant to the Earth's upper mantle. When
combined with geophysical observations, these results have the potential to
detect the presence of sulfide melts at depth and estimate their mobility at
small (mm) and large (km) scales, which may lead to the reinterpretation of some
geophysical anomalies that are measured on the Earth's surface. The experimental
data set will also be relevant to the interior of other terrestrial planets. The
research outcomes will be integrated with an extensive education initiative that
consists of helping K-12 schoolteachers at the San Diego Unified School District
promote earth science research into their courses. The investigator and her
group will be working with science education leaders at Scripps Institute of
Oceanography (SIO) and San Diego Unified School District (SDUSD) to design
training workshops for the teachers around the experimental results from this
project. Several undergraduate and graduate students, as well as one postdoc
researcher will be supported as part of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
interconnectivity and mobility of sulfide melts seem to depend highly on the
composition of the melt phase as well as on redox conditions, suggesting that
there is a fundamental need to study the effect of melt chemistry and redox
conditions on the transport properties of sulfide melts. High-pressure and high-
temperature experiments will be conducted up to 10 GPa and up to 1700°C at UCSD-
SIO and APS-GSECARS. Emphasis will be placed on two parameters affecting sulfide
melts' mobility: chemistry and redox conditions. Sample compositions will be in
the Fe-S-O-Ni-Cu system and oxygen fugacity will range from IW-1 to IW+4,
corresponding to the Iron-Wüstite (IW) redox buffer. Experimental results will
be applied to different tectonic contexts where the chemistry and redox
conditions enhance sulfide melt interconnectivity and where geophysical
(seismic, electromagnetic) observations indicate anomalies at different depths
in the upper mantle. This investigation of the transport properties of sulfide
compounds encompasses mineral physics and geophysics, and is relevant to
economic geology (e.g., metal transport related to ore deposit formation),
planetary science (e.g., metal-silicate differentiation), as well as metal
industry (e.g., strength and plasticity of metal alloys). The education
initiative that will be designed around the scientific outcomes of the project
supports efforts that integrate next generation earth science standards into
instructional practices at the K-12 level. This novel collaboration with science
education specialists will have direct impact on the earth science education of
SDUSD students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.