* 1750663
* CAREER:   Signal processing in the Erk pathway: dynamics, decisions, and development
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2023
* Jared Toettcher, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 03/31/2023
* USD 1,308,263.00

One of the most exciting and provocative ideas in modern biology is the notion
that cells can be "reprogrammed" and engineered to perform a desired function.
Yet the ability to manipulate cellular responses is still quite limited in two
key ways. First, researchers have not deciphered the instructions used by cells
to adopt a particular response. Second, even if researchers perfectly knew which
instructions to provide, they lack the tools to deliver them to a particular
cell of interest, at a precise time, without affecting its neighbors. This
research will address both of these key challenges by studying a protein, Erk,
that plays a fundamental role in organizing cell decisions in all multicellular
organisms. This project will rely on a combination of cutting-edge tools: live-
cell biosensors to measure natural Erk responses and engineered, light-sensitive
proteins to alter Erk activity at precise times and locations in a tissue. This
comprehensive understanding of how Erk activity patterns control responses at
the cell, tissues, and whole organism scales and how one can alter those
patterns to control cell fate. These studies will be integrated with an
education plan to train the next generation of quantitative biologists and to
foster early exposure to research for historically underrepresented
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of the researcher's lab is to
address two fundamental problems in cellular systems biology. How are a small
number of highly conserved signaling pathways repurposed in different cell types
and organisms to encode information about the external world? Which features of
the signals sent by these pathways are sufficient to specify cell-, tissue-, and
organism-level phenotypes? Fulfilling these two aims will help to bridge the gap
from a static genotype to complex multicellular phenotypes and define the
computations that are carried out by the groups of proteins that work together
to process cellular information. The research plan is focused on an extensively
studied signaling pathway, the Erk pathway, which plays essential roles across
eukaryotic organisms. Although the individual proteins comprising the pathway
have been thoroughly studied by genetic and biochemical approaches, live-cell
Erk biosensors have recently revealed exquisite spatiotemporal patterns of
activity: oscillations in individual cells, propagating waves across tissues,
and a fast succession of spatial patterns during embryogenesis. The work will
dissect these ornate patterns using a combination of quantitative measurements
and highly controlled optogenetic inputs that can be used to activate Erk
signaling in any spatial or temporal pattern. In particular, the research seeks
to: (1) dissect the mechanism that generates pulses of Erk activity in a
laboratory model of the epidermis; (2) determine how Erk dynamics control gene
expression and cell fate in epidermal cells; and (3) unravel how Erk signaling
affects tissue morphogenesis in the developing fly embryo, where exquisite
signaling patterns appear over time and in 3D space throughout the organism. The
research is complemented by an education plan directed at broadening the early-
stage research opportunities available to undergraduates, particularly
historically underrepresented students, and at disseminating the tools of
quantitative biology and optogenetics to the next generation of cell and
developmental biology trainees.&lt;br/&gt;The Project is jointly funded by
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and Integrative Organismal Systems, with
additional support provided by the Directorate's Rule of Life Venture
Fund.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.