* 1750116
* CAREER: Quality Matters: Dynamic, Static and Proactive Analyses for Automated Program Repair
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Claire Le Goues, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 02/29/2024
* USD 606,350.00

Society is increasingly reliant on software that affects human safety, privacy,
and other important concerns. Software engineers have many tools at their
disposal to identify errors and write correct code. However, programmer
productivity and software quality are serious problems due to the number of open
bugs, the negative impact of these bugs, and limited time available to
developers to fix them. A recently emerging area of research develops techniques
for automatic program repair. This project will advance the state of software
testing and repair by addressing some of the challenges that must be overcome if
automatic program repair is to become a common tester's tool. The outcomes of
this research will reduce the cost of software defects, improve the quality of
software, and improve productivity of programmers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
attack this problem, the project will develop repair techniques that synthesize
new code based on Hoare logic and provide better patch guidance for developers
through automatic reduction of false negatives. The research will extend
separation logic-based bug-finding analyses to construct verified fixes. This
involves dynamic strategies that search for and then compose diverse solutions
to a given bug repair problem into measurably general patches, also static
techniques that construct patches for previously undiscovered bugs that are
difficult to find via testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.