* 1750558
* CAREER: Safe and Efficient Extensions for Low-Latency Multitenant Storage
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Ryan Stutsman, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 04/30/2024
* USD 558,000.00

Businesses are moving data and applications into the cloud, meaning that many
applications and data are consolidated efficiently in one place on fewer
servers. Cloud storage services must keep the data of thousands of customers
separated while also allowing customers to operate on it efficiently. Safely
intermixing customer-provided operations over data is problematic. Historically,
processor hardware isolates programs, but increasing data access rates make that
costly. This project develops a new approach to storage that allows safe
operation on data without hardware protection using recent advances in
programming languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach combats data movement
between disaggregated storage and compute nodes by having untrusted tenant
extensions pushed to Sandstorm, a new cloud storage system. Sandstorm's insight
is that storage extensions can use language-level isolation to eliminate
hardware isolation overheads that cannot be avoided today: not with virtual
machines, containers, nor serverless Lambdas. Sandstorm also eliminates copying
data for safety, so extensions benefit from low-level hardware functionality
like zero-copy network transmission. The project will develop multitenant
benchmarks, low-cost performance-isolated concurrency mechanisms for multicores,
techniques to minimize data movement within servers, storage extensions that
demonstrate the benefits, and distributed extensions over
clusters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As power limits data center scale, minimizing
data movement out of storage becomes crucial. Sandstorm enables any cloud
developer to accelerate data-intensive applications like real-time social
network and natural graph analysis and fine-grained coordination of hundreds of
thousands of autonomous vehicles. All artifacts will be developed openly under a
permissive MIT license for academic and industrial use. The project includes
development of a new education platform for teaching students about distributed
systems and cloud computing at the graduate, undergraduate, and high school
levels with a set of serverless computing labs targeted toward University of
Utah students and summer camp attendees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All data, code,
experiments, and benchmarks will be open and made publicly available through
http://github.com/utah-scs/ and at http://utah.systems/ and retained for a
minimum of three years beyond the project award period. All data, code,
benchmarks, and experiments associated with all published results will also be
hosted at http://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataverse/utah-scs as part of the Harvard
Dataverse for long-term retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.