* 1750375
* CAREER: Shape-based differentiation of RNA elements using small molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Amanda Hargrove, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 05/31/2024
* USD 714,827.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Professor Amanda Hargrove of Duke University to investigate
critical differences in the shape of regulatory RNA structures through the
development of novel technologies. The central dogma of molecular biology has
long stated that DNA codes for RNA, which codes for protein, which then carries
out a cell's important functions; but there is a rapidly growing appreciation
for the functions of RNA itself in fundamental biology. At the same time, there
is a pressing need for new techniques to investigate these functions, including
how RNA interacts with other molecules. In this work, Hargrove and coworkers
develop new technology to meet this need using pattern-based recognition, which
is similar to human's sense of taste, wherein a handful of receptors can
identify a wide range of flavors based on how the components of those flavors
differentially interact with the receptors. In this application, small organic
molecules are used as receptors to evaluate different "flavors" of RNA structure
and rapidly reveal how the shape of RNA corresponds to its function. The assay
developed will be widely accessible for future investigations into the
classification of RNA functional motifs, and the library of small molecule
receptors and their properties will be a publicly available and searchable
database. The knowledge and technology produced provide the basis for novel,
fundamental discoveries into the structure and function of regulatory RNAs and
thus, the central dogma of molecular biology, which impacts all areas of life,
from the environment to human health. These innovative technologies push the
limits of differential sensing to include structural biology, paving the way for
the structure-based classification of additional biomacromolecules. This
research integrates with the educational plans of the PI to: 1) implement
research-based experiments and collaborative projects among diverse
undergraduate and high school students throughout North Carolina; 2) increase
student understanding of noncovalent interactions via accessible visualization
and application activities; 3) introduce students to interdisciplinary research
and real-world applications of chemistry and chemical biology; and 4) increase
student engagement in the study of STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-
term research goal of the PI is to establish guiding principles for small
molecule and protein recognition of RNA and to use these principles for the
development of chemical probes for RNA structure and function. The CAREER
research objective is to draw upon exquisitely tunable small molecules to
develop timesaving and simple technologies that elucidate critical principles in
RNA recognition and related function. The identification of functional yet non-
protein coding RNA (ncRNA) sequences has led to a revolution in molecular
biology, yet myriad questions surround the molecular function of ncRNA. These
knowledge gaps include the driving principles behind ncRNA molecular
interactions, particularly the influence of three-dimensional shape, and how
these interactions guide ncRNA-dependent processes. Fundamental investigations
of ncRNA biochemistry are hindered by challenges in molecular characterization,
including the intensive time and expertise required to determine 3D RNA
structure. Using techniques recently developed in the lab of the PI, the
proposed work addresses a number of fundamental molecular questions, including:
1) How does shape influence small molecule:RNA recognition? 2) What RNA
structural elements can small molecule receptors differentiate? 3) How do
varying environmental conditions impact this differentiation? 4) How do base
modifications influence RNA recognition? 5) Can arrays of small molecules
differentiate functional RNA elements in a manner comparable to or better than
proteins? These novel, small molecule-based methods for understanding RNA
recognition provide ready access to chemical insights that reveal both the
fundamental principles of small molecule:RNA recognition and the pivotal role
RNA shape plays in regulating key cellular functions, ultimately leading to new
knowledge in the ncRNA field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.