* 1750931
* CAREER: Mathematical Modeling and Computational Tools for in vivo Astrocyte Activity
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Guoqiang Yu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 05/31/2023
* USD 529,249.00

This project aims to develop new computational tools to interpret and analyze
the activity of astrocytes. Astrocytes, one type of glial cells and the most
populous cells in brain, have recently been found to have much more active
functionality than previously thought. Astrocytes closely listen to and
proactively regulate the nervous system, yet their exact roles in normal and
pathological brains remain elusive. Recent technological progress makes it
possible to monitor astrocyte activity with unprecedented spatial and temporal
resolution, but considering the complexity and scale of astrocyte activity data,
rigorous computational modeling is critically needed. This project will
establish a solid foundation for quantitative analysis of astrocyte activity,
enabling in vivo analysis, greater reproducibility, and benefits for
understanding brain disorders. The computationally challenging problems
formulated in this project are expected to be valuable for other areas of
computer science, serving as examples to build new statistical models and
develop powerful generic machine-learning theory and algorithms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will develop a comprehensive data-
driven framework to model astrocyte activity, with the specific goals of
automatically detecting calcium events, identifying functional independent units
and characterizing their individual and systems manifestation. Three research
objectives include: (1) developing computational approaches to detect calcium
events (2) systems modeling and quantification of astrocyte activity, and (3)
application to in vivo astrocytes of mouse and other model animals to showcase
the usefulness of the proposed methodology by addressing several different
current biological questions. The educational objective is to help maintain the
competitive vitality of the U.S. computational neuroscience workforce, and to
deepen the understanding of core computational concepts, by incorporating
cutting-edge computational neuroscience problems into the engineering
curriculum, by improving the recruitment and retention of women and minority
students, by reaching out to K-12 students to inspire their interest in this
interdisciplinary field, and by interacting with undergraduate students to offer
opportunities and encourage them to choose computational neuroscience as a
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.