* 1750553
* CAREER:   Host-Parasite Coevolutionary Dynamics: Testing key hypotheses in host mating system evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2024
* Levi Morran, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Paco Moore
* 04/30/2024
* USD 852,404.00

Reproduction is the most essential biological process. It influences how DNA is
inherited from one generation to the next. Organisms actually have many
different ways of reproducing. It is unclear why the most common should involve
genetic contributions from two parents (bi-parental reproduction) as opposed to
one (uni-parental reproduction). One important consequence of bi-parental
reproduction is that it produces more genetically variable offspring. Why this
is an advantage, however, is unclear. One possibility is that genetically
variable offspring are more likely to escape infection from parasites and
diseases that have adapted to the parents' genetic make-up. Another is that the
genetic variability is helpful more generally for adaptation to changing
environments. This project uses the nematode worm Caenorhabditis elegans, which
can reproduce either uni- or bi-parentally, along with its bacterial parasite,
Serratia marcescens, to experimentally test these ideas. The project will also
contribute to teaching and training students at many levels, providing
opportunities for them to learn scientific methods in a hands-on fashion. It
will integrate research with education in undergraduate teaching labs and will
include developing and implementing new teaching laboratory classes. It will
also train graduate students. Finally, it will include an outreach program that
will bring hypothesis testing science to a neighborhood with many young children
from underrepresented groups in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The questions of
both how and why bi-parental reproduction is maintained in nature largely remain
a mystery in evolutionary biology. Currently, the Red Queen hypothesis (RQH) is
the most well supported hypothesis regarding the evolution and maintenance of
outcrossing. The central prediction of the RQH is that negative frequency-
dependent selection, imposed by coevolving parasites, favors reproduction via
outcrossing over self-fertilization in host populations. Although a rapidly
growing number of studies demonstrate the ability of coevolving parasites to
favor host outcrossing over host self-fertilization, the mode of selection
imposed by coevolving parasites, and in general, the coevolutionary dynamics
between outcrossing hosts and their respective parasites remain unclear. Here,
the fundamental predictions of the RQH will be comprehensively tested in perhaps
the only experimental system currently capable of permitting such a test.
Specifically, the host, Caenorhabditis elegans, and parasite, Serratia
marcescens, populations will be experimentally evolved to determine if
coevolving parasites are necessary for the evolution and maintenance of
outcrossing, or if only a dynamic changing environment is required. After which,
the phenotypic and underlying genetic changes in the hosts and parasites, as
well as the mode (or modes) of selection that result from antagonistic
coevolution, will be determined through a combination of phenotypic assays,
next-generation sequencing, functional genetic testing via transformation, and
subsequent experimental evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.