* 1750785
* CAREER:  A novel microbial electrosynthesis platform built on a model electron transfer pathway
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Michaela TerAvest, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 03/31/2024
* USD 541,343.00

Two major challenges facing society today are generating fuels and chemicals
from sustainable materials, and storing energy produced by solar and wind
technologies. Both feats are achieved by bacteria in a process called microbial
electrosynthesis, in which bacteria convert carbon dioxide into fuels and
chemicals using electricity as a power source. This project will develop
bacteria with improved electrosynthesis capability. This project will also train
graduate and undergraduate students in synthetic biology to be the next
generation of scientists in this emerging field. The educational efforts extend
to adult and primary school audiences, to broaden understanding of synthetic
biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work takes a novel approach to
enable microbial electrosynthesis by developing a platform for electricity
uptake in well-characterized organisms that are amenable to genetic engineering.
Preliminary results demonstrate electricity-driven reduction of acetoin to
2,3-butanediol in the electrochemically-active bacterium Shewanella oneidensis
MR-1. This is the first-ever demonstration that electricity can be used to
generate intracellular reducing power through a defined biochemical pathway.
Building on these exciting results, work is proposed to enhance electron
transfer rates in this system, connect the system to production of fuels and
chemicals in Escherichia coli, and identify the native pathways necessary for
electron uptake. This will result in a generalizable platform that can be used
to drive a wide range of reduction reactions, including carbon dioxide fixation,
and provide a strong foundation for further research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award is supported by the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental and Transport Systems and the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.