* 1750632
* CAREER: Integrative Approaches to Uncovering Complex Genotype-Phenotype Relationships in High Dimensional Genomics Data
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2018,11/30/2019
* Xinghua Shi, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 11/30/2019
* USD 335,547.00

The unprecedented accumulation of genomic data offers a unique opportunity to
dive deep into the understanding of biology given appropriate tools to mine such
data. This research will enable and accelerate the capabilities needed to
realize the promise envisioned for big data genomics, and establish a new
paradigm for genomics by fully exploiting the gamut of genomic datasets to
better understand basis biology. Specifically, this project will combine robust
statistical modeling and rigorous computational approaches toward predictive
modeling of genomics data. Successful completion of the project will result in
new knowledge, new tools, and most importantly long-lasting transformative
enhancement of the usability and significance of genomic data.

This project will have impact on education in genomics and bioinformatics at
undergraduate and graduate levels and will outreach to K-12 students and
underrepresented groups. To capitalize on the gamut of genomic data toward
better understanding of biological systems, the community is in dire need of
accurate, robust, scalable, and efficient methods to interpret such data toward
predictive modeling of various phenotypes. Echoing the PI's overarching career
goal of providing easy-to-use data analytics and software tools to computational
and experimental scientists in life sciences, this research will result in a
suite of tools that allow biologists to conduct novel scientific research in
elucidating the landscape of genotype-phenotype relationships. The project will
advance science through 1) novel Bayesian hierarchical models that incorporate
domain knowledge to predict phenotypes from genotypes; 2) iterative pipelines to
capitalize on the new models for uncovering the complex relationships between
genotypes and phenotypes; and 3) new software modules integrated with existing
data science infrastructure for scalable modeling and visualization of large-
scale and high-dimensional genomic data. Further information may be found at
https://shilab.uncc.edu.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.