* 1750006
* CAREER: Tailoring hormone responses in plants via synthetic signal integration devices
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Anna Stepanova, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kan Wang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,275,899.00

The plant hormone, auxin is an important plant-made growth regulator that
governs multiple aspects of plant growth and physiology and acts at every stage
in the life of the plant. The goal of this project is to generate new molecular
tools to precisely control where and when auxin is made as a way to manipulate
plant growth, particularly in the root. Taking advantage of the powerful gene
editing and targeting technology (CRISPR), this project generates programmable
genetic devices (biological logic gates), that make it possible to turn genes of
interest (such as auxin biosynthesis genes) on and off at will. The basic
principles and tools developed in this project have the potential for broad
applications in agriculture and beyond. The protocols and materials generated in
this study serve as the basis for a new Synthetic Biology course for upper level
undergraduate and beginning graduate students at NC State University. In
addition, the investigator has adapted some of these materials for workshops
that provide training and resources for high school teachers. The investigator
also establishes a molecular biology tool "lending library" that enables local
teachers to execute molecular experiments in their classrooms. Furthermore,
continuation of the previously established bilingual (English and Spanish)
hands-on Plants4Kids demonstrations with live plants and seeds at the NC Museum
of Natural Sciences and local elementary schools brings the excitement of
experimental sciences to the youngest audiences. These activities expose young
people to scientific methods and demystify agricultural and plant genetic
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biology research is often restricted by the
choice of promoters available to drive the expression of genes of interest in
complex patterns and at desired levels. To overcome this limitation, a series of
easily programmable CRISPR-based synthetic genetic circuits are developed to
integrate multiple inputs from previously described synthetic and natural
promoters. These new tools take advantage of crRNA:tracrRNA gRNA pairs and
combine inputs from two or more different drivers/promoters to delimit where a
dCas9-based synthetic transcription factors activate or represses target gene
expression. The proposed approach rests on two or more pseudo-orthogonal gRNA
pairs and is compatible with the construction of all basic logic gates to
produce multiple derived patterns of targeted gene expression. In theory, this
technology can produce hundreds of orthogonal genetic components that in
combination perform complex logic operations. The new strategy is not only
scalable, but also enables tuning of gene expression levels, thus providing an
unprecedented degree of flexibility in targeted gene expression. To demonstrate
the utility of the new approach, the investigator regulates the tissue specific
expression of local auxin production in roots in an auxin-deficient mutant and
interrogates the effects on root architecture; thus addressing a long-standing
question on the role of local auxin production in maintaining the stem cell
niche or plant roots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.