* 1750483
* CAREER:Designing Robots that Learn: Closing the Gap Between Machine Learning and Engineering
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Byron Boots, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Erion Plaku
* 08/31/2020
* USD 188,141.00

Robotics has enjoyed great success when a robot's interaction with its
environment can be precisely defined. However, if the models that robots use to
predict, plan, and control their behaviors are inaccurate, it can lead to
suboptimal or even dangerous behaviors. Unfortunately, as robots and their
environments become more complex, it is increasingly difficult to accurately
specify robot behavior. An alternate approach is to learn the models from
experience, but most such approaches need large amounts of data, in a variety of
situations, which is practically infeasible to collect. This project attempts to
combine the strengths of hand-crafted, physics-based models and machine learning
algorithms to tackle such problems. Such a combined approach will better
position engineers to design robots that can operate in less-structured real-
world environments. The project also addresses educational goals related to this
vision by providing cross-disciplinary experiences that combine machine learning
and robotics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop new
theory and algorithms that close the gap between machine learning and
engineering approaches to robotics, which have traditionally been studied
separately. While engineering uses physics knowledge to provide
interpretability, transparency, and guarantees about the reliability and
robustness of engineered systems, machine learning studies data and information,
and provides guarantees that focus on the expressivity of models, computational
cost, and sample efficiency of learning algorithms. The current project consists
of three research initiatives to bring these disciplines closer together. The
first aims to develop new semi-parametric models for robotics that combine
parametric physical models and non-parametric statistical models. The second
will tackle the problem of learning state space models from data when given
incomplete information about dynamics and state. The third will investigate how
structural knowledge from engineering can be used to constrain the hypothesis
space of nonparametric learning algorithms and deep neural network
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.