* 1750694
* CAREER: Multiscale Modeling of Polymersomes
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,11/30/2023
* Sharon Loverde, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2023
* USD 486,545.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports
theoretical and computational research and education on how chain-like molecular
units, or polymers, can assemble themselves to form vesicles that confine a
solution. The vesicles, called polymersomes, have diverse applications in the
soft materials community as drug delivery devices or even as tiny, nanoscale,
flasks for chemical reactions. The shape of the polymersome can be tailored in
response to external stimuli such as temperature or type of solvent. The PI will
focus on polymersomes made of a particular kind of polymer that contains a
hydrophilic molecular building block, one that can dissolve or mix with water,
that is connected to a hydrophobic molecular building block which does not mix
well with water. At low concentrations in water, depending on the polymer length
and exact ratio of hydrophobic to hydrophilic groups, these polymers can
assemble into spherical shapes, worm-like shapes, or vesicle-like shapes. The PI
will use computation and focus investigation on the self-assembly of these
polymers into polymersomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will use molecular
dynamics simulation methods to investigate both the self-assembly of these
polymersomes as well as their elastic properties. In molecular dynamics, the
rule by which atoms and molecules interact with each other is mathematically
described by a force field. This award will create new force fields to simulate
polymersomes at large length-scales on the order of microns and long time-scales
on the order of hundreds of microseconds. The PI will aim to develop these force
fields so that they accurately describe the elastic properties of the
polymersomes. In addition, these force fields will be used to investigate how
adding change to the polymers changes the properties of the polymersome
membrane. Furthermore, the PI will utilize specialized techniques in molecular
dynamics simulation to investigate the formation of pores in the membrane, as
well as change the membrane shape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complementing the above
research activities, proposed educational and outreach activities include
strengthening the local educational and research environment of College of
Staten Island and City University of New York (CUNY), and more closely
integrating the institutions with local NY teachers. Working with a local high
school teacher who is an alumna of College of Staten Island, the PI has
developed several course modules that introduce students to concepts in
chemistry. The PI will test and assess the impact of these modules. Moreover,
the PI will establish a two- day workshop to introduce local high school
teachers to computational chemistry and high-performance computing, in
collaboration with the High-Performance Computing Center at CUNY, entitled
Workshop for Teaching Science with Computational Chemistry. The PI will assess
the impact of this workshop through surveys of the teachers after and during the
next school year to see how this impacts and enhances the classroom environment,
with the guidance of the Director for Academic Assessment at CSI. The proposed
research and the educational activities are all enhanced by the PI's experience
and current activity in mentoring minorities and females interested in the STEM
fields all the way from the high school to postdoctoral level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award
supports theoretical and computational research and education to develop and
utilize multi-scale computational methods with the aim of deducing design
principles to control the properties of polymersomes. Nearly all soft materials,
particularly materials based on polymeric self-assembly, are far from their
equilibrium state. Not only is this a challenge, but it is also an opportunity
to harness the structure, morphology, and transformation kinetics of self-
assemblies to optimize materials properties. Indeed, the ability to tune
molecular assembly shape in response to external stimuli has numerous
applications in tailoring the thermodynamic, mechanical, and photonic properties
of materials. This research activity aims to develop multi-scale computational
approaches that will provide fundamental insight into the design principles
guiding the elastic properties of charged polymeric membranes, including
polymersomes. Polymersomes, in particular, stimuli-responsive polymersomes have
diverse applications as nanocarriers, nanoreactors, and even as biomimectic
systems. Within the scope of this project the PI will develop a computational
toolbox that can be used to engineer polymersomes with key physical properties.
Specifically, the PI will design coarse grain force fields for common diblock
copolymers that self-assemble into polymersomes, and use an array of approaches
in molecular dynamics to characterize and predict their elastic properties.
Next, the PI will utilize various computational methodologies to predict the
stability of these polymersomes, specifically the energy required to porate the
membrane, as well as characterize their stimuli-responsive change in
shape.&lt;br/&gt;A focus of this research project is the development of
computational methods and force fields to characterize intermediate morphologies
and shape transformations underlying molecular self-assembly of amphiphilic
molecules. These new computational techniques would be both verified and
experimentally validated, and would allow for the rational design of new diblock
copolymer mixtures that can self-assemble into the polymersome morphology, that
can be tested by experimental collaborators. New computational methods that
inform the design of diverse morphological self-assemblies from the molecular
level up, that also incorporate their potential for dynamic shape
transformation, can impact multiple soft materials fields. Outcomes of the
proposed research will allow for molecular design strategies that can be used to
tailor amphiphiles to optimize their dynamic response to external stimuli such
as solvent or salt concentration. For example, the diblock copolymers discussed
within this proposal can be tailored for applications such as drug delivery or
as catalytically active nanomotors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complementing the
above research activities, proposed educational and outreach activities include
strengthening the local educational and research environment of College of
Staten Island and City University of New York (CUNY), and more closely
integrating the institutions with local NY teachers. Working with a local high
school teacher who is an alumna of College of Staten Island, the PI has
developed several course modules that introduce students to concepts in
chemistry such as surfactant micellization. The PI will test and assess the
impact of these modules. Moreover, the PI will establish a two-day workshop to
introduce local high school teachers to computational chemistry and high-
performance computing, in collaboration with the High-Performance Computing
Center at CUNY, entitled Workshop for Teaching Science with Computational
Chemistry. The PI will assess the impact of this workshop through surveys of the
teachers after and during the next school year to see how this impacts and
enhances the classroom environment, with the guidance of the Director for
Academic Assessment at CSI. The proposed research and the educational activities
are all enhanced by the PI's past experience and current activity in mentoring
minorities and females interested in the STEM fields all the way from the high
school to postdoctoral level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.