* 1750041
* CAREER: Strategic decision-making for communication and control in decentralized systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2024
* Ashutosh Nayyar, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 01/31/2024
* USD 500,097.00

This project aims to develop a strategic decision-making framework for
communication and control in dynamic decentralized systems. Centralized dynamic
decision-making problems have a long history in engineering, economics and
mathematics literature. Many modern systems, however, involve networks of agents
making decisions in an uncertain and dynamic environment. Such decentralized
systems arise in diverse application domains: infrastructure systems like power,
transportation and communication networks, sensing and surveillance systems like
teams of autonomous vehicles or robots, as well as networks of inter-connected
devices such as the internet of things. Such systems are characterized by
presence of multiple agents/decision-makers that have incomplete information
about their environment, limited abilities to communicate with each other and
that still have to make decisions that may affect the overall system. These
systems have to contend with two key aspects of decentralization: (i)
Decentralization of information, and (ii) Decentralization of decision-making.
The decentralization of information and decision-making creates the need for
communication. This communication may be limited, unreliable and imperfect.
Decision-makers need to adapt to their communication environment. On the other
hand, communication itself may require decision-making such as deciding when and
with whom to communicate and what information to communicate. Thus,
communication and decision-making are intimately coupled in decentralized
systems. The overarching goal of the proposed research is to investigate this
interplay of communication and control/decision-making that arises in
decentralized systems operating in dynamic and uncertain environments. The
technological and societal impacts of the proposed research will come through
the development of new theoretical tools for communication and control in
decentralized systems that will impact many applications and industries
including: sensing and surveillance systems, robotics, smart grid, communication
networks, urban infrastructure maintenance, and cyber-physical security. The
educational impact of the project will come through the training of graduate
students and engagement with local high-school students through school visits
and/or on-campus events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the proposed research
will be on strategic decision-making which requires identification of decision
strategies for agents that allow them to respond to real-time information about
unfolding events in their environment in order to optimize the performance of a
decentralized dynamic system. The proposed work will address fundamental
questions regarding control and decision-making in decentralized systems
operating in uncertain and dynamic environments. In particular, it will explore
characterization and computation of decision strategies in the following
domains: decentralized stochastic control with unreliable and imperfect
communication among controllers, minimax decision and control problems in
decentralized systems, joint optimization of real-time coding, communication
scheduling and control strategies for decentralized control. The fruits of this
research will potentially constitute an important step in the further
understanding of the interplay of information, communication and decision-making
in dynamic decentralized systems.