* 1750089
* Population-specific patterns of heritability and integration in the human dentition
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Kathleen Paul, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 02/28/2023
* USD 400,737.00

Teeth are an extraordinary resource for paleoanthropologists and archaeologists.
They preserve well in the fossil and archaeological records, and contain a great
deal of information about diet, environment, growth and development, and
relatedness among populations or species. However, the underlying biological
processes influencing diversity in tooth form have yet to be fully established.
This project uses dental cast samples and family genealogies from diverse
bioregional samples to better understand the factors that influence the
expression of shape characteristics on an individual tooth, among teeth within
an individual's dentition, and among human populations. The findings from this
project will advance knowledge about how tooth formation is shaped by genes,
development, and childhood environment. The investigators will create an archive
of high resolution 3D tooth scans and anonymized genealogies that will be hosted
online and made freely available to a global network of scholars. This archive
will enhance the research and educational infrastructure for not only biologists
and anthropologists, but also clinical dentists, orthodontists, and forensic
odontologists who conduct primary research in applied fields. Additionally, the
work supports undergraduate and graduate student training at Arizona State
University, a diverse and inclusive environment with a high representation of
Hispanic and Native American students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses
measurements and observations on the crests, cusps, and furrows that
characterize mammalian tooth crowns. Despite their use by numerous scholars
across diverse fields, we still do not fully understand how the process of tooth
formation is genetically controlled and how different teeth within the dentition
are integrated with respect to developmental processes that include both genetic
and non-genetic factors. In this project, 150-250 observations will be collected
from each of approximately 3,000 individuals from five samples representing
distinct modern human populations. Quantitative genetic analyses will be used to
estimate the relative contribution of genes and environment in determining
variation in tooth size and shape (heritability). Estimates of genetic
correlation (pleiotropy) among dimensions and shape variables will define how an
organism forms similar tissues (teeth) at different times (in-utero versus early
childhood) under the same developmental program and with input from overlapping
genetic factors. These estimates will be compared across the five populations to
assess whether a general human pattern is evident, and if not, to determine what
factors explain disparities between populations. Results will yield insights
into how researchers can use dental data as a genetic proxy measure, with an
emphasis on the use of teeth from archaeological or forensic
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.