* 1750436
* CAREER: Equilibrium Computation and Other Total Search Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Ruta Mehta, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 02/29/2024
* USD 499,906.00

Nash and market equilibria are two of the most fundamental solution concepts in
computational game theory and economics, respectively. These concepts are
applicable to many long-standing open questions in diverse fields such as
cryptography, topology, and verification. Even though we have a fair
understanding of these by now, many fundamental questions still remain
unresolved in areas such as efficient approximation algorithms, beyond-worst-
case analysis, and the relations between the sub-classes and the problems
therein. This project aims to explore these questions by bringing together tools
from equilibrium computation, sum-of-squares analysis, robust analysis, and
other areas. The project is expected to provide efficient and robust algorithms
for a large class of such problems, as well as to develop tools to obtain
connections among problems from disparate fields and thereby bring insights into
their complexity. The former will have a positive practical impact due to
numerous applications in areas such as social network analysis and resource
allocation. The project will involve and train graduate and undergraduate
students at various levels of the project, integrate the findings with teaching,
and make lecture notes and other material freely available online. The project
will also reach students from underrepresented groups through mentoring
workshops and the opportunities provided by initiatives at the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three main research goals
of this project are: (i) understand the recent exponential time hypothesis for
the class PPAD through the complexity of constant-approximate Nash equilibria,
(ii) understand the relative complexity of problems in the class CLS coming from
topology, verification, cryptography, etc., and (iii) develop beyond-worst-case
analysis to explain the existence of simple and empirically fast algorithms for
computing equilibria. These problems will involve developing novel tools for
approximation and for beyond-worst-case analysis. Furthermore, new reduction
techniques will need to be developed to relate the open problems from diverse
fields and/or to prove hardness of approximation. The project will approach
these by building on recent work on equilibrium computation and complexity,
using tools from the sum-of-squares method, recent smoothed analysis techniques,
and advances in proving lower bounds. Tools developed in the process will
contribute to the burgeoning literature in these domains and open up avenues for
further exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.