* 1750038
* University of Nebraska at Omaha Scholarship for Service Renewal/Outreach Project
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2024
* William Mahoney, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 2,170,960.00

The University of Nebraska at Omaha (UNO), a designated National Center of
Academic Excellence in Cyber Operations (CAE-CO), proposes to continue and
expand its participation in the CyberCorps(R): Scholarship for Service (SFS)
program to prepare highly-qualified cybersecurity professionals for entry into
the government workforce. In addition, the proposers seek to provide
opportunities for SFS scholars to construct their own Capture-the-Flag (CTF)
cyber operations competition, as well as host an annual high school CTF event.
These efforts will yield a downloadable, easy-to-install CTF infrastructure that
will be shared with other universities, community colleges, and high schools,
and may be utilized for recruiting new students to cybersecurity. The SFS
program funds projects that address cybersecurity education and workforce
development, including funding to award scholarships to students in
cybersecurity. In return for their scholarships, recipients will work after
graduation for a federal, state, local, or tribal government organization in a
position related to Cybersecurity for a period equal to the length of the
scholarship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scholars will be constructing a "CTF-Cyber
Operations (CTF-CO) in a Box" project, which will result in a complete problem
set for a High School Capture-the-Flag event where the questions in the CTF map
to knowledge units (KUs) of the CAE-CO designation. The students will document
and prepare this infrastructure for "prime time release;" test the validity of
the documentation and the software packaging by having several outside
university parties (e.g., other student clubs, faculty) install the
infrastructure from scratch; develop survey capabilities that can capture player
engagement with challenges in the CTF event; and develop capabilities that allow
game authors to identify the cybersecurity concepts, procedures and judgments
necessary for each developed challenge. An assessment will be conducted to
identify challenges that are too hard and may discourage students from selecting
the CO pathway for cybersecurity careers. As part of their responsibilities for
hosting the CTF event, the SFS students will be tasked with expanding the
recruiting for teams to these underrepresented rural communities and to female-
only high schools such as Duchesne Academy in the Omaha
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.