* 1750731
* CAREER: The Future of Work in Health Analytics and Automation: Investigating the Communication that Builds Human-Technology Partnerships
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Joshua Barbour, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 08/31/2023
* USD 467,000.00

Advances in technologies such as the internet of things, robotics, and
artificial intelligence are transforming work through data-intensive automation,
which may eliminate jobs without creating new ones or deskill and diminish
existing work. This project will investigate how work is automated to encourage
forms that benefit work and workers. The project will expand knowledge about the
everyday conversations that shape the implementation of automation, and how
leaders make choices about how to have those conversations in the first place.
The project will focus on health and healthcare work, with is a context likely
to be affected by datafication and automation and likely to provide STEM-related
careers for individuals who have the right skills. In healthcare, automation may
help providers prevent medical errors, lower the costs of caregiving, and
augment or create new forms of work, but the success of such systems depends on
how they are designed and implemented. By focusing on the actual communication
involved in automation, the project will generate theoretical insights and
practical recommendations for leaders in health and analytics organizations,
regarding (a) what makes the communication involved in data-intensive automation
effective or not, and (b) how to structure and facilitate that communication.
The research will be used to create short films and a learning module for
students making key career decisions. The films and module will be designed to
reach groups underrepresented in STEM and to provide information about STEM
careers affected by automation and STEM-related, communication competencies. The
project will help students at community colleges and universities understand and
prepare for the opportunities and challenges of
automation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent research has demonstrated that
automation is determined not merely by the features of new technology or
pressures to make work more efficient, but by a complex, communicatively-
negotiated mix of workers' and managers' ideas about factors such as market
forces, professional standards, regulation, industry knowledge, and human and
technology workflows. Automation involves intertwined changes in the
technologies and organization of work. These changes unfold in and through
everyday communication about how work is and ought to be accomplished. Using a
combination of interview and observational methods, the project will investigate
two theoretically and practically important contexts: (1) Healthcare
organizations that develop and implement technologies such as automated metrics
dashboards and clinical decisions support systems, and (2) Quantified Self
communities where practitioners of personal analytics are creating new human-
technology partnerships, new forms of work and play, through automation.
Insights from this project will advance research on automation, data-intensive
work, communication design, and organizational and technological
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.