* 1750260
* Science of Broadening Participation: CAREER: Disability, Experience, and Technological Imagination
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Ashley Shew, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 441,426.00

This is a Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award, a prestigious award
that NSF provides to junior faculty who exemplify the role of teacher-scholars
through outstanding research, excellent education and the integration of
education and research within the context of the mission of their organizations.
This specific award supports an integrated research and education project that
investigates narrative accounts of the lived experience of technology in the
context of disability. It will examine how these narratives differ from the ways
in which scientists and engineers understand and explain their work related to
disability. Currently, stories about technologies for disability feature
accounts of life-changing technology and techno-optimism, which differs
substantially from the stories disabled people tell about the technologies they
choose to use. The researcher also plans to implement educational and outreach
activities aimed at the inclusion of people with disabilities in conversations
about technology, and about engineering and design spaces as collaborators and
future practitioners. She will also develop classroom, public, and open-access
materials that include narrative accounts from disabled people about
technologies that appropriately bear witness to ambiguity and resistance to
technological configurations; it is expected that these materials would be used
to complement existing STEM educational materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project highlights the disconnects between STEM practice concerning disability
and the lived experience of disability. By looking at the history, narratives,
and context of negotiations about technology, this work centers the expertise
possessed by disabled communities about the nature of disability, offering
alternative narratives for considering disabled bodies in the technological
imagination - and bodies in technology, more generally. This CAREER plan seeks
to bridge what we know about bodies and biases from STS and philosophy of
technology with first-person observation and historical context from the field
of disability studies. Since the field of STS brings with it interest in
intervention in STEM practice, the intellectual merit of this proposal will have
impacts beyond disciplinary boundaries. By documenting and disseminating this
research through various media, this project has potential impacts in design
communities, academic science and engineering courses, assistive technology
spaces, and disability communities. This project promotes better modes of
engagement between STEM communities and the people they desire to
serve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.