* 1750780
* CAREER:  AF: Giving Form to Data with a Geometric Scaffold
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Benjamin Raichel, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2024
* USD 505,046.00

Using geometry to find structure in data is an old idea (Plato is quoted as
saying, "God ever geometrizes") that gains fresh application as our data
changes. Today's data sets, from areas such as machine learning, are often
massive and high-dimensional: for example, when trying to classify news
articles, each article may be represented as a point where the frequency of each
word is a different dimension. This leads to geometries that are hard to grasp
intuitively and hard to work with computationally (the "curse of
dimensionality"). Finding a smaller and lower dimensional subset of the data
points that approximately preserves geometric structure not only reduces
computation time but also can improve results by suppressing extraneous
features. Representing inter-point distances of a general space in a more
structured space can support new operations, such as data visualization by
mapping the 2-D plane of the screen, or more efficient computation by mapping to
the hierarchical structure of a tree. This project takes the age-old practice of
teasing out geometric structure and applies it to the large- and high-
dimensional data sets of the modern world. By taking a geometric approach to
foundational problems in areas such as big data and machine learning, this
project seeks to more closely connect computational geometry and these other
areas, in turn both modernizing the classical field of computational geometry
and advancing these other areas. The educational goals of this project will be
achieved by directly supporting student research on the outlined topics,
incorporating topics into developing new courses, and organizing regular
seminars in order to grow the visibility and interdisciplinary nature of
algorithms and theoretical computer science at the awardee
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given a data set, the goal is to specify its
geometric structure, use this structure to summarize and embed into simpler
spaces where computations can be done efficiently, and when this is not
possible, identify how to minimally fix the data to facilitate these tasks. The
project's focus is on three interrelated topics concerning geometric structure
that lie at the intersection of big data, geometry, and machine learning: 1)
data factorization and sparsification, 2) metric embeddings for structured
spaces, and 3) metric violation distance. The ultimate purpose is to develop
better algorithms for handling data, ranging from better clustering algorithms
to better classification algorithms. The ubiquity of such algorithms implies
that any progress has the potential for significant real world
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.