* 1750333
* CAREER: New Algorithms for Submodular Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Alina Ene, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 01/31/2024
* USD 507,423.00

Submodular optimization provides general solutions to a wide range of
applications from monitoring water distribution networks to summarizing large
corpora of documents and speech recognition. Most of the existing submodular
optimization algorithms are not suitable for modern datasets, since they are
designed for worst-case instances and they suffer from prohibitive running times
and poor empirical performance. This project aims to develop scalable
algorithmic approaches with improved empirical performance for submodular
optimization and to transfer theoretical insights to applications. The proposed
research brings together insights from computer science, mathematics and
optimization, and strengthens connections among these fields. The project will
involve training the next wave of students and equipping them with technical
tools to work in all these fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on
three inter-related research directions in submodular function optimization: (a)
Design faster algorithms for minimizing submodular functions with a decomposable
or sum structure. The approach is to build on a rich set of tools from both
discrete and continuous optimization. (b) Design algorithms for constrained
submodular maximization problems with improved approximation guarantees and
faster running times. The focus is on settling the approximability of
constrained submodular maximization problems with a non-monotone objective and
on designing faster algorithms for central families of constraints. (c) Design
algorithms and frameworks for allocation or labeling problems with submodular
costs. The main goal is to obtain more expressive algorithmic frameworks and
efficient algorithms.