* 1750140
* CAREER: New Directions in Graph Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Debmalya Panigrahi, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 01/31/2024
* USD 515,998.00

Networks such as the Internet, social networks, transportation maps, and
communication backbones have an ubiquitous presence in modern life. Graph
algorithms play a crucial role in these networks by providing a range of basic
services such as navigation, traffic management, and robustness against physical
failures. Moreover, graphs are useful in modeling interactions in a variety of
systems that arise in physical, biological, and social sciences. This project
identifies a set of common themes in the algorithmic challenges that arise in
modern networks -- uncertainty of data, complex failure patterns, and gigantic
scale -- and seeks generic solutions that address these core issues. The project
is expected to provide new insights into classical graph optimization problems,
while also creating new models, problem formulations, and research directions
that embrace these broad challenges. This project will also train graduate and
undergraduate researchers in theoretical computer science, with an emphasis on
gender diversity and participation of underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For over fifty years, graph algorithms have played a
central role in the advancement of computer science, both in theory and
practice. Modern networks have evolved in scale, structure, and functionality,
inspiring new models, problems, and algorithms. This project focuses on three
key research thrusts for modern graph algorithms: (a) network design under
unreliable or imprecise future predictions, by developing generic optimization
techniques for uncertain and dynamic inputs; (b) the analysis of correlation
effects in network failures by expanding the scope of classical metrics like
minimum cuts to incorporate correlated failures of multiple network components;
and (c) the design of highly efficient algorithms for large networks, focusing
on the tradeoff between approximation and efficiency for fundamental graph
optimization problems. The project will integrate tools from diverse areas such
as combinatorial optimization, probability theory, mathematical programming, and
continuous optimization to model and address these algorithmic questions, and
the project is expected to shed new light on related questions in these domains
as well.