* 1750213
* CAREER: Longitudinal Development of Numerical Processing Brain Networks in Developmental Dyscalculia: A Neuroimaging Study from Kindergarten to Second Grade
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/2018,01/31/2023
* Gavin Price, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 01/31/2023
* USD 1,259,062.00

Approximately 6% of Americans suffer from the mathematical learning disability
developmental dyscalculia (DD), facing academic difficulties, reduced
employment, increased mental and physical illness, and higher rates of arrest
and incarceration. Despite the potential consequences, no consensus currently
exists regarding the brain and behavioral causes of DD. The project team will
attempt to characterize the development of and interaction between brain
mechanisms responsible for processing symbolic and nonsymbolic numbers in
children from kindergarten through 2nd grade with DD, with the hope that
understanding the root causes of the disorder will aid the development of
effective diagnostic and remedial tools for educational interventions. They will
engage in a combination of neuroscientific and behavioral research in order to
disambiguate between competing causal theories that are unlikely to be
distinguished on the basis of behavioral evidence alone. The project is
supported by a CAREER award to Vanderbilt University by the EHR Core Research
(ECR) program, which supports work that advances the fundamental research
literature on STEM learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Competing theories of the
underlying cause of DD suggest that there is a deficit either in the
representation of numerical magnitude, or in the connection between those
representations and symbolic numbers. The project will attempt to disambiguate
between these theories by providing a multimodal characterization of the neural
networks involved in basic nonsymbolic and symbolic number processing in DD
children using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), as well as
structural metrics of grey and white matter. The project will examine the
development of those networks and will examine the extent to which those
networks predict typical and atypical mathematical skill development.
Investigators will study children with DD, children with dyslexia (DL), and
typically developing (TD) children longitudinally from kindergarten to 2nd
grade. By contrasting between these three groups, the investigators will be able
to identify atypical brain and behavioral phenotypes that are specific to DD, as
well as identify any commonalities between DD and DL. In each year, participants
will complete a battery of symbolic and nonsymbolic number processing tasks in
the fMRI scanner, in addition to a battery of behavioral tests measuring
mathematics skills and general cognitive abilities. Measures of brain structure
will also be collected in each year, allowing investigators to assess functional
brain activation, functional and structural connectivity, and their relation to
behavior and to each other. At the conclusion of the research project, the
research team will provide evidence supporting a characterization of the core
neurofunctional abnormalities in basic number processing underlying DD, identify
the relationships between structural brain integrity and functional neural
mechanisms underlying numerical magnitude processing in DD, and explore the
causal developmental relationships beween aberrant number processing brain
mechanisms and math outcomes in DD from kindergarten through 2nd
grade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.