* 1750786
* CAREER: Anisotropic Suppression of Lattice Thermal Conductivity through the Interaction between Phonons and Thermal Magnetic Excitations
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2024
* Chen Li, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 03/31/2024
* USD 513,399.00

A better understanding of how magnetism affects heat transfer can impact key
applications ranging from the design of computer chips to spacecraft. The
overarching goal of this project is to design an innovative thermal switch,
which allows the control of heat flow by magnetism. It has been challenging to
design systems with desired thermal transport properties as no perfect thermal
conductor or insulator exists. Therefore, being able to control heat flow in the
generation, transfer, and consumption of energy represents a very important
issue. This CAREER project will use a combination of innovative experimental
research at national facilities and high-performance computing modeling of heat
flow. The principal investigator will collaborate with local high schools to
provide an opportunity for students to get exposure to large data sets and learn
to use software tools for their analysis through designed extracurricular
activities. Other initiatives include science demonstrations at community events
targeted to the diverse community in Southern California's Inland Empire and
recruitment of high-achieving students from nearby community colleges to spend
their summer working on the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Career project
utilizes innovative experimental techniques, supported by computational
simulations, to provide the first set of direct measurements of the interactions
between the thermal excitations in nuclear structure (phonons) and the thermal
excitations in magnetic structure (magnons). The results are expected to
illuminate the anisotropic suppression of lattice thermal transport by these
interactions, which enables the design and control of a new generation of
multifunctional lattice structures with enhanced thermal transport properties.
This project builds upon recent advances in neutron scattering techniques by
leveraging several inelastic neutron spectrometers to make complementary
measurements of phonons and thermal magnetic excitations at temperatures from 10
to 1300 K and under external magnetic fields up to 5 T. The measurements provide
dispersion relation, group velocities, and lifetime data for various phonon
modes; molecular dynamics simulations based on first principles density
functional theory is used to interpret the measured phonon dynamics and to
understand the effects of magnetic excitations on lattice thermal transport due
to phonon scattering. The success of the project is expected to significantly
improve fundamental understanding of how thermal magnetic excitations affect the
phonons responsible for the lattice transport; quantify the contribution of the
interactions to the anisotropic thermal transport properties; and provide
guidelines to tailor the lattice thermal transport using magnetic structure as
an additional degree of freedom. The project also extends the use of inelastic
neutron scattering as a scientific tool to understand thermal transport
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.