* 1750970
* CAREER: Computational Optics and Photonics for Deep Imaging of Live Tissue
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Heidy Sierra, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 04/30/2024
* USD 498,905.00

Innovation in non-invasive imaging techniques is part of the effort to provide
rapid screening, diagnosis as well as to guide treatment in numerous settings
that aspire to offer affordable and efficient healthcare. Most of the existing
high-resolution methods are effective primarily on thin and nearly homogeneous
transparent samples or over tissue surface. In most realistic scenarios, it is
important to acquire information at depth within tissue. High-resolution
volumetric imaging approaches may require expensive computational tools for data
analysis and complex hardware configurations. Computational optics grounded on
signal processing and image reconstruction concepts offers promising
alternatives. This research contributes to advance the related state-of-the-art
in translational cyberinfrastructure and biomedical technology. Results from
this research can improve non-invasive imaging systems for research and patient
care while supporting the NSF mission to promote the progress of science and
advance the national health. The development of this project involves
multidisciplinary efforts from computer science, bioengineering and electrical
engineering as well as educational activities with the participation of students
from underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
providing a framework to support advances on optical imaging techniques that can
perform at the needed resolution and speed for various scenarios such as
healthcare and biomedical research. The research plan is geared to creating an
advanced cyberinfrastructure with simulation and analysis tools to build a
computational optical system for deep imaging of live tissues. The components of
the framework include three-dimensional optical imaging models employing
nonlinear scattering theory that integrate tissue optical properties to
characterize their effect into the imaging resolution performance. Additionally,
it includes the integration of light-tissue-interaction modeling parameters with
compressive sensing concepts and machine learning algorithms for advanced data
management. This project targets realistic challenges in biomedical research,
including (i) a gap between complex physics of light propagation in tissues and
the design of efficient high-resolution imaging systems, (ii) computational
optics and photonics for deep imaging of live tissues, and (iii) integration
with reliable and state-of-the-art data analytics and visualization
environments. The simulations and computational optics tools focus on confocal
imaging of skin tissue, which is widely used in biomedical research, and is
potentially adoptable in the clinic to guide diagnosis of skin conditions. The
education plan addresses three major areas: i) research training and experiences
for graduate and undergraduate students, i) course development in topics related
with computational optics and data analytics, and iii) outreach to K-12 students
and professionals to introduce research issues and opportunities in
computational imaging and data analytics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.