* 1750379
* CAREER:   Organization of global transcriptomes by stepwise control of Pol II activity at gene promoters
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Sergei Nechaev, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,252,540.00

A long-standing biological mystery is how the same DNA genome can specify
distinct cell types in an organism. Transcription, the synthesis of RNA on the
DNA template, is the first step in gene expression that largely defines which
genes will be active. The key unanswered question is how transcription is
regulated across the genome to generate stable, cell-type-specific patterns of
gene expression. By combining classic biochemical approaches with global
sequencing, this project will determine how specific transcription patterns may
be stabilized by universal mechanisms targeting the enzymes responsible for RNA
synthesis. By studying the process of transcription, the project will tackle a
general problem of how multiple layers of information could be packed into, and
extracted from, the same DNA sequence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project deals
with the phenomenon of promoter-proximal RNA polymerase II (Pol II) pausing,
which occurs within the first 100 nucleotides of many metazoan genes and is
controlled by factors involved in most if not all Pol II-transcribed promoters.
Pausing is established by the Negative ELongation Factor (NELF) and, apart from
the well-known productive elongation, can be alternatively released without mRNA
synthesis via premature termination. This project will investigate the roles of
factors responsible for pause establishment and release in human mesenchymal
stem cells undergoing adipocyte differentiation. Objective 1 will focus on
establishing pausing to determine how NELF defines genes to be paused. The
question will be addressed by perturbing the levels of NELF at various time
scales and monitoring Pol II pausing distribution and dynamics using our
published as well as new methods including 5'-capped RNA- sequencing and
multiplex permanganate footprinting. Objective 2 will focus on pause release to
determine how the decision between mRNA production versus termination regulates
expression of genes in response to a model heat shock stimulus. The question
will be addressed by combining Pol II ChIP-sequencing and global run-on assays
with novel analysis of termination-specific small RNAs derived from paused
complexes. By exploring Pol II pausing as a prominent yet still poorly
understood phenomenon, a new principle organizing genes into networks may be
uncovered. Students engaged into ongoing research will make more informed
decisions on whether or not to pursue careers in science, which will elevate the
reputation of basic science among general public especially in rural
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.