* 1750795
* CAREER: Encrypted Computation
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Daniel Wichs, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2024
* USD 498,037.00

Traditionally, the main goal of cryptography has been to secure data in transit
over an insecure channel, by providing the digital analogue of a "lock box" that
can only be unlocked by the intended recipient but whose contents cannot be
observed or manipulated by anyone else. In recent years, new technologies and
applications such as the rise of cloud computing are forcing us to fundamentally
change our perspective. Data is not only vulnerable while in transit, but is
increasingly being stored with third-party providers that have vast storage and
computational resources and are expected to offer a rich array of tools and
services over this data. Traditional cryptosystems could secure the data in the
cloud but only at the cost of rendering it unusable and preventing the cloud
from offering any functionality over it. The goal of this project is to design a
new generation of cryptostosystems that go beyond the "lock box" paradigm and
allow users to cryptographically protect their data in the cloud while still
enabling the cloud to perform useful computations over it. More generally, the
project studies the broad question of how to enable computation over
cryptographically protected data with the best possible trade-offs between
security and functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project
focuses on three goals. The first goal is to construct provably secure program
obfuscation schemes that can be used to encrypt a program in a way that hides
its code but still allows us to evaluate it on arbitrary inputs. Such
obfuscation schemes are known to be immensely powerful and would have countless
applications throughout cryptography. Although this is likely to be a difficult
goal and is one of the grand challenges in cryptography today, the project
identifies several intermediate problems which may be closer within reach and
may serve as useful stepping stones. The second goal is to improve numerous
aspects of cryptosystems, such as fully homomorphic encryption and signatures.
These schemes allow anyone to compute over encrypted/authenticated data and
derive an encrypted/authenticated output without learning anything about the
data itself. Although basic constructions of these primitives are known, they
have many deficiencies that this project plans to address. Lastly, the project
studies the additional challenges involved in computing over cryptographic data
in the random-access machine model of computation, which best captures the
efficiency requirements of real-world programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.