* 1750269
* CAREER: Losing Nemo- the impact of changing seas on mutualistic behavioral interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Danielle Dixson, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 06/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

Declining ocean ecosystems are an environmental concern of global importance.
Tropical coral reefs are especially vulnerable to stressors such as rising
seawater temperature and ocean acidification. Elevated temperature causes the
bleaching and death of important structural organisms for reefs, such as corals
and sea anemones. Ocean acidification changes the chemical make up of seawater,
making it harder for corals to build reefs, and causes behavioral and sensory
impairments in a variety of reef species including fishes. Although research has
examined how each of these environmental alterations affects individual species
independently, the ecological relevance of these findings is limited. Coral
reefs are the most diverse of all marine ecosystems, with &gt;25% of all ocean
species living in a location that covers &lt;2% of the ocean's floor. The
importance of understanding both environmental changes acting concurrently on
species interactions is vital to understanding how the ocean functions.
Mutualistic interactions, where two different species benefit from one another,
are key components of biodiverse ecosystems, yet may be severely impacted by
climatic conditions. In addition, ocean acidification and rising temperatures
occur simultaneously, yet their impacts are rarely studied together. This
project will use the iconic interaction between anemonefishes (or clownfish) and
their host sea anemones to investigate the ecology of mutualistic interactions,
and how they will be affected by changing environmental condtitions. Using a
programmable seawater system to adjust both the acidity and temperature of the
water, mimicking daily fluctuations found on a natural reef, this project has
the potential to further the understanding of how changing climatic conditions
impact reef ecosystems as a whole. The use of charismatic fauna that are widely
recognized will foster public awareness. Research findings will be shared with
the general public in a number of different mediums including lecture series at
popular venues, educational displays in national and international locations,
and the development of children's storybook used to bring scientific information
to a relatively ignored age group, increasing scientific exposure at an early
age. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While focusing on one specific mutual interaction,
the results gained from these experiments extend beyond the anemonefish and the
sea anemone and the coral reef system, impacting any species interaction in
which species are reliant on a photosynthetic host as habitat, such as coral,
seagrasses, seaweeds, or kelp. Specifically, this research will investigate: 1)
the impact that changing temperature and ocean acidification conditions will
have on the mutualistic interactions using a complex laboratory study in which
the anemone and fish are held separated or together in acidified and temperature
conditions projected to occur by the year 2100 and the combination of
temperature and acidified water; 2) the impact that bleached host habitat has on
the recruitment potential under natural field conditions tested in situ on reefs
of Papua New Guinea where anemones will be bleached in the environment and
natural recruitment rates will be recorded to the different treatments; 3) if
the presence of fish assists the recovery of bleached habitat following
bleaching events tested using a laboratory set up to determine if added
nutrients provided by the fish to the anemone can increase resilience to
bleaching as well as aid in recovery; and 4) whether a bleached host leaves
occupants more vulnerable to predation due to changes in camouflage under
laboratory altered ocean acidification and/or temperature scenarios. This
project will use a state-of-the-art programmable carbon dioxide dosing and
temperature adjustment system to incorporate biologically realistic diel
fluctuations, which have not been considered in past studies. This comparative
approach will elucidate the evolutionary ecology of this iconic symbiosis and
determine the role that mutualistic behaviors will play in rapidly changing
ecosystems. This project was co-funded by the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR)
in the Office of Integrative Activities (OIA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.