* 1750532
* CAREER:  Using indel rate variation to understand evolutionary constraints on distances between functional elements in the genome
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Mira Han, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2024
* USD 574,068.00

Adjacent protein domains interact to fold into a functional protein structure.
Adjacent binding sites in the DNA interact with the multiprotein complex for
efficient binding. Yet, both protein domains and clusters of binding sites are
encoded as one-dimensional arrays in the genome. This project tests the
hypothesis that, in order for specific and correct interactions to occur, there
are optimal distances between these functional units and that they are
maintained across evolutionary time. Since insertions and deletions of DNA
(indels) change the distance between these functional units, the genome will be
under evolutionary constraint against indel mutations that affect the distance.
To test this hypothesis, the investigator will develop software to
systematically estimate and compare the changes in distance between functional
elements and statistical models to test the likelihood of the events observed.
Upon project completion, the scientific community will have tools that identify
distances that are conserved, and will be able to predict the effect and
importance of indel mutations occurring in these genomic regions. The
investigator will hold workshops for girls in grades 6-12 to develop software
games that model the concept of evolutionary constraint. She will also develop
undergraduate and graduate classes with hands-on activities on molecular
evolution and computational sequence analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to utilize the variation in rates of indels to infer the
evolutionary constraint on the distance between functional elements in the
genome. Experimental evidence has been accumulating on selection against indels
in the loops and linkers within proteins, or in the space between binding sites
of regulatory elements. But, studies on the evolution of these sequences are
almost nonexistent, due to the difficulty in aligning these sequences. This
project addresses these challenges by applying methods that can model variable
indel rates across sites or methods that model length instead of relying on
alignments. Using these methods, the investigator will produce phylogenetic, and
quantitative estimates of indel rates on a significant proportion of the genome
that has been neglected so far. In Objective 1, using a new software the
investigator has developed, variable site-specific indel rates will be estimated
across loops between protein motifs to identify structural motifs with strong
constraints on their distance. In Objective 2, the investigator will develop a
new software based on birth-death processes to estimate indel rates without
relying on alignments. Using this software, she will test the hypothesis that
there is stronger constraint on the distance between tandem homologous domains,
compared to non-homologous domains. In Objective 3, the investigator will use
the software described above to test the hypothesis that there is stronger
constraint on the distance between binding sites of homodimers, compared to the
distance between binding sites of heterodimers. This study will integrate the
knowledge gained in the fields of structural biology and developmental biology
into a phylogenomic context, and provide tools for the community to test
specific evolutionary hypotheses on distance between functional elements of
interest. The results of the project will be presented at
https://github.com/HanLabUNLV.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.