* 1750394
* CAREER:  Evolution of individual identity - processes shaping shaping phenotypic and genetic diversity in animal recognition systems
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Michael Sheehan, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,111,731.00

As we know from human appearance, physical variation is essential for
recognizing individuals. Recognition of individual appearance in animals can
have consequences for choosing a mate, and consequently the trajectory of a
species' evolution, as well. On the one hand, evolution is typically believed to
reduce the variation of individual appearance within a species. On the other,
evolution has been shown to favor individuality when it promotes recognition.
This project seeks to better understand these seemingly contrasting consequences
of evolution through experiments with paper wasps, insects commonly used to
study the evolution of behavior. The research will focus on a paper wasp species
with highly individual facial patterns, and investigates how facial variation is
encoded in its genes, how it is maintained, and to what extent natural selection
favoring individuality contributes to divergence of populations to create new
species. This project will also promote science education through a
collaboration with the Sciencenter of Ithaca, NY and the local state park
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will study the selective and
demographic processes shaping patterns of diversity in a uniquely tractable
paper wasp. The color patterns of Polistes fuscatus wasps mediate individual
recognition among co-nesting queens and show dramatic variation both within and
between populations. Previous work has demonstrated that the color pattern
diversity in P. fuscatus is the result of selection for individuals to advertise
their identity and facilitate recognition. The extreme color pattern diversity,
relatively simple genetic architecture of color variation, small genome size and
abundant populations make these wasps ideal for addressing fundamental questions
regarding the maintenance of phenotypic and genetic diversity in recognition
systems. This powerful system will be used to investigate four major topics
using a combination of comparative, population and functional genomics
approaches coupled with detailed phenotyping of specimens: (1) What is the
genetic architecture of individual identity signals? (2) How do phenotypic
diversity and genetic architecture interact to determine patterns of genetic
diversity? (3) What are the roles of selective and demographic forces in shaping
patterns of phenotypic diversity? (4) Does selection on recognition systems lead
to the maintenance of variation or rapid turnover in diversity across time and
space?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.