* 1750613
* CAREER: First-Principles Electron and Spin Dynamics in Materials with Spin-Orbit Coupling
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2023
* Marco Bernardi, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2023
* USD 549,712.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research
and education in developing computational methodology for investigating and
understanding in detail the motion of electrons in materials. The focus of the
research is on a property of electrons called spin, which is analogous to the
spinning rotation of a planet around its axis. In materials containing heavy
atoms, such as bismuth or tungsten among others, the spin and spatial motions of
electrons are coupled; this so-called spin-orbit coupling is at the center of
recent breakthroughs in materials physics. The objective of the research is to
develop accurate methodology for the calculation of the dynamics of electrons in
materials where spin-orbit coupling is significant. In contrast to conventional
studies, which typically employ simple models to interpret experiments, the goal
is to develop truly predictive calculations that are free of empirical
parameters and can be applied broadly to new materials. By accurately computing
the interactions of electrons with atomic vibrations and defects in the crystal
structure of the material, the project will develop a microscopic understanding
of materials with yet untapped potential for new technology, including novel
metals and ultrathin semiconductors containing heavy atoms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will generate knowledge and computational methods
needed for breakthrough advances in electronics, renewable energy, spectroscopy,
computing, and quantum technology. These efforts are critical for establishing a
United States leadership in emerging technologies based on novel materials. The
computational methods generated in the project will be freely available, user-
friendly, and widely usable; users will include academic research groups,
national laboratories, and the industry. This project aims to be an enriching
opportunity for the high-school, undergraduate, and graduate students involved.
The PI will train high-school students on scientific computing through engaging
activities. The research team will host undergraduate students, who will
contribute to research and develop their curricula by learning cutting-edge
computational materials physics. The project will contribute to the development
of graduate students with a unique interdisciplinary background at the
intersection of physics, computer science, and materials science. They will be
equipped to lead computational physics and materials science research in the
United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research and education
in developing a detailed understanding of the dynamics of charge carriers and
their spin in materials with spin-orbit coupling. The project will develop new
theory and computational methods to accurately calculate the timescale and
mechanisms of scattering, relaxation, transport, and ultrafast dynamics of
electrons and spin in materials with spin-orbit coupling. While computations of
charge and spin dynamics are typically heuristic, the PI will develop predictive
first-principles calculations based on density functional theory and related
methods that are free of empirical parameters and can be applied broadly to new
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By accurately computing the interactions of
electrons and spin with lattice vibrations and crystallographic defects, the
project will develop a microscopic understanding of materials with yet untapped
potential for new technology. The research team will focus on a range of
materials with spin-orbit coupling, including two-dimensional transition-metal
dichalcogenides for novel optoelectronic devices, lead-halide perovskites for
efficient solar cells, and topological semiconductors and semimetals for new
fundamentals physics. The complex atomic structure in these materials
underscores the need for accurate and broadly applicable methods to compute
carrier and spin dynamics in materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new methods
and code generated in the project will be included in PERTURBO, a software
developed by the PI to advance understanding of electron and excited-state
dynamics in materials. The first-principles approach pursued here can be applied
broadly to electronic and spin-based devices, as well as to advancing ultrafast
electron and spin spectroscopies. These efforts are critical for establishing a
United States leadership in emerging electronic, renewable energy, computing,
and quantum technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project integrates research
and education by training a new generation of high-school and undergraduate
students in scientific computing. The graduate students working on the project
will acquire a unique interdisciplinary background at the intersection of
physics, computer science, and materials science. They will be equipped to lead
computational physics and materials science research in the United States.