* 1750326
* CAREER: Interpretable Deep Modeling of Discrete Time Event Sequences
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Fei Wang, Joan and Sanford I. Weill Medical College of Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Yang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 539,642.00

Discrete Time Event Sequences (DTES) are ordered event sequences with a concrete
timestamp associated with each event. DTES are ubiquitous in our daily life. One
representative example is patient electronic health records. Computational
modeling of DTES can reveal the hidden event evolving mechanisms and improve the
performance of endpoint analytical tasks such as sequence forecasting and
grouping. Conventional approaches for analyzing DTES are typically based on
strong statistical assumptions and may not work well in practice. Motivated by
the recent empirical success of deep learning methods in various application
domains, the objective of this project is to develop interpretable deep learning
approaches for modeling DTES. This project validates the utility of the
developed algorithms in various medical applications. It incorporates the
resulting research outcomes into curriculum development and courses, to train a
new generation of machine learning and data mining practitioners. In addition,
special training opportunities are provided to high school students and
community college students for a broader education of modern data analysis
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of three synergistic
research thrusts. First, it develops a series of approaches for integrating
external domain knowledge into the modeling process. This guarantees the learned
models align well with the domain knowledge and at the same time provides
effective regularizations to avoid overfitting. Second, it devises approaches
based on mimic learning and pattern dissection to interpret the knowledge hidden
in the learned models. This makes the learned models much more practical and
reusable. Third, effective model and data sharing mechanisms are developed to
transfer the knowledge across similar learning tasks. This maximizes the
utilizations of the available samples for each task by leveraging the task
relationships. Two key problems in medical domain, hospital readmission and
disease phenotyping, are used as the target applications for validating the
proposed approaches based on several real-world large-scale patient electronic
health record data sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.