* 1750383
* CAREER: Integrating perceptual models of auditory importance into deep learning-based noise-robust speech recognition
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Michael Mandel, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2023
* USD 497,162.00

Hearing is central to human interaction, but the hearing process is not easily
observed. The objective of this project is to train models to identify portions
of speech utterances that are important to their being correctly identified by
human listeners, and to use predictions from these models to make automatic
speech recognition (ASR) systems more noise robust by focusing on those regions.
The ability to identify important regions of an utterance could significantly
advance our understanding of healthy and impaired hearing. Improvements in
automatic speech recognition would have broader impacts on the 260 million
Americans who use smart phones and the $100 billion ASR industry. The
educational portion of this project utilizes examples from speech, language,
audio, and music processing to attract and retain students in Brooklyn College's
introductory programming course serving a diverse student body along with
similar efforts at affiliated high school programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
team's preliminary results have shown that that some regions of an utterance are
more important or useful than others in identifying it by measuring the
intelligibility of a given utterance in many different noisy mixtures. This
project expands upon these preliminary results in three ways. First it measures
ASR auditory importance using the team's existing slow but accurate technique
involving random "bubble noise", comparing different ASR variants to each other
and to human listeners. Second, it trains a model to predict ASR auditory
importance from clean speech using a novel architecture called the bubble
cooperative network (BCN) that allows the recognizer to be trained jointly with
the BCN to improve performance. Third, it adapts the learned importance
predictor to human listeners and uses this human-adapted importance predictor to
further refine the ASR models. These tasks should permit the use of utterance-
level human responses to directly improve the noise robustness of automatic
speech recognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.