* 1750587
* CAREER: Two-Stage Competition on Spatio-Temporal Location and Pricing
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Vikrant Vaze, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 03/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project exploits the
opportunities brought by the emerging technologies and combines knowledge from
operations research (OR), economics and computer science to advance science in
resource allocation and promote national prosperity and welfare. The project
will establish the mathematical foundations for resource allocation, coupled
with computational algorithms and empirical validation methods, for prescriptive
and predictive analysis in determining facility locations and associated
pricing. Prescriptive analysis helps competing entities in optimizing their
scheduling and facility location decisions. Predictive analysis helps central
authorities (e.g., government and regulators) in optimizing system efficiency
and equity through infrastructure investments, incentives creation, and
regulations. Under this project's integrated vision for research and education,
the research program directly informs the educational program. The educational
program includes the development and dissemination of an active learning module
for high-school mathematics focused on underrepresented minority students; an
undergraduate research internship program for underprepared prospective
engineering students; and undergraduate and graduate course development in OR
and game theory. These educational activities contribute toward strengthening
and diversifying the pipeline of researchers and practitioners skilled in OR and
analytics, in turn fostering the long-term growth of the very disciplines which
the research program builds upon. Educational and outreach activities also focus
on highlighting the economic, social and political complexities associated with
planning and operations of civil infrastructure
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scheduling and facility location problems
(together called as spatio-temporal location problems) share similar underlying
mathematical structures that allow researchers to analyze them jointly. However,
under dynamic pricing, spatio-temporal location decisions become interdependent
with pricing decisions which are made at a later stage through complex
interactions between competing service providers and their customers. This
necessitates the use of two-stage game theoretic models. This project develops a
comprehensive framework that relies on combining and mutually reinforcing
mathematical, computational and empirical insights. The key innovations are the
tight interplay between mathematical, computational and empirical ideas, a
holistic approach that enables the optimal tradeoff between modeling precision
and solution tractability, and a comprehensive testbed comprising large-scale
real-world networks from aviation, railways, transit, hotels and gasoline
distribution. The project not only makes deep contributions to the theoretical
and applied research in competitive transportation scheduling, but also triggers
further exploration enabling similar future contributions to the competitive
facility location theory and applications. Additionally, this general approach
could be usefully employed in other, otherwise intractable, applications of
multi-stage game theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.