* 1750462
* CAREER:   Deciphering molecular mechanisms underlying liquid-liquid phase separation of ubiquilin proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Carlos Castaneda, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 04/30/2024
* USD 827,638.00

Living cells can separate chemical reactions or other functions into separate
compartments, or organelles, most of which are surrounded by lipid membranes
that form a barrier between the rest of the cell and the organelle. Membrane-
less organelles, instead, are formed by liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) of
macromolecules (like proteins) that coalesce to form liquid-like droplets and
organelles that are not surrounded by lipid membranes. Deciphering the
biophysical rules governing the assembly and disassembly of these membrane-less
organelles is necessary to understanding their cellular functions. This project
will establish ubiquilin proteins as a model system by which the LLPS assembly
and disassembly will be studied. Ubiquilins are proteins that regulate protein
quality control mechanisms inside cells. The broader impact of this project will
lead to the development of a new multiscale approach using nuclear magnetic
resonance, small angle scattering, microscopy and computational modeling to
study LLPS that can then be extended to other molecular systems. Additionally,
the education plan aims to improve science literacy among high school students,
broaden STEM representation from economically-disadvantaged and/or
underrepresented populations, and develop science teaching and communication
skills for STEM graduate students. To accomplish these goals, high school
students will participate in a yearly mini-workshop as part of the Summer
Science Institute (SSI) at Syracuse University. These students will experiment
on how physical parameters (e.g. temperature) modulate LLPS of proteins, the
results of which will be integrated into the project's scientific
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project is focused on elucidating the
molecular determinants of the liquid-liquid phase separation of ubiquilin
proteins, specifically UBQLN1, UBQLN2 and UBQLN4. UBQLNs are a relevant model
system for studying LLPS because both intrinsically-disordered regions and
folded domains in UBQLN2 modulate its LLPS. The project's goals are to: (1)
investigate the role of protein oligomerization in promoting phase separation of
UBQLN proteins using deletion constructs, NMR spectroscopy, and microscopy, and
(2) use small-angle X-ray and neutron scattering (SAXS, SANS) to look inside
protein droplets, and structurally characterize the phase-separated and non-
phase separated states with computational modeling. Execution of this project
will directly contribute to the PI's long-term goal of building a comprehensive
model of LLPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.