* 1750109
* CAREER: Enabling Predictable Performance in Cloud Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Anshul Gandhi, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 08/31/2024
* USD 435,727.00

Cloud computing allows tenants, such as Netflix and Expedia to economically rent
compute and storage resources from providers. To enable low resource prices,
providers consolidate multiple tenants onto a single physical server. However,
this sharing of physical resources among tenants often leads to contention,
resulting in unpredictable performance. Worse, tenants cannot observe resource
contention due to the opaque nature of cloud computing. This project will
develop novel performance models to estimate resource contention in opaque cloud
deployments. These models will then be leveraged to develop solutions for cloud
tenants that mitigate performance variation, thus enabling predictable
performance in clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To realize predictable performance,
the project will proceed along two integrated fronts. On the theoretical front,
the project will develop uncertainty-aware stochastic performance models. These
models will then be integrated with control-theoretic and machine learning
techniques to infer, at runtime, the unobservable model parameters in a cloud
environment. On the systems front, armed with the uncertainty-aware models, the
project will develop solutions, including task schedulers and resource managers,
that alleviate application performance variation. The solutions will be designed
to dynamically detect and diagnose performance interference. All models and
solutions will be experimentally evaluated in public and private
clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary nature of the project
provides unique opportunities for integrated education and outreach. The primary
benefit of the project will be increasing cloud adoption and promoting its
broader impact on energy efficiency. To facilitate this goal, the project will
develop open-source solutions for platforms such as OpenStack. The project will
advance interdisciplinary education by developing performance analysis lectures
and modules that will be integrated with existing courses taught in the
departments of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics and Statistics, and the
College of Business. Outreach activities will focus on creating research
opportunities for local area high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All data
produced as a result of this project, including models, software solutions,
publications, and courseware, will be made publicly available at the project
repository: http://www.pace.cs.stonybrook.edu/predictable-clouds.html. The
project data will be maintained and made available for at least 10 years, and
even longer, if needed. Data will be stored and hosted on local web servers, and
will also be replicated on external public web servers, such as those provided
by github, which offer long-term durability and
reliability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.