* 1750025
* CAREER: Getting to the bottom of mathematics anxiety: A longitudinal investigation into its developmental operating mechanisms
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2018,10/31/2022
* Zhe Wang, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 10/31/2022
* USD 792,539.00

This project will examine the role that mathematics anxiety plays in impeding
the development of mathematical competency. Mathematics anxiety describes the
feeling of fear and apprehension experienced prior to or during math related
activities. It is a highly prevalent emotion in the student population. Highly
math anxious students, compared to their low math anxiety counterparts, exhibit
lower math achievement and less interest in math-related career paths. To
understand more precisely why and how mathematics anxiety may hinder the
development of mathematics ability, this project will (1) investigate the real-
time impacts of mathematics anxiety on math problem solving; (2) examine the
long-term impacts of mathematics anxiety on engagement in math learning in and
out of school; and (3) explore possible individual characteristics that may
mitigate the negative implications of mathematics anxiety on math learning
outcomes. The project is supported by a CAREER award to Texas Tech University by
the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances the
fundamental research literature on STEM learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this project is to further our scientific understanding of
the mechanisms underlying the negative association between mathematics anxiety
and mathematics achievement. Ultimately, this knowledge will provide
opportunities to improve the quality of emotional experiences and knowledge
acquisition in math education. This project will integrate methodological
approaches from cognitive-affective sciences, educational sciences,
psychophysiology, and developmental psychology into a 3-year longitudinal
design, following students from upper elementary school into middle school.
First, this project will test the hypothesis that mathematics anxiety impairs
math performance by undermining goal-driven attention needed for successful math
problem solving. The researchers will examine continuous attention distribution
patterns (measured by eye movement) during math problem solving in students with
varying levels of mathematics anxiety. Second, the researchers will examine the
longitudinal relation between mathematics anxiety and mathematics attainment,
with the hypothesis that avoidance and disengagement in math learning mediate
this developmental relation in multiple contexts, in class, at home, and in out
of school math activities. Third, researchers will incorporate
electrocardiography, impedance cardiography, and questionnaire measures to
explore state and trait emotion regulation and effort mobilization as possible
mechanisms in uncoupling undesired math learning outcomes from mathematics
anxiety. Through finding dissemination as well as education and outreach
programs, this project will offer the opportunity to promote public
understanding of mathematics learning in particular, and to educate parents and
teachers to become better consumers of the science of learning in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.