* 1750339
* CAREER: Using Metamodeling to Enable High-Fidelity Modeling in Risk-based Multi-hazard Structural Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Seymour Spence, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

To assess the risk and resiliency of seismic and wind excited buildings in the
United States, the use of high-fidelity computational models is paramount to
characterizing the building performance. However, the need to propagate
uncertainty through the system when estimating state-of-the-art risk/resiliency
metrics significantly hinders, if not precludes, the use of such models. This
difficulty becomes exasperated in risk-based decision-making where multiple
building design solutions must be evaluated and compared over several hazards.
The research goal of this Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER)
award is to overcome this fundamental limitation through the investigation of a
new simulation paradigm based on the optimal fusion of low-/intermediate-
fidelity metamodels with high-fidelity structural models. By defining the
metamodels through domain independent approaches, multi-hazard assessment will
be naturally encompassed and will enable new approaches for rapidly identifying
the optimal tradeoff solutions to multi-hazard risk-based decision problems.
These advances will provide models and procedures for enabling a full transition
to optimal risk-based design, while promoting the rational use of computational
resources through rigorous optimization. Risk-based design will benefit national
welfare and prosperity through enhancing the safety of the built environment
against wind and seismic events to better protect life and property during
extreme events and to maintain essential services and business continuities
during response and recovery. The educational goals of this CAREER award are to
increase the number of women in engineering and professionals with expertise in
wind loss mitigation. This will be achieved through a high school outreach
program that leverages the link between risk-based engineering and societal
benefit to inspire a diverse student pool to pursue careers in engineering, the
development of an undergraduate wind engineering program at the University of
Michigan, and undergraduate student research opportunities. To implement the
high school outreach program, project-based learning modules that connect risk-
based engineering and societal benefit through basic science will be created.
Dissemination of these materials will be achieved through a teacher training
workshop. Data from this project will be archived in the NSF-supported Natural
Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) Data Depot
(https://DesignSafe-ci.org). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will create a
new class of parametric metamodels (surrogate models) through identifying
orthogonal subspaces for each high-fidelity computational model of the
simulation environment. This will provide a setting in which both physics-based
and data-driven reduced-order parametric metamodels can be defined through
hyper-reduction and machine learning. The combined space of the high-fidelity
and parametric metamodels will provide an enriched simulation environment in
which multi-fidelity uncertainty propagation models can be defined for rapidly
estimating high-fidelity probabilistic risk/resiliency metrics. The parametric
nature of the metamodels will enable the creation of new adaptive multi-
objective optimization schemes that will allow the rapid identification of high-
fidelity multi-hazard Pareto fronts, which are central for effective risk-based
decision-making. The models identified through this effort will directly benefit
a number of other disciplines, including aerospace and biomedical engineering,
atmospheric sciences, and the automotive industry, where rapid high-fidelity
computation plays a key role in scientific discovery. The research will use the
NHERI wind tunnel facility at the University of
Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.