* 1750263
* CAREER: D3: Addressing Emerging Data-Induced Challenges in Embedded and Real-Time Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Cong Liu, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 07/31/2022
* USD 538,366.00

Data-driven embedded systems are here. The ability to create algorithms that
process massive amounts of real-time sensor-captured data is enabling designers
in many industries to develop intelligent embedded systems that automate actions
and decisions, e.g., self-driving vehicles. This emerging data-intensive
embedded computing paradigm brings a new set of data-induced challenges around
guaranteeing timing predictability and enabling latency constraints to be
analytically validated at design time. The goal of this research is to overcome
challenges due to real-time processing of massive data in embedded systems in
order to guarantee timing predictability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;D3, a
comprehensive resource management ecosystem with the capability of predictably
processing massive real-time data-intensive workloads, is implemented in the
operating system. D3 brings in a novel set of fundamental system-level
techniques, which enable smart data filtering and characterization, transparent
and supervised streaming for execution concurrency optimization, and predictable
memory management under heterogeneous architectures. The hard algorithmic
challenges due to co-scheduling memory and highly heterogeneous computing
resources such that analytical guarantees on timing predictability become
quantifiable will be addressed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing a comprehensive
heterogeneous resource management ecosystem for predictably processing massive
real-time data-intensive workloads would be a significant result for many
application domains, such as transportation and robotics. The next-generation
automotive system is a good example that could greatly benefit from the proposed
research. The outcome of this project will pave the way to certifiability of
safety-critical autonomous vehicles based on heterogeneous platforms. An
innovative undergraduate research project to develop an educational tool that
uses real-time data-driven system design concepts as its foundation assists in
realizing the educational objectives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All source code and
evaluation data will be freely available for direct download from public web
servers maintained by the University of Texas at Dallas (UTD) Computer Science
Department under an open source Gnu Public License. Additional case-study test
programs and scripts will be freely available under the open source BSD license
and directly downloadable from public web servers maintained by the UTD Computer
Science Department. All data products produced in this project will also be
archived in the UTD computer science computing repository for permanent storage.
The repository is available at www.utdallas.edu/~cong/CareerRepo.