* 1750472
* CAREER: A Comprehensive and Lightweight Framework for Transcriptome Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Robert Patro, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2020
* USD 444,170.00

Over the past decade, sequencing technologies have been developed that enable
the profiling of gene expression across a wide variety of organisms and tissue
types. These technologies allow the investigation, on a transcriptome-wide
scale, of how gene expression changes in different conditions, under various
stimuli, and in different disease states. These technologies are transformative
in progressing basic science (e.g., understanding cell biology) and applied
science (e.g., approaches to drug development). However, the deluge of data
produced by these technologies brings with it a host of computational
challenges, such as discovering if samples contain genes previously not
annotated, accurately determining the sequence of these genes, and quantifying
the abundance of all the genes expressed in a sample. Much effort has been
dedicated to developing reliable computational methods for processing this data.
Yet, even the best existing solutions are sometimes unsatisfactory in terms of
their accuracy, and are becoming computationally burdensome given the rapid rate
at which new data is being produced. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to develop a new generation of accurate and lightweight methods for
analyzing gene and transcript expression using sequencing data. These tools will
apply new data structures and algorithmic ideas to the problems of mapping
sequencing reads, discovering and assembling new transcripts, and accurately and
robustly quantifying gene expression. Further, these methods will work in the
context of both established technologies and the newly-emerging protocols that
allow measuring cell-specific gene expression across thousands of individual
cells. The methods and software produced as a result of this project will help
enable new discoveries by being more sensitive and accurate than existing
approaches, will reduce costs by decreasing computational demands, and will
speed up analyses by producing results more quickly than existing approaches.
The outreach goals of this project include the creation of educational media
including videos and a podcast series that will help convey key insights and
benefits of new computational genomics methods to both practicing biologists as
well as to the scientifically-interested public at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lightweight quantification methods streamline many
common transcriptomic analyses, like differential expression testing in well-
annotated organisms and common tissue types. Yet, substantial challenges remain
that prevent the use of lightweight methods in many analysis tasks, e.g., when
novel transcripts should be considered, or when events such as intron retention
may play an important role. This work will advance the accuracy and fundamental
capabilities of lightweight transcriptome analysis methods. Specifically, a new
graph-based data structure will be developed for indexing a collection of
reference sequences. A lightweight alignment tool will be built around this
index that will incorporate a statistical model that allows sharing of splicing
contexts across large collections of samples to guide and inform difficult
alignment problems. A multi-sample methodology for joint transcript discovery
and quantification will also be developed, based on new approaches to modeling
the joint likelihood of transcript sequences and their abundances. Efficient
likelihood factorizations will allow this approach to remain computationally
convenient. Finally, a suite of tools for processing and quantifying high-
throughput, single-cell RNA-seq data will be developed. These tools will adopt a
novel approach for solving the cell barcoding, UMI deduplication, and gene
expression estimation problems jointly, and in a unified statistical framework.
The underlying model will share statistical information between cells to improve
clustering and quantification, and to analyze expression at the resolution
supported by the data, i.e., as groups of distinguishable isoforms. All of these
tools will be released as high-quality, open-source software.