* 1750886
* CAREER: Making Type Error Debugging Work
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Sheng Chen, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 01/31/2024
* USD 522,060.00

A type system is part of a programming language to catch programming errors.
Encouraged by their success, modern programming languages increasingly employ
ever more sophisticated type systems to provide guarantees about the safety and
correctness of programs. To make type systems convenient to use, languages
usually rely on type inference to automatically determine types, thus saving
programmers from tedious and manual type annotations. When type inference fails
to compute a program's type, the error messages produced by existing compilers
are often imprecise and difficult to understand, making it hard for programmers
to fix a program. The goal of this research is to make type systems more usable,
and thereby to assist programmers in fixing errors quickly and reliably. The
intellectual merits of this research are a series of techniques and theories for
generating informative messages for fixing type errors in advanced type systems,
and a unified representation of error reparation for integrating various
debugging techniques. The developed techniques are driven by insights gained
from a large-scale empirical study and a usability study. The project's broader
significance and importance is to make languages with advanced type systems and
type inference more usable, leading to improved programming productivity and
increased adoption of languages for constructing more reliable software. A
reduced learning curve will specifically increase the adoption of such languages
in both K-12 and higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conceptual and
technical development of the proposed research is backed by variational typing,
a typing discipline that supports the reuse of computations, and that encodes
type uncertainties with sound underlying theories and efficient implementations.
The ability to reuse type information allows efficient exploration of large
spaces of potential error fixes, the efficient location of errors, and the
generation of informative error messages. While the proposed research targets
Haskell, a type system laboratory with numerous advanced features, the
techniques and theories developed by systematically studying the interactions of
variational types and other typing features are applicable to a wide range of
programming languages.