* 1750474
* CAREER: Visual Analytics by Demonstration for Interactive Data Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Alexander Endert, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 04/30/2024
* USD 491,640.00

In today's data-driven era, more people analyze data as part of their daily
lives. Visual analytic technologies help people in a variety of these domains
including business, health, education, national security, and many more. These
visual analytic techniques are effective since they combine powerful machine
learning with interactive data visualization. Currently, the way that people use
such systems is through user interfaces with control panels to adjust parameters
of the analytic models and visualization properties directly. For example,
controls may ask users to select which analytic model to use, which parameter to
adjust, and by how much. However, when people do not have the necessary
expertise or training in data science or information visualization, they may not
be able to properly use these tools and miss out on important insights. Instead,
this project will explore, design, develop, and evaluate techniques that allow
people to demonstrate their analytic goals, tasks, and operations. Developing
this "visual analytics by demonstration" method of user interaction has the
potential to impact numerous data-driven domains, and society more broadly. This
project will also provide educational experience and research training for
graduate and undergraduate students to guide them towards careers in
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will create Visual
Analytics by Demonstration prototypes, generalizable toolkits, and demonstration
primitives to foster exploration and discovery in visual analytics. Instead of
control panels that require users to directly parameterize analytic models and
visualizations, people provide demonstrations, from which the system selects the
appropriate visual representation, analytic model, and parameters. To realize
the benefits of such technology, many research challenges exist and must be
addressed. For instance, what are the basic demonstration primitives that people
use to communicate their intent to a system? How can systems interpret these
demonstrations and perform the correct analytic and visualization operations?
Finally, how can these systems guard against potential user bias in exploring
data using by-demonstration? Project objectives include the design,
implementation, and evaluation of by-demonstration visual analytic prototypes.
The research will perform formative studies to develop demonstration primitives
categorized by user tasks. The project will design and develop applications for
specific data domains as well as general, open-sourced toolkits for other
researchers to use and extend. User studies will identify if and how specific
tasks and operations can be performed by demonstrations, and how these compare
in performance to current control panel interfaces. The proposed work will also
create instructional material to integrate visual analytics by demonstration
into courses that teach visual analytics, or data science more generally. The
project website (http://va.gatech.edu/projects/visual-analytics-by-
demonstration/) will include project information, links to resulting
publications, videos, and open-source software
produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.