* 1750597
* CAREER: From Genes to Assemblages: Causes and Consequences of Spatiotemporal Population Variation Across Millennia in Small Mammals
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Jessica Blois, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 702,612.00

Understanding how species respond to environmental change, and the long-term
consequences of those responses, is important for appropriately managing
biodiversity for the future. Using fossilized small mammal populations from the
recent past (spanning the environmental changes of the last 21,000 years) in the
western United States, this project will explore the ability of different
species and communities to adapt to future environmental changes and their
likelihood of extinction. The research findings will be translated into
evidence-based educational activities for middle school through college students
and the broader public, aiming to increase scientific literacy of the public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Species niches and community context interact to shape
species responses to environmental change, and the ecological and evolutionary
legacies of these responses will persist for many years into the future. To
investigate the drivers and outcomes of population-level responses to long-term
change, small mammal fossil deposits in the western US spanning the past 1000s
of years will be excavated, and compared to previously excavated deposits from
northern California. The relative influence of climate, environmental niches,
and biotic interactions on shaping variability in population abundances across
space and time will be quantified. Then, the influence of population-level
abundance changes on compositional, functional and genetic structure and
diversity through time will be determined. Finally, these patterns will be
forecast to the future to determine how environmental change may influence the
ecological and evolutionary structure of future populations and assemblages. The
research findings will be developed into teaching modules for middle and high-
school classrooms and the broader public. In parallel, the PI will revise her
undergraduate classes to fit a framework of active learning and evidence-based
pedagogical techniques. Overall, this project will significantly advance
understanding of the patterns, processes, and outcomes of species responses to
climate change, as well as the scientific literacy of the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.