* 1750981
* CAREER:  Network-Based Signaling Pathway Analysis: Methods and Tools for Turning Theory into Practice
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Anna Ritz, Reed College
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 938,147.00

Cells receive and respond to signals in their environment, and these signals are
often disrupted in disease. Experiments can help understand how proteins
interact with each other to alter the cell's behavior; however deciding which
proteins to test in an unbiased manner is challenging. Networks, or graphs, are
commonly used to represent interactions among proteins, where proteins (nodes)
are linked by pairwise interactions (edges). While network-based methods have
been popular for many years, predictions from these methods are often
challenging to interpret and the tools have not been made easily accessible to
biologists, dramatically slowing the potential pace of scientific discovery. The
goal of this research is to develop novel methods that more closely reflect the
biological questions posed by experimental biologists, and enable the adoption
of such tools by the scientific community. This work will be accomplished at a
primarily undergraduate institution (PUI), and students who wish to pursue
careers in biology need computational training. The project will establish a
program for undergraduate training in computational biology at PUIs through
local and national initiatives that support both student and faculty
development. This project will offer frameworks for (a) introducing
computational biology to undergraduates through conference attendance and (b)
implementing computational biology activities and courses for undergraduate
biology programs with limited resources. Results from this project can be found
at http://www.reed.edu/biology/ritz/research.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&
gt;Cells respond to their environment using a series of protein-protein
interactions, collectively referred to as signaling pathways, that transfer
extracellular signals to the regulation of target genes. Computational methods
that describe signaling pathways as graphs have been critical hypothesis-
generation tools for understanding the relationship among proteins in cellular
signaling response. This project identifies a unifying concept in graph theory
-- that of computing directed, connected paths in graphs -- and applies this
idea to signaling pathway analysis questions posed in multiple fields of
biology. Novel path-finding algorithms will be developed to generate mechanistic
hypotheses of active signaling, using dysregulated signaling in disease as a
case study. These path-finding algorithms will be applied to signaling pathway
analysis in cellular and developmental biology, including pathways that regulate
changes in cell shape (morphogenesis) and eye development (retinal
neurogenesis). Close collaborations with biologists will help inform the
development of easy-to-use tools and broaden their applicability to other
fields. The final aim will establish hypergraphs, a generalization of directed
graphs, as an improved mathematical representation of signaling. The collection
of novel methods produced by this project, along with a demonstration that these
tools serve as hypothesis generation engines for other fields in biology, will
be a significant step towards accelerating the hypothesis generation-validation-
testing research cycle. Biological contributions by adopters of these methods
will exponentiate this work's impact on scientific knowledge and discovery
beyond the computational contributions in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.