* 1750936
* CAREER: Scalable and Adaptable Cross-Domain Autonomous Health Assessment
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Nirmalya Roy, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 04/30/2024
* USD 650,316.00

The wide availability of commodity smart home sensor systems (Google Home,
Amazon Echo, etc.) and internet-of-things (IoT) devices (Fitbit, Actigraph,
etc.) is making it easier to continuously monitor individuals' health-related
vital signals, activities, and behaviors to provide just-in-time health
intervention to the aging population. This CAREER project seeks to design,
implement, and evaluate heterogeneous sensor systems in smart homes that help
ameliorate the progressive functional and behavioral health decline of older
adults. The work specifically looks at cross-domain approaches that can
accommodate variability in behavior, activity, and physiological health
conditions across a large population and diverse set of smart home sensor
systems. The inability to build scalable and adaptable activity and behavior
monitoring models across domains such as multi-occupant homes with heterogeneous
internet-of-things devices is a major impediment to adoption of smart home
technologies for healthcare applications. The project develops novel deep
transfer learning techniques, optimization-based heuristics, opportunistic
sensing architecture, and spatiotemporal dynamical systems-based approaches to
address the diversity, adaptability, and reliability of activity and behavior
recognition models across different users and technologies, while leveraging a
human-in-the-loop control for improving the performance of the sensor systems.
These techniques will help automate activity and physiological health monitoring
at scale, and thereby improve the design and study of adaptive interventions for
elderly people, their families, and professional caregivers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to realize autonomous health assessment
methodologies in practice, it is necessary to build an activity and behavior
recognition system across multiple inhabitants and various connected consumer
devices that can select, adapt, and cope with device and user heterogeneities,
privacy characteristics, resource constraints and scarcity of labeled data. To
address the above-mentioned problems, this research project contributes to new
methodology in four ways. First, it is introducing deep transfer learning
activity recognition model and multi-user multi-device optimization-based
heuristics that automatically help adapt the inherent variations across
different domains, including user/device-type/device-instance. Second, it is
designing a spatio-temporal dynamical system approach based on fractal dynamics
to mitigate the variability in various sensor signals, and capture the self-
similarity of human physiological health markers and establish the parametric
task performance dependency between functional and behavioral health
measurements. Third, it posits an opportunistic sensing architecture and human-
in-the loop activity model for real-time data sharing and annotation that help
optimize the user interruption and system performance. Fourth, it is designing a
distributed implementation of tailored-computational techniques in actual smart
home deployments, and evaluating the effectiveness of sensor-based functional
and behavioral models and algorithms for just-in-time health assessment in
actual living environments. In addition to the targeted focus on education, an
ongoing collaboration with the University of Maryland, School of Nursing is
being leveraged for real deployment of smart home sensor systems and
technologies at three retirement community centers and senior homes in the
greater Baltimore area to compound the impact of proposed evidence-based
research efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.