* 1750127
* CAREER: New Mathematical Programming Techniques in Approximation and Online Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2023
* Viswanath Nagarajan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 01/31/2023
* USD 508,002.00

Numerous applications in engineering, science and business are modeled and
solved as combinatorial optimization problems. In today?s digital age, data
collection and storage is inexpensive. The bottleneck lies in society's ability
to solve increasingly larger problem instances, where the challenge typically
stems from computational or informational limitations. This intractability can
often be overcome by searching for approximately optimal instead of exactly
optimal solutions. This project will design new mathematical-programming-based
techniques that are broadly applicable in approximating combinatorial
optimization problems. The project will strengthen connections of theoretical
computer science to various fields of mathematics such as discrepancy theory,
geometry, graph theory, optimization and probability. The PI will also
collaborate with industry colleagues to disseminate the theoretical findings on
some of the studied problems and assess their practical impact. The educational
aspect of this project includes training undergraduate and graduate students,
developing new course material and organizing a workshop for high-school
teachers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Despite the wide range of possible
combinatorial optimization problems, a common approach underlying numerous
results in approximation and online algorithms is mathematical programming and
rounding. This project will develop new techniques in this area by investigating
(1) algorithms based on convex-programming hierarchies, (2) rounding algorithms
based on recent advances in algorithmic discrepancy and (3) an online primal-
dual framework for convex objectives. This project involves designing general
algorithmic techniques (and identifying problem classes to which they apply) as
well as improving the state-of-art on central problems such as k-Median,
directed Steiner tree, the Beck-Fiala conjecture, unsplittable flow and online
multicommodity routing. This project will also expand the applicability of the
resulting techniques to areas such as combinatorics and operations research.