* 1750987
* CAREER: Science of Security for Mobile User Authentication
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Janne Lindqvist, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2020
* USD 189,178.00

Mobile devices contain a collection of personal, private, and financial
information that, if accessed by an unauthorized user, has the potential to be
severely compromising. Thus, it is important for mobile devices to verify
whether their users are allowed to access the device and its services. We call
this mobile authentication, and it is frequent, prevalent, and necessary. The
need to protect data from unauthorized access is important to understand,
irrespective of whether an end-user ultimately opts out of using authentication.
It is incumbent on manufacturers and researchers to provide usable and secure
methods that everyone can use. To reach that point requires solid scientific
understanding. This project will scientifically evaluate the metrics and
measurement techniques for accurately assessing mobile authentication, and use
those metrics to drive the design of new authentication systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is motivated by the following observations: 1)
people are switching from desktops to smartphones as their main computing and
Internet platform, 2) mobile platforms provide opportunities for ingenious
authentication methods, and 3) although the scientific and engineering community
is producing many solutions to mobile authentication, the underlying trade-offs
and science behind mobile authentication are not well understood. This project
uniquely integrates research and education and promotes underrepresented
students in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) in K-12,
high school, undergraduate and graduate studies. This is an interdisciplinary
project that leverages several disciplines including security engineering,
mobile computing and human-computer interaction. This project will advance
fundamental knowledge on user authentication and security. Towards that end, the
project will 1) develop a framework grounded in statistical error analysis for
evaluating user authentication systems, 2) create guidelines on how to evaluate
and design experiments to ensure comparability and reproducibility, 3) study the
cognitive processes that impact secret-knowledge based authentication systems,
4) design, prototype, and implement, novel lightweight mobile-friendly
authentication systems, and 5) explore innovative approaches that prevent
cognitive overload and ensure security while mobile.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.