* 1750377
* Positive Selection on Gene Regulation and the Evolution of the Human Brain
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Courtney Babbitt, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2022
* USD 330,001.00

Although humans and chimpanzees share approximately 98% of the same genes, they
have very different brains. Scientists hypothesize that regions of the genome
that turn gene expression on and off are critically important for understanding
this difference. This project uses evolutionary and experimental methods to
examine how natural selection has shaped gene expression in the human brain. The
investigators will analyze regions of the genome showing evidence for
adaptations unique to the human lineage, to better understand the advent,
nature, and importance of neural differentiation between humans and non-human
primates. The project will provide student-led educational experiences using a
next-generation sequencing platform for hands-on training. The critical big-data
skill set that students will gain is translatable both to graduate training and
careers in biotech. Additionally, outreach to local elementary school students
will be provided through a partnership with the Eureka! Program for STEM
retention of women, which runs every summer at UMass Amherst.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will find functional links between adaptation
across the genome and changes in neural cells. Using a curated bioinformatics
catalog of putative enhancers, this project will test the hypothesis that there
are functional links between adaptation in the genome and changes in neural
phenotypes that occurred during human evolution. In order to understand the
functional consequences of mutations particular to human regulatory regions,
changes in gene expression associated with particular gene regulatory sequences
will be measured. This will be done in neural progenitor cells and in mature
neurons, in both human and chimpanzee cell lines. To functionally test these
regions, cutting-edge high-throughput enhancer assays will be used to measure
significant differences in how these ~10,000 implicated regulatory regions are
driving differential gene expression in neural progenitor cells and mature
neurons. Both of these cell types will be derived from induced pluripotent stem
cell (iPSC) lines, which have the capacity to be driven to many different cell
types. The results will reveal information about the functional links between
adaptation and human-specific changes in a tightly controlled experimental
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.