* 1750063
* CAREER: Structured Output Models of Recommendations, Activities, and Behavior
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Julian McAuley, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Wei Ding
* 07/31/2023
* USD 550,000.00

This project will investigate predictive models of human behavior that are
capable of estimating rich, structured outputs. Such predictive models underlie
many of the most important computing systems in science and industry, ranging
from e-Commerce to personalized healthcare. While existing models (i.e.,
"recommender systems") typcially focus on simple predictions (a user's next
click or star rating, a patient's next symptom, etc.), this project shall
develop models capable of generating outputs in the form of text, images, and
sequences. These new modalities of predictive modeling will allow personalized
recommender systems to be adapted to answer complex questions, predict nuanced
reactions, and even to design new content that elicits a certain
reaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's technical approach combines ideas
from personalized recommender systems with newly-emerging techniques for
generative modeling. Ideas from recommender systems can be used to handle issues
like personalization, subjectivity, or other variance that arises due to
differences between individuals; ideas from generative modeling allow complex
outputs (text, images, sequences) to be generated. This technical contribution
can be viewed either as a new form of recommender system capable of handling
more complex queries, or alternately as a new suite of generative modeling
approaches that can account for variance between individuals. This project will
have impact to applications where complex, high-dimensional data meets issues of
personalization and subjectivity. Specific examples to be investigated include
online activity traces, e-Commerce, and personalized
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.