* 1750621
* CAREER: Mapping pathways to food security and sustainable development
* SBE,SMA
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Catherine Brinkley, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 05/31/2024
* USD 619,951.00

America's most productive farmland lies in the direct path of urban expansion,
competing economically with housing markets. The U.S. population is predicted to
grow by 50% before 2050, adding nearly 140 million people. Accommodating such
growth requires an understanding of urban form and both its influence on and its
response to surrounding land-uses. Metropolitan areas contain only 20% of the
total U.S. farmland and 80% of the population. Yet, metropolitan-area farms
account for the majority of fruit, nut, berry, vegetable, milk and egg
production. It is this array of fresh food that is needed to battle the upsurge
of unhealthy eating and associated diet-related diseases, such as obesity and
diabetes. Encouraged by growing consumer preferences and willingness to pay more
for local foods, many metropolitan farms are increasingly turning to direct
marketing through you-pick operations, farm stands, farmers' markets, and
Community Supported Agriculture (CSA) as a way to stay economically competitive
against the housing market. This project explores how social networks formed
through local food marketing influence land-use regulations, agricultural
economics, and urban development patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To inform a
"science of cities," this research tests a novel explanatory theory. Ecologists
have identified structural complexity as an important indicator for total system
growth and resilience. Structural complexity fosters niches. The presence of
niches allows for a diversity of uses. Such diversity fosters resilience in the
face of natural disasters, disease or extinction of one species. Structural
complexity can be estimated. For example, carefully laying a flexible chain over
the surface of a coral reef provides a simple indicator of surface roughness,
termed rugosity. Rugosity measurements correlate with the availability of
habitat niches and related coral biodiversity, total reef species, reef growth
and resilience to stressors. Drawing from ecology, this research translates the
metric of rugosity -- an interface measurement that indicates niches, rich
social networks, and potential resilience to shocks -- to urban and agricultural
studies. This research will measure the structural complexity of urban areas as
critical to urban and agricultural growth (land values, population growth,
production), shared metabolism (supply chains, resource use), and resilience
(response to economic and natural disaster). Satellite imagery provided by the
National Agricultural Statistics Service now allows high-fidelity spatially
explicit data for multivariate regression analysis on farmland loss, crop
diversity, and urban development. Collection of novel data on marketing channels
allows social network analysis on the mediating effects formed through the food
system on land-use. In sum, this research tests the hypothesis that farms that
are more intertwined physically with urban lands will also be more intertwined
socially through direct and local marketing, thereby changing diet-related
health, job diversity, farm tenure, and land-use patterns for urban and
agricultural communities alike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.