* 1750717
* CAREER: Defining colonization mechanisms and functions of Streptomyces strains in root microbiomes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Sarah Werner, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 05/31/2022
* USD 559,546.00

The human population is projected to reach 9 billion people by the year 2050. To
accommodate this increase in population, global food production will need to
increase by 70-100%. Chemical fertilizers, such as phosphate rock, are commonly
used to improve crop yields. However, many of these fertilizers are non-
renewable resources that will continue to decrease in supply as the demand
continually increases. Alternatives to chemical fertilizers are, therefore,
necessary to continue improving crop yields into the future. This need, combined
with increased public awareness of host-associated microbial communities
(microbiomes) and the benefits they provide to their hosts, has turned the
attention of the agricultural biotechnology industry towards harnessing plant
microbiomes by developing probiotics that increase plant growth and
productivity. Before these plant probiotics can have widespread success as an
alternative way to improve crop yields, it must be understood how microorganisms
inhabit plant tissue consistently and robustly despite encountering various
hurdles to colonization. In addition to plant-produced chemicals that can limit
microorganism growth, other microorganisms competing for similar niche space can
affect each other's growth directly via products such as antibiotics. This
research will explore the mechanisms used by microorganisms to protect
themselves against these harmful chemical attacks. Planned educational
activities will provide education, resources, and training to local and regional
communities, targeting underrepresented groups. Together, the intertwined
research and educational plans will provide a new perspective to improve and
complement product development by agricultural biotechnology companies to expand
their potential success to enhance plant
productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants evolved in a microbial world, and, as
with many other multicellular organisms, specific subsets of microorganisms
assemble into stable host-associated microbiomes. Recent massive parallel
sequencing studies using the universal 16S ribosomal RNA gene defined
microbiomes for a wide variety of plant species. Results demonstrated clear
overlap in internal root (endosphere) microbiome composition, even between the
evolutionarily divergent monocots and dicots and across diverse soil reservoir
microbial communities. These commonalities suggest that selective pressures,
likely imposed by both the plant immune system and competing microbes, exist and
limit successful colonization of the endosphere. This work will explore specific
interactions between collections of Streptomyces isolates, non-Streptomyces
isolates, and genetic mutants of Arabidopsis thaliana as a tractable model
system. Streptomyces were chosen based on their ability to: colonize roots from
a variety of plants, influence the viability of other soil microbes through
production of secondary metabolites, and be controlled the plant immune system.
This research will test the hypothesis that Streptomyces species act as keystone
members of the endosphere through investigation of how chemicals produced by
host plants and/or microbes shape root microbiome membership. The knowledge
gained from these studies could facilitate consistent and robust plant
colonization by beneficial microbes, even in the face of direct microbial
competition and host defenses. Understanding these mechanisms will be critical
as we move from basic lab experiments into development of plant biological
products to increase crop yields, and thereby, global food security, as the
human population continues to rise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.