* 1750813
* CAREER: Scaffolding Strategies for Undergraduate Mathematics Modeling Skills
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Jennifer Czocher, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 970,800.00

Maintaining an effective pipeline of students into STEM careers depends upon
their ability to learn mathematical modeling. Mathematical modeling involves
creating a mathematical representation that can describe a nonmathematical
problem. This CAREER: Scaffolding Strategies for Undergraduate Mathematics
Modeling Skills project is designed to increase understanding about how students
learn mathematical modeling, and then to use that information to improve
teaching of mathematical modeling. Research indicates that learning to create
mathematical models is often difficult for students. Because of this difficulty,
students benefit from strategies that help them progress from their current
level of understanding to higher levels of understanding and mastery. These
scaffolding strategies appear to be especially important when math is used to
describe non-math problems. This project has two research goals: 1) to
understand how undergraduate STEM students build a mathematical model, including
the process by which they define a mathematical strategy to describe a
nonmathematical problem; and 2) to identify task features and facilitator
scaffolding strategies that best support the growth of students' mathematical
modeling abilities. The project will focus on three critical competencies
related to mathematical modeling: making assumptions, mathematizing, and
validating. Improving student skills in mathematics is important for improving
student performance in STEM fields, a national priority. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
mixed-methods study will be conducted to address three major research questions:
1) What modeling capabilities are most relevant to success in STEM courses,
according to STEM professors? 2) How do different modeling tasks elicit
different types of student reasoning, and which of these reasoning types are the
most promising for improving STEM students' modeling competencies? 3) What
scaffolding strategies are most promising for improving STEM students' modeling
competencies and why? To answer these questions, the project will be conducted
in three phases: a sensitizing study, a probing study, and an efficacy study.
Interpretive qualitative analysis will be used to understand why and how
students engaged in the competencies identified in Phase 1 and 2. In Phase 3,
the efficacy study, interviews will be conducted with specific scaffolding
contingencies to examine relationships among task environment, scaffolding
strategies, and modeling competencies. An education plan involves training
graduate assistants to implement the identified scaffolding strategies in
mathematics and mathematics education classrooms. These results will then be
disseminated more broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.