* 1750944
* CAREER: Ultrafast Carrier Dynamics in 2D Group-IV Monochalcogenides
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Lyubov Titova, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 05/31/2024
* USD 573,111.00

Non-technical Description: Discovery of graphene, recognized by the 2010 Nobel
Prize in Physics, ushered an era of research and development of single layer,
often called two-dimensional (2D) materials, with potential applications in
high-speed optoelectronics, solar energy conversion, and chemical sensors. This
project focuses on a new class of 2D materials that includes GeS, SnS, SnSe and
GeSe. These materials are environmentally stable, composed of earth abundant
elements, and predicted to exhibit unique characteristics such as a high
electric conductivity and a spontaneous electric polarization, or
ferroelectricity. Ferroelectricity makes them particularly attractive for
applications in next generation solar cells as intrinsic electric field
facilitates conversion of absorbed light into electric current. This project
investigates processes that occur in these materials when they absorb light.
Understanding these processes is necessary to lay the foundation to new
photovoltaic and optoelectronic devices. The research activities in this project
are integrated with educational and outreach activities aimed at inspiring women
and students from disadvantaged backgrounds to pursue careers in science and
technology and providing them with mentorship and research opportunities. To
achieve this goal, the Principal Investigator's team works with Worcester Girls,
Inc., a program for high school girls, and hosts annual research forums that
bring together undergraduate students from Worcester Polytechnic Institute,
Mount Wachusett Community College and other community colleges in Central
Massachusetts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This project focuses
on dynamics of photoexcited charge carriers in an emergent class of the two-
dimensional (2D) van der Waals nanomaterials, group-IV monochalcogenides. These
materials have been predicted to possess extraordinary properties such as robust
room temperature ferroelectricity and strongly anisotropic electronic and
optical properties that can be controlled by external fields. The Principal
Investigator's team studies the carrier dynamics over sub-picosecond to
nanosecond time scales and aims to uncover the relationship between structure
and optoelectronic properties in 2D group-IV monochalcogenide nanostructures. A
key objective of this project is development of novel approaches to fast, all-
optical control over optical properties and ferroelectric polarization in these
materials by means of optical and intense THz pulses. To achieve these
objectives, the research team applies all-optical ultrafast techniques including
terahertz emission spectroscopy and time-resolved terahertz spectroscopy, time-
resolved microscopic photoluminescence and nonlinear excitation with intense
terahertz to investigate 2D group-IV nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.