* 1750341
* CAREER: Molding the thermal emission of light
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2024
* Mikhail Kats, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 01/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Thermal emission (thermal radiation) is the phenomenon responsible for most of
the light in the universe, including light from the sun and stars, the glow of
embers in a fire, and the invisible infrared light from people and vehicles that
enables thermal imaging. Though detailed understanding of thermal emission dates
back over a century, recent advances have encouraged the re-examination of this
phenomenon and its potential applications. This project will explore ways to
utilize and engineer thermal emission for applications such as passively
regulating temperatures without using external power or feedback loops, coatings
that camouflage objects from infrared cameras, and improved temperature
measurements at a distance. The design and implementation of thermal emitters
and thermal-emission measurement schemes will involve computational design,
collaboration with materials scientists, micro- and nanofabrication, and table-
top optical experiments. Students working on this project will thus gain
experience in all parts of the engineering process, and develop analytical,
experimental, and communication skills. This project will closely integrate the
research, teaching, and outreach missions, with the aims of improving
undergraduate and graduate education, communicating science to the public, and
increasing participation in science from students at all levels. The principal
investigator will incorporate timely research findings into his advanced optics
and photonics courses, which will be redesigned using a hybrid model combining
lectures and a flipped classroom approach. The project will aim to expand the
recruitment of students from groups underrepresented in science and technology
programs via targeted recruiting into summer and graduate programs. To promote
science communication, the principal investigator and his group will also launch
a podcast focused on topics in applied physics, technology, and the practice of
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional wisdom grounded in the century-old
Planck and Stefan-Boltzmann laws holds that thermally emitted light is
broadband, unpolarized, non-directional, and becomes brighter with rising
temperature. Over the last fifteen years, a number of groups have shown that it
is possible to engineer the spectrum, directionality, and polarization of
thermal emitters, enabling applications such as thermo-photovoltaics and high-
efficiency incandescent light sources. However, other engineering degrees of
freedom of thermal emitters have scarcely been explored, including temperature
dependence in the emissivity, temperature non-uniformity, and wavefront
selectivity. This project will explore these degrees of freedom and their
applications to thermoregulation, infrared privacy, and metrology. Phase-
transition materials will be used to realize thermal emitters with temperature-
dependent emissivity, utilizing thin-film optical design and nanoscale defect
engineering to maximize the design space. One set of emitters will enable
passive regulation of temperature in systems where radiative heat transfer
dominates, such as components of spacecraft or high-temperature power plants.
Complementary emitter designs will enable cloaking of objects from infrared
cameras, masking temperature profiles. In parallel, a new thermography technique
will be developed, granting the ability to measure temperature distributions
underneath the surfaces of materials. Finally, thermal emitters will be
demonstrated that can directly generate a variety of complex optical wavefronts,
including optical vortices and radially polarized beams.