* 1750011
* CAREER: The Working Mechanics of Organic Electrochemical Transistors
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2023
* Bjorn Lussem, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 01/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;The organic electrochemical
transistor (OECT) is one of the most successful organic bio-electronic devices.
The list of applications of OECTs ranges from sensors for biomolecules, to
electrocardiographic recordings, and in-vivo recording of brain activity.
Overall, OECTs will open new ways to study and monitor common diseases, which
can lead to an improvement of the health and quality of life of people in the US
and around the world.&lt;br/&gt;However, despite the intense interest in OECTs,
the understanding of their working mechanism is incomplete. Models used to
describe OECTs split the device in two separate parts - one part describing
ionic conduction inside the gate electrolyte, and a second part describing the
electronic conduction inside the organic semiconductor. This artificial
separation between ionic and electronic currents leads to inconsistencies in the
description of the device operation, which have to be resolved in order to
increase the performance of OECTs. &lt;br/&gt;In its research component, the
project aims at enhancing the understanding of the working mechanisms of OECTs.
A 2D numerical simulation will be implemented and validated. The model will be
used to quantify carrier densities and electric fields inside the devices, to
understand the origin of current instabilities of OECTs, and to quantitatively
describe the sensing mechanism of OECTs.&lt;br/&gt;The educational goal of this
project is to increase the awareness and knowledge of the nature and ethics of
science for students of introductory science courses and high school students.
Short graphic novels will be developed that explain the nature of science using
anecdotes from the lives of famous researchers as examples. These teaching
materials will be used in an inverted physics
classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Organic Electrochemical
Transistors (OECTs) hold the promise of enabling new bioelectronic applications
and of providing new means to study the working mechanisms of biological
systems. OECTs rely on a delicate interplay between ionic and electric currents,
which, however, is not sufficiently understood. The research goal of this
proposal is to close this research gap and to enhance our knowledge in the
working mechanisms of OECTs. &lt;br/&gt;To reach this aim, the following
objectives are pursued: i) To formulate and validate a two-dimensional drift-
diffusion model that quantitatively describes OECT behavior; ii) to study the
origin of hysteresis and gate bias stress effects in OECTs; and iii) to study
and model the sensing mechanism of OECTs.&lt;br/&gt;To describe OECT operation,
the continuity equations of all involved charge carriers must be solved along
with the Poisson equation. A drift-diffusion simulation will be implemented and
validated by moving front experiments, impedance spectroscopy of metal-
electrolyte-semiconductor junctions, and electric characterization of
systematically varied OECTs. A transient model of OECTs will be implemented to
explain the origin of hysteresis and gate-bias stress effects in OECTs.
Enzymatic reactions are added to the simulation in order to describe the sensing
mechanism of OECTs quantitatively.&lt;br/&gt;These experiments have the
potential to advance the knowledge in the field: i) the steady state
distribution of all charge carriers inside the organic semiconductor will be
clarified, which is essential to understand the details of OECT operation. ii)
Approaches to avoid instabilities found in current OECTs are proposed, which is
essential for a later commercialization. iii) A detailed understanding of the
sensing mechanism of OECTs is developed. &lt;br/&gt;The educational goal of the
project is to strengthen introductory physics teaching by developing modules
that discuss the nature and ethics of science. In collaboration with the Access
and Support for Successful Undergraduate Research Experiences (ASSURE) program,
summer projects will be offered to students from minority serving universities
to support them in their applications for graduate schools.