* 1750380
* CAREER: A collaboration coach with effective intervention strategies to optimize group performance.
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Ehsan Hoque, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2024
* USD 623,453.00

Many employees question the effectiveness of workplace meetings, despite their
importance to collaborative decision-making. Sometimes attendees have trouble
staying focused, or else one individual dominates the conversation; in both
cases, productivity is down. The ability to conduct a meeting and foster
effective participation by all is influenced by subjective and unquantifiable
factors such as relationship dynamics, gender biases, and willingness to accept
criticism. This research will explore whether it may be possible to avoid these
complications by using an impersonal entity - the computer - to conduct group
meetings and provide both live and post-meeting feedback that enables
participants to stay on topic, take part equally, and listen closely to one
another, all while generating analytics about the process. The framework that
will be developed in this research may serve as a tool for improving meeting
efficiency and effectiveness, while opening up the possibility of designing
interventions for individuals with Asperger syndrome or social phobia who find
it difficult to assert themselves in group settings. Providing live feedback
during a meeting will require real-time recognition and analysis of the sensed
data, but live feedback is only valuable when its interpretation does not impose
a cognitive overload on the participants. This research will make contributions
on designing live feedback that is effective yet not distractive. Project
findings will also be applicable in the context of online learning, where a
computer facilitator could engage every student equally. In addition to
standardized test scores, computers can also create objective analytics on, for
example, students' ability to ask questions, participate effectively and
maintain a positive attitude. Recognizing students for their effort may
positively impact their scores. Project findings may help virtual assistants
(such as Alexa or Google Home) mediate conversations with appropriate and
respectful intervention strategies, and in addition they may yield insights into
the role played by gender and racial diversity in improving team performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interplay of human behaviors (e.g., facial expression,
tone of voice, language, interruptions, participation rates, and turn-taking) is
considered subtle, sometimes contradictory, and often confusing. These behaviors
can be highly individual-specific, and may require temporal modeling with real-
time performance if they are to be harnessed automatically for effective meeting
mediation. While the raw sensed numbers are useful when developing algorithm
benchmarks, they add very little value for users. This research will use
principles of human centric computing to visualize, interpret and reveal
insights from raw behavioral data. In particular, the following research
questions will be addressed using human-centric approaches in the context of
online video conferencing: 1) What possible mediation strategies exist that
avoid being disruptive and disrespectful to human participants; 2) Which is most
helpful: live feedback, post-meeting feedback, a combination of both, or no
feedback at all; 3) Can we implement an automated process to facilitate meeting
productivity; and 4) Does feedback improve group performance in any measurable
way?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.