* 1750675
* Human population history and the evolution of human immune function
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Jessica Brinkworth, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2024
* USD 421,137.00

Pathogens are thought to have played a significant role in shaping human
population history by affecting patterns of mortality and immune system
evolution. Moreover, differential pathogen exposure across ancient populations
may have resulted in modern day population differences in immune function. This
project will investigate how Yersinia pestis (plague) exposure in past
populations may have affected modern day human immune system function and
outcomes of illness. The investigators will compare the responses of macrophages
(cells required by Y. pestis to establish an infection) from individuals
descended from populations with putative severe historic plague exposure
(European) and substantially lesser plague exposure (West African). The research
findings will advance our understanding of the role of pathogens in human
evolution, and may inform public health research on immune function. The project
will provide laboratory training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students, including groups underrepresented in science, and foster a diverse,
international research network. Findings will be distributed not only through
peer-reviewed publications, conferences and popular press, but directly to the
public through university-organized adult education seminars and child science
engagement events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human immune systems have functionally
diverged, with geographic populations exhibiting differences in immune responses
to particular pathogens, and in the manifestation of chronic
inflammatory/autoimmune diseases and cancers. One possible contributing factor
to the strong functional divergence in immunity seen in such a comparatively
young species is differing degrees of natural selection on the immune system by
"local" past infectious disease epidemics. Plague has been posited to be one of
the strongest agents of disease-based natural selection in human history.
Encountered by Eurasian and North and Central African populations until it
disseminated worldwide during the late 19th century, Y. pestis is estimated to
have killed 30-50% of the European population during the "Black Death" outbreak
of the 14th century. Plague, therefore, has long been suspected of altering the
immune function of European populations. There has been little examination of
human immune responses to Y. pestis to assess assertions that it is a factor in
the divergence of immunity and health of human populations. The objective of
this study is to clarify how immune responses in modern populations with
differing historical plague exposure have evolved and respond to Y. pestis. By
infecting macrophages from historically severely- and lesser-exposed populations
with Y. pestis in vitro and assessing whole genome expression, cell
physiological responses and evidence of natural selection, this project aims to
identify 1) population-level variation in genomic and cell physiological
responses to plague, 2) immune responses that are more plague-specific, and 3)
responding genes that are evolving. These data will be compared to responses to
other bacterial infections, and assessed for association with acute and chronic
diseases of differing prevalence in European and African American populations.
In combination this work will better define how differing infectious disease
histories are reflected in the immune function of modern human
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.