* 1750158
* CAREER: Resilient Execution with Bounded-Time Recovery (REBOUND)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Linh Thi Xuan Phan, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2024
* USD 475,430.00

This project develops new ways to defend critical infrastructure systems, such
as factory control networks, medical devices, or power plants, against attacks.
These systems directly interact with the physical world, so a successful attack
can have serious consequences: for instance, a compromised chemical plant could
have severe environmental consequences, and a compromised medical device could
result in injury or death. Contemporary security mechanisms, however, can be
inadequate for at two reasons. First, current defenses tend to be quite
heavyweight, which makes them difficult to apply to resource-constrained
infrastructure systems. And second, timing is critical: current defenses tend to
focus on preventing systems from 'doing the wrong thing' or 'failing to do the
right thing', as opposed to preventing systems from 'doing the right thing at
the wrong time', which is often just as damaging. To address this problem, this
project creates stronger defense mechanisms tailored specifically for
infrastructure systems. The new mechanisms explicitly take timing into account,
are expected to have lower cost, and will initially be applied to automotive
systems in collaboration with a major car manufacturer. The principal
investigator will organize tutorials for practitioners, and will enhance the
curriculum of the Master's in Embedded Systems program at the University of
Pennsylvania with more coverage of Internet-of-Things security. She is also
developing a series of outreach activities to improve the representation of
women and minorities in the real-time systems community. Collaborations with the
law school and the medical school at the University of Pennsylvania will
investigate how to use the new techniques to improve the legal framework for
infrastructure systems, by offering better accountability for product defects,
for example, and how to apply them to improve the security of medical systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project pursues an approach called bounded-time
recovery. Unlike many existing techniques, bounded time recovery does not
attempt to mask all symptoms of an attack, which existing defenses do at great
cost; rather, it leverages the fact that many systems cannot change their state
arbitrarily quickly, due to properties such as inertia or thermal capacity, and
can thus already tolerate brief disruptions, provided the system quickly returns
to a correct state. This approach seeks guarantees that 1) the system will meet
its timing requirements in the absence of an attack, and that 2) when under
attack, the system will return to a correct state within a bounded amount of
time, potentially after reconfiguring itself to exclude compromised nodes. The
goal is to provide these guarantees in the Byzantine model, that is, without a
priori knowledge of what the attacks will look like, or which nodes will be
attacked. To achieve this goal, the project will construct practical algorithms
for (provably) detecting attacks within bounded time, based on techniques such
as tamper-evident logs and cryptographic evidence; create methods for recovering
from detected attacks within bounded time, using ideas from multi-mode systems;
and produce reusable implementations of the new techniques that will be widely
disseminated and made available under an open-source
license.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.