* 1750852
* CAREER: Bridging the Gap Between Bottlebrush and Comb Polymers with Precision Macroinitiators to Generate New Elastomeric Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Justin Kennemur, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2024
* USD 534,049.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project the PI and his
students will synthesize, characterize, and determine a variety of material
properties for a new class of high-performance elastic polymers that may have
super-elastic or super-soft properties. Prominent advances in polymer chemistry
over the last several decades have ushered in the ability to design a variety of
molecular architectures with a high degree of control and functional
versatility. The development of new molecular architectures that synergize the
features of advanced functionality and enhanced elasticity is the primary
objective of this research. The proposed work is hypothesized to produce ultra-
flexible materials and super-soft gels that are potentially superior and could
have applications as lubricants, articular cartilage (knee or joint)
replacements, and protective equipment that reduces force impact. A new class of
architectures of polymer molecules having bottlebrush-network shapes will be
designed and explored, which is expected to lead to special super-elastic
properties. This research will be integrated with broader impacts of education
for undergraduates, graduates, and the local community. It will contribute to
nurturing the growing research in polymer science at FSU and the nation. A
three-point plan focuses on curriculum development, collaborative events, and
community outreach directed towards underrepresented groups in polymer science.
Education about plastics, their challenges, and their opportunities to solve
societal needs for future generations will be undertaken and integrated with the
proposed research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The design of bottlebrush (BB) systems for
frontier materials applications places emphasis on the degree of polymerization
of the backbone and the side chains in addition to graft density. Although these
coarse dials serve as a means to begin understanding of these unique
architectures, there are other synthetic components which may present a means
potentially to discover new properties. A majority of BB systems are derived
from the polymerization of either a vinyl monomer or norbornene to produce a
variety of graft chemistries affixed to a highly limited number of backbone
options. This work proposes to expand the suite of backbone chemistries possible
through the use of precise polypentenamer scaffolds suited to produce BB systems
through a "grafting-from" approach. These materials will produce a graft at
exactly every fifth carbon (similar to polynorbornenes) but with a flexible
rubber-like backbone chemistry between each graft site. It is hypothesized that
the reduced Kuhn length associated with this flexible backbone will result in
amplified sensitivity as the size of the grafts increase and begin to occupy the
pervaded volume around it. Such dynamic behavior will be fully studied through
light scattering and viscoelastic measurements as a function of the synthetic
design principles that elucidate variances in the aforementioned coarse dials
for BB systems. The results will be corroborated with developing theoretical and
computational treatments for BB systems. Given the rubber-like backbone, a
natural extension for such systems towards superelastic and supersoft networks
will be explored to provide potentially transformative materials for use in
lubrication and impact dampening. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A three-point plan will
be implemented to increase the education in polymer science at FSU and the
surrounding community through enhanced curriculum, collaborative events, and
outreach. Undergraduates will be offered an advanced elective in polymer
synthesis. Research focused around polymer science will be highlighted with an
FSU annual poster session. Finally, continued efforts to reach out to the
surrounding community through a plastics education exhibit will bring to light
societal aspects that involve polymer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.