* 1750430
* CAREER: Foundations of Information Theory: Information Inequalities and Dimension-Free Phenomena
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Thomas A Courtade, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2024
* USD 550,000.00

Information inequalities stemming from entropy and mutual information form the
basis for Shannon's mathematical theory of communication, data transmission and
storage, the vast consequences of which have ushered in the modern information
age. While originally bounding theoretically the rate at which data may be
transmitted over an imperfect channel, or how far an information source may be
compressed, the foundational nature of these inequalities has led to their
widespread applications in quantitative fields ranging from computer science to
physics. This may be attributed, in part, to these inequalities being dimension-
free, that is, the sharpness of the estimate does not degrade with the data
dimension, thus making them suitable for analysis and inference in high-
dimensional settings that are characteristic of modern problems in statistics,
optimization and data science. Broadly speaking, this project seeks to further
elucidate these foundational underpinnings of information theory, and to extend
their applicability to modern problems in statistics and data analysis that seek
to uncover information from large data sets. The research is coupled with a plan
to integrate research and education at multiple levels: the project will train
researchers at the interface of statistics, information theory and mathematics,
preparing them to enter academic and industrial careers in data science, and
skillfully adapt to new fields as national priorities change. Other aims are to
promote collaboration within the broader research community through development
of thematic workshops and tutorials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
undertake a systematic investigation of information inequalities. This goal will
be achieved through an integrated research agenda that seeks to: (i) quantify
high-dimensional statistical phenomena; (ii) characterize extremal properties of
information inequalities; and (iii) discover new concentration and isoperimetric
phenomena through linking information- and transportation-based quantities on
graphs and other discrete spaces. Through these aims, this project will promote
the influence of information theory across traditional boundaries and enrich the
set of intellectual questions addressed. Given the intrinsic importance of
quantifying statistical and probabilistic phenomena throughout science and
engineering, the results will have broad and lasting
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.