* 1750725
* CAREER: Agile and Scalable Millimeter Wave Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Romit Roy Choudhury, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 02/28/2023
* USD 550,000.00

The ever-increasing demands for mobile and wireless data have placed a huge
strain on wireless networks, and have led the Federal Communications Commission
to release more than 14 GigaHerz of bandwidth for both licensed and unlicensed
use in the millimeter wave frequency bands. Millimeter Wave (mmWave) bands are
expected to deliver multi-Gigabit-per-second (Gbps) wireless data rates that
will be central to next-generation (5G) cellular networks as well as wireless
local networks. Networks using these bands will also enable new applications
such as virtual and augmented reality, vehicle-to-vehicle communications, and a
surge of multimedia and Internet-of-Things traffic. Millimeter wave technology,
however, is fundamentally different from existing wireless technologies such as
WiFi and cellular networks due to its physical properties, including
directionality, wide bandwidth, and sparsity. As a result, today's mmWave
systems face new challenges, in terms of mobility, medium access, and control
overhead, which prevent them from scaling and supporting mobile networks. The
research proposed in this project will address these challenges to unleash the
potential of mmWave technologies. The project will design and build practical,
scalable, mobile millimeter-wave networks for next generation communication
systems. The project will also integrate mmWave communication into novel
applications like virtual reality (VR) and self-driving cars. The proposed
research will be disseminated through close collaboration with industry and
publication in top research venues. It will also be integrated into education
through the design of new undergraduate and graduate wireless classes and
involvement in community outreach programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal
will enable practical, agile and mobile mmWave networks and integrate them into
higher layer applications. It will address the above challenges by introducing
novel cross-layer protocols that exploit the underlying sparsity of mmWave
networks to deliver new protocols that can perform beam alignment, tracking,
interference management and scheduling in real-time and with low overhead that
allows them to scale to large networks. The proposed research will be executed
in three key thrusts: (1) It will develop link establishment protocols that can
discover the best alignment between access points and clients and track the
client's direction. (2) It will develop new medium access control protocols that
will scale mmWave to multi-link networks. (3) It will integrate mmWave networks
into higher layer applications like VR and self-driving cars by developing a
joint communication and sensing system. The proposal will design, build and
empirically test the proposed systems in wireless
testbeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.