* 1750328
* CAREER: Air Quality Impacts of Dynamic Forest-Atmosphere-Chemistry Interactions
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Jeffrey Geddes, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 02/29/2024
* USD 692,975.00

This CAREER project will investigate how natural and human-caused interannual
variability in the sources and sinks of reactive trace gases from forests
influence air quality across North America. Observations and models will be
combined to assess the role of interannual variability in the biosphere on
atmospheric chemistry and air quality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has
four objectives: (1) Characterize interannual variability in simulated biogenic
reactive trace gas sources/sinks and their impacts on air quality in the US,
driven by meteorology and phenology; (2) Develop time-varying land cover inputs
that can be used to simulate the impacts of recent historical land use/land
cover changes on atmospheric chemistry and air quality in the US.; (3) Determine
how changing interactions between forests and atmospheric chemistry modify the
impacts of concurrent changes in anthropogenic emissions on air quality in the
US.; and (4) Identify and attribute important patterns in ground- and satellite-
based observations of atmospheric chemical composition to spatiotemporal
variability in the biosphere. The education and outreach plan is focused on
expanding science data literacy in atmospheric
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.