* 1750674
* Does Overstepping of Garnet-producing Reactions Delay Devolatilization in Subduction zones? Insights From the Cycladic Blueschist Belt, Greece
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Frank Spear, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/28/2023
* USD 419,247.00

The largest earthquakes and the most significant volcanic hazards occur as a
consequence of the subduction of tectonic plates. It is generally accepted that
the triggers to both these large earthquakes and the melting of the subducted
crust and overlying mantle somehow involve the release of fluids from the
subducted sediments and crust via devolatilization reactions that cause the
breakdown of minerals that contain water in their structure. However, the
identity of the specific minerals and reactions responsible for the release of
fluids has been elusive because none of the minerals that are believed to be
common in subduction channels have the appropriate stabilities with respect to
pressure and temperature based on thermodynamic calculations. This study will
support the Ph.D. dissertation research of a graduate student from an
underrepresented group in geosciences, and will involve two undergraduate
students from Amherst College that is collaborating on some of the analytical
activities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is to test the alternative
hypothesis that garnet-bearing reactions that produce fluids during the
subduction process are significantly overstepped with respect to their nominal
equilibrium location at a specific pressure and temperature. That is, the common
minerals found in subduction zones may persist to significantly greater depths
(the depths recorded by earthquakes) because the nucleation of the new phases
necessary to initiate the reaction is suppressed. This hypothesis will be tested
through application of a novel approach that utilizes Raman spectroscopy on
inclusions of quartz inside of the mineral garnet to determine the pressure-
temperature conditions at which the garnet nucleated and, thus, the conditions
at which major devolatilization occurs. The results of this study should help
resolve a long-standing paradox and will provide a much clearer understanding of
the processes responsible for triggering earthquakes and mantle melting thus
aiding in the ability to predict the occurrence of these
hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.