* 1750447
* Effect of Molecular Structure on the Atmospheric Oxidation of Organic Compounds and Aerosol Formation
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Paul Ziemann, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 04/30/2022
* USD 325,726.00

The overall objective of the project is to conduct experimental and modeling
studies to achieve an improved understanding and quantitative description of the
effects of the molecular structure of organic compounds on their atmospheric
oxidation products and their tendency for the products to form aerosols.
Atmospheric gaseous and particulate compounds can affect air quality,
visibility, climate, and human and ecosystem health. This project will provide
new data on organic oxidation products and mechanisms, which should be
applicable to many other atmospheric reactions because of the similarities in
basic reaction pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments will be conducted in
large volume, inert Teflon environmental chambers under simulated atmospheric
conditions. Chemical reaction products present in the gas and particle phases
will be identified and quantified using real-time and offline methods that
employ various combinations of appropriate analytical techniques such as
chromatography, spectroscopy, and mass spectrometry. Specific experiments are
designed to quantify the effects of linear and branched molecular structures and
oxygenated functional groups on chemical reaction pathways. Results will be
incorporated into a detailed chemical reaction model, which will be evaluated
and further improved by comparing simulations with measured gas- and particle-
phase products formed from the oxidation of a set of atmospherically
representative alkanes, alkenes, and oxygenated compounds, under both polluted
and clean air conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The provision of support of a
graduate student along with activities intended to contribute to public
understanding of science of air quality and climate issues are mentioned project
activities. The models that will be improved and evaluated as a result of this
project are used in laboratory, regional, and global simulations, which are
widely used to evaluate potential effects of gases and particles on visibility,
human health, ecosystems, and climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.