* 1750361
* CAREER:  The Role of F-box-Mediated Protein Degradation in Seed Development
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2024
* Zhihua Hua, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,129,255.00

Seeds are important for the propagation of flowering plants and are also the
primary source of food for human and animal consumption. Understanding the
molecular mechanisms underpinning seed development can help protect plant
diversity and secure the ever-increasing demand for food production. Rapid cell
division and tissue patterning during the process of seed development result in
the production of various short-lived regulatory proteins that are removed in a
timely manner. Alterations to these protein removal pathways can cause sterility
or a severe reduction in the quantity and quality of seed production. However,
currently little is known about the identity of these short-lived proteins and
how they are targeted for removal. The goal of this research is to understand
the functions of a specific group of proteins, termed the F-box proteins, in
regulating protein turnover during seed development. The resulting discoveries
can then be translated into crop breeding for developing innovative approaches
to manipulate seed production. The interdisciplinary nature of this project will
provide a wide array of training opportunties for high school, undergraduate,
and graduate students, including those from groups under-represented in science.
In addition, this project will develop and promote a "big data" - enabled
educational system through classroom teaching, research mentoring in the
laboratory, and outreach programs. This training system is critical in modern
biological education due to the exponential increase in genomic sequencing. The
educational goal of this project is to train diverse students, particularly
those from educationally underserved Appalachian areas, to develop computational
thinking skills in solving biological questions, thus empowering them to pursue
a STEM-based career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The F-box protein family serves as the
substrate receptor in Skp1-Cullin 1-F-box (SCF) ubiquitin ligases that target
many abnormal and short-lived proteins for ubiquitylation and subsequent
degradation by the 26S proteasome. In plants, this family plays a wide range of
regulatory roles as suggested by its large expansion in plant genomes and
genetic analyses of several members in the family. Unfortunately, little is
known about the functions of most F-box proteins. Given the presence of many
conserved cellular differentiation programs that coordinate to form a mature
seed, the over-arching goal of this project is to uncover the role of
evolutionarily-conserved F-box proteins in seed development, using Arabidopsis
thaliana as a model. First, RNA-Seq experiments and proteomic analyses will be
undertaken to define the global influence of F-box-mediated protein degradation
in seed development. Bioinformatic approaches will then be used to construct
dynamic regulatory networks between active F-box members, F-box substrates, and
transcription factors involved in different seed developmental stages. Second, a
novel inducible clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat
interference (CRISPRi) approach, combined with conventional T-DNA insertion
mutations and over-expression strategies, will be used to uncover the genetic
functions of conserved F-box genes in embryogenesis. Third, comprehensive
genetic, biochemical, and proteomic approaches will be utilized to fine tune the
mechanistic roles of F-box proteins involved in seed development. Fourth, the
sequencing data generated from the experiments will be adopted in "big data" -
enabled biological education, in which different levels of computational
thinking skills will be incorporated to train a diverse group of students. This
research is anticipated to contribute in-depth knowledge to both seed biology
and the biochemistry of protein ubiquitylation. Innovative materials, methods,
and algorithms created in the project will have substantial impacts on
furthering the understanding of the role of protein ubiquitylation in gene
expression regulation.&lt;br/&gt;The Project is jointly funded by Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences and Integrative Organismal Systems, with additional support
provided by the Directorate's Rule of Life Venture
Fund.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.