* 1750679
* CAREER: Autonomous Wearable Computing for Personalized Healthcare
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2018,02/28/2022
* Hassan Zadeh, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 02/28/2022
* USD 436,701.00

Wearables are poised to transform health and wellness through automation of
cost-effective, objective, continuous, real-time, and remote health monitoring
and interventions. These technologies utilize machine learning algorithms to
detect important health events and to predict impending medical complications.
Currently, however, machine learning algorithms for these systems are designed
based on sensor data that are collected and labeled/annotated in controlled
environments such as laboratory settings and clinics. This process of data
collection, data annotation, and algorithm training has created great
impediments to scalability of wearable systems because (1) collecting and
labeling sufficiently large amounts of sensor data is a time consuming, labor-
intensive, expensive, and often infeasible task; and (2) wearables are deployed
in highly dynamic environments of the end-users whose physical, behavioral,
social, and environmental context undergo consistent changes. Such changes
result in drastic decline in the accuracy of the machine learning algorithms
trained in controlled environments. Therefore, it is important to develop
autonomously reconfigurable machine learning algorithms as wearable sensors,
settings in which they are utilized, and their configuration changes. This
project introduces computational autonomy as an overarching solution for
training accurate machine learning algorithms, without human supervision, in
highly dynamic, unpredictable, and uncontrolled settings. The successful
conclusion of this work will enable future wearables to learn in-situ
autonomously, operate in-the-wild reliably, and adapt to the changing context of
their users automatically. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
foundations of computational autonomy for wearable-based health monitoring and
interventions through the following research objectives: (1) investigating
methods of automatic and autonomous labeling of sensor data in a new setting
based on labeled sensor data collected in a different setting by designing
combinational optimization methodologies for cross-subject, cross-context,
cross-platform, and cross-modality sensor data mapping; (2) developing non-
parametric label refinement algorithms to reliably infer labels in a new setting
based on uncertain and sporadic knowledge obtained from another, potentially
unreliable and heterogeneous, sensor; (3) exploring methodologies for training
machine learning algorithms that are robust to unknown parameters of a source
sensor and adaptive to dynamically changing signal attributes of the new
setting; and (4) validating the developed algorithms and tools through both in-
lab experiments and in-the-wild user studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
interdisciplinary project will not only address the technical challenges in
developing highly performant wearable systems but will also enable actual
monitoring of a variety of populations. The work has major broader impacts on
conducting high-precision chronic disease management and on the availability of
wearable-based consumer applications. This has the potential to lead to the
development of products around the concept of computational autonomy and its use
in automation of health management, as well as, applications yet to be
envisioned. The interdisciplinary nature of this work will provide unique
opportunities for integrated research and education. To this end, the
educational objectives will focus on developing a new ambassador program to
increase interest of underrepresented minority community college students in
Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) careers in general and in
computer science and engineering careers in particular, developing a novel
patron program to improve retention of transferred underrepresented minority
students through student and parental exposure to wearable-based health
monitoring research, engaging undergraduate students in research, and
establishment of an interdisciplinary research-based curriculum on computational
autonomy. All the data produced over the course of this project, including
design methodologies, software algorithms and tools, experimental data,
publications, and curriculum will be made publicly available at
http://epsl.eecs.wsu.edu/. The data will be stored and hosted on local servers
and replicated on external public web servers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.