* 1750155
* CAREER: Software Adaptation and Synthesis Techniques for Internet of Things Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Octav Chipara, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 06/30/2023
* USD 499,311.00

Wearable Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices, such as smart watches, smart glasses,
and cloud-enabled hearing aids promise to improve our everyday lives. However,
developing such systems is challenging. System developers must account for the
differences in users and hardware platforms, and anticipate how a system will
respond to the changing operating conditions. For example, a hearing aid may use
its onboard processor to augment speech in relatively quiet surroundings but
rely on more powerful cloud computing resources to enhance speech as users
encounters more noisy environments. Today, developers lack effective programming
languages and tools to help them create and improve such IoT
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates how adaptive IoT systems
may be developed using policy-driven software adaptation and synthesis. Central
to our approach is to separate the functionality of a system (encapsulated in
software components) from its run-time adaptation (specified as a policy).
Developers will be provided with a language to write policies that control when
components are executed, their concurrency, and dynamically selects which
alternate component implementation should be used. The policy language will be
combined with data-driven techniques that integrate simulation, program
analysis, and machine learning techniques to configure the parameters of a
policy as well as synthesize new policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
undertaken as part of this proposal will provide a solid foundation for building
adaptive IoT systems. The primary research activities will help reduce the
development time and improve the robustness of IoT systems, bringing this
technology closer to fruition. The primary educational activities include
incorporating new topics on IoT systems into the Operating Systems curriculum
and topics on software adaptation and synthesis into the Mobile Computing
curriculum. These efforts will create a pipeline of undergraduate and graduate
students that are broadly interested in systems research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The publications, educational materials, software
artifacts, and results obtained as part of this project will be made publically
available at http://cs.uiowa.edu/~ochipara/career for five years following the
completion of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.