* 1750994
* CAREER: Ultrasound Brain-Computer Interface
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Brett Byram, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 04/30/2024
* USD 549,995.00

Brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) are an emerging research area that might
profoundly benefit people with severe motor loss and have potential applications
in other situations where physical and voice interfaces are impractical. This
project will develop techniques for using ultrasound imaging to measure and
interpret brain activity and integrate ultrasound derived information with
existing electroencephalography (EEG)-based techniques. Doing this will provide
faster and more precise measures of brain activity compared to existing
techniques. It will also allow for the integration of sub-cortical information
into BCIs, information that EEG systems cannot provide. To achieve this goal,
portable ultrasound helmet prototypes will be developed and solutions to
transcranial ultrasound image quality problems will be resolved, which will also
prove useful for medical ultrasound more generally. The helmet will advance the
feasibility of mobile brain activity measurements. Along with the development
and prototyping of an ultrasound BCI device, the development of new algorithms
to integrate ultrasound and EEG signals will lead to new techniques for both
understanding brain activity and using it to interact with computers. The work
will also provide the basis for modernizing and creating several new courses
around the intersection of machine learning and biomedical signal processing, as
well as providing research opportunities for outreach programs that involve high
school students from underrepresented groups in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will be organized around several main activities. The first activity is
to develop high-dynamic range ultrasound imaging methods for transcranial
ultrasound. This will include the integration of multiple ultrasound transducer
arrays and development of a new beamforming strategy utilizing iterative multi-
stage regularization supported by deep learning methods to remove high-amplitude
noise while preserving small signal variations corresponding to blood flow. The
second activity is to use the imaging methods to support an adaptive
demodulation technique enabling non-contrast functional ultrasound analyses
without contrast agents at low transducer frequencies appropriate for human
transcranial imaging. The third activity is to develop a wearable helmet that
captures both ultrasound and EEG signals together. The ultrasound and EEG will
be physically registered using a new probe that will serve as both an EEG and an
ultrasonic point source. The helmet data will be used to develop both
ultrasound-only and integrated (EEG plus ultrasound) algorithms for detecting
brain states that computer systems can use either as direct commands or as input
to adapt their behavior to a user's current brain
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.