* 1750695
* CAREER: Semantic Divergences Across the Language Barrier
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Marine Carpuat, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 01/31/2024
* USD 549,930.00

Despite the explosion of online content worldwide, much information is currently
isolated by language barriers. While multilingual users and translators can
help, the diversity and scale of online content make it impossible for humans
alone to break the language barrier. Automated tools are needed to support and
supplement their work. This project introduces computational representations and
methods to compare and contrast the meaning of text in different languages. The
resulting models will be useful to develop language technology that can support
cross-lingual communication, and cross-cultural understanding, including and
augmenting machine translation, by providing support for second language
learners, volunteer translators, and security analysts. This CAREER project
integrates research with education by using activities motivated by the
practical problem of translating Wikipedia to illustrate the challenges of
language technology developed on inevitably biased data. These activities target
high-school and undergraduate students outside of computer science, as well as
computer scientists of diverse backgrounds at the undergraduate and graduate
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cross-lingual work in natural language processing
currently relies on the assumption that a source text and its translation are
equivalent in meaning in the two languages, and that they can be decomposed into
smaller equivalent units by aligning sentences, phrases and words. Yet, content
conveyed in two languages is rarely exactly equivalent: the same topics or
events can be discussed from widely different perspectives, and even faithful
translations can be hard to understand without the appropriate linguistic and
cultural background knowledge. Building on and connecting distinct bodies of
work on machine translation and semantic analysis, this project provides
techniques to detect and explain nuanced differences between words and sentences
in different languages. We characterize semantic divergences, differences in
meaning across languages, using an expressive set of semantic relations between
words and sentences. We use the resulting models to improve machine translation
quality, and to explain translations to readers of various backgrounds.