* 1750443
* CAREER: Communication, Information, and Interactive Compression
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Gillat Kol, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Brass
* 01/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Information theory had a profound impact on both the practical and theoretical
communities, finding application in almost every branch of science and beyond.
Information theory is especially relevant today with the rise of the internet
and data-intensive applications. Lately, many of these applications are
interactive, involving several communicating parties, and the trend for more
interaction is growing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interactive information theory is a
new field of study at the interface between information theory and computational
complexity theory. The key ingredient that sets it apart from classical
information theory is that it studies problems where parties are interacting and
information flows in more than one direction. The goal of this project is to
deepen our understanding of interactive information theory. Specifically, it
considers the interactive compression problem, which is the interactive analogue
of the data compression problem. Informally, the celebrated data compression
theorems imply that every message can be compressed to its information content,
measured using the Entropy function. The interactive compression problem asks
whether the transcript of every communication protocol between several parties
can be compressed to (roughly) its "information
content."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An affirmative answer to this problem would yield
a powerful method for proving nearly tight communication complexity lower
bounds, and may shed light on other central problems in theoretical computer
science that are closely related to it, such as the direct sum and parallel
repetition problems for different models, and on the log-rank conjecture. Good
compression protocols also suggest a new paradigm in protocol design, where one
optimizes over the information revealed by the protocol and then applies a
compression scheme to obtain a protocol with low information. The study of
interactive compression can also be of interest to the privacy and information
theory communities, which have considered similar notions.The PI will mentor
students, give tutorials and create a new course on interactive information for
Computer Science and Electrical Engineering majors.&lt;br/&gt;