* 1750867
* CAREER: Towards the Security of Heterogeneous CPU-FPGA Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Sheng Wei, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Sandip Kundu
* 01/31/2019
* USD 99,191.00

With the rapidly growing demand of high performance computations, the
traditional central processing unit (CPU)-based computing systems have been
deployed with field programmable gate array (FPGA) components for hardware
acceleration, such as in the emerging CPU-FPGA cloud systems. Despite the
significant performance benefits, the CPU-FPGA architecture introduces new
attack surfaces through the communications between the two heterogeneous
components. This project develops a hardware isolation-based security framework
to eliminate the new attack surfaces, a programming toolkit to facilitate the
development of secure CPU-FPGA systems, as well as a set of CPU-FPGA benchmark
applications for evaluation purposes. The project involves three research
activities. First, it develops a hardware security framework that achieves FPGA-
compatible containers enabled by bus-level hardware isolation, together with
efficient security verification policies leveraging approximate computing and
side channel analysis. Second, it delivers a programming toolkit that
automatically partitions the CPU and FPGA jobs into the hardware isolation
environment using dynamic program slicing, as well as a performance and resource
optimization scheme employing dynamic scheduling. Third, it generates a
representative set of CPU-FPGA benchmarks spanning secure multimedia systems,
financial security, and privacy-preserving scientific computing to evaluate the
security and performance of the CPU-FPGA systems. The project will generate
broader impacts from several aspects. First, it will enable comprehensive
education activities such as new curriculum design and summer internship
programs attracting undergraduate students to cybersecurity research. Second, it
will benefit many fields of studies with strong security guarantees and short
learning curves given the growing popularity of CPU-FPGA cloud. Third, the CPU-
FPGA benchmarks have the potential of enabling industrial outreach and
generating real world impacts. Furthermore, the project will transform the
fields of hardware security, software engineering, and scientific computing to
the new frontier of jointly supporting heterogeneous architectures, motivating
interdisciplinary cybersecurity research. The project repository will be stored
on a publicly accessible server at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln
(http://cse.unl.edu/~swei/projects/hisa). All the project data will be
maintained for at least 5 years following the end of the grant period.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.