* 1750656
* CAREER: Algorithm-Centric High Performance Graph Processing
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Xuehai Qian, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

With the advent of big data, large amounts of data are collected from numerous
sources, such as social media, sensor feeds, and scientific experiments. Graph
analytics has emerged as an important way to understand the relationships
between heterogeneous types of data, allowing data analysts to draw valuable
insights from patterns in the data for a wide range of applications, including
machine learning tasks, natural language processing, anomaly detection,
clustering, recommendation, social influence analysis, bioinformatics. Due to
the broad applications, the research community tackled graph processing from
multiple angles, including distributed, disk-based systems and in-memory graph
processing. There are four key problems of today's graph processing research: 1)
the gap between programming model and algorithm; 2) the lack of diversity in
applications studied; 3) insufficient research on dynamic graphs and graph
database; and 4) architectural supports focus only on classical problems. This
proposal attempts to advance the graph processing systems by solving these major
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research proposes a novel approach ALCHEM,
algorithm-centric high performance graph processing, which involves the
collaborative designs of algorithms, programming model, systems, and
architecture. This interdisciplinary research program takes the opportunity to
explore or enhance the interactions between different layers, with the emphasis
on algorithm efficiency. It contains four research thrusts: (1) Using graph
abstraction as a bridge between programming model and algorithm to speed up the
convergence; (2) Developing efficient execution model with specialization; (3)
Building a graph database as a unified engine for relational and dynamic graph
data; (4) Enhancing architecture with novel features to support new graph
algorithms (e.g., random walk). The research will trigger close interactions
between researchers in theory, system, and architecture. The project will engage
women, minorities and undergraduates. Uniquely, it will not only train the
students' system building skills, but also strengthen their algorithm
understanding. The research outcomes will benefit the society by improving
everyday life with better and faster recommendations, enhanced security, and
better social relationships.