* 1750024
* CAREER: Scalable Information Flow Monitoring and Enforcement through Data Provenance Unification
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Adam Bates, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 03/31/2024
* USD 528,077.00

System intrusions have becoming more subtle and complex. Attackers now covertly
observe and probe systems for prolonged periods before launching devastating
attacks. In such an environment, it has grown prohibitively difficult for system
administrators to identify suspicious events, correlate these events into an
attack pattern, and determine an appropriate response. Data Provenance is a
method of modeling a system's execution in the form of a causal relationship
graph, allowing investigators to trace the ancestry of data objects and identify
relationships between seemingly independent events. The goal of the proposed
work is to develop techniques that enable the use of data provenance as an
expressive and efficient monitoring tool in large distributed systems. These
mechanisms will enable unprecedented capability to reason about system events,
centrally monitor activities within data centers, and express fine-grained
enforcement of security properties based on the historical flow of data.
Research and software artifacts will be made available to the broader community
through the Linux provenance web site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
will examine central challenges related to expressivity and scalability that
currently prevent the further proliferation of provenance-based auditing
techniques. To address the semantic gap that has traditionally prevented system-
layer auditing from being able to explain higher-level application behaviors,
this project pursues the design of universal provenance mechanisms that leverage
binary analysis to transparently identify siloed application-layer logging
activities, extract their semantics, and graft the information onto a causal
relationship graph that encodes the entire system's execution. Grammar induction
techniques will be leveraged to overcome the tremendous storage burden of
provenance and provide a scalable central monitoring framework for data centers.
After enriching system-layer auditing and enabling the efficient communication
of suspicious activities via provenance traces, data provenance will be
integrated into enforcement mechanisms to address critical security challenges
including regulatory compliance, information flow control, and fault
attribution. The advancement of state-of-the-art of provenance-based tracing and
enforcement should establish a new baseline for reasoning about the flow of data
in today's complex computing systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.