* 1750667
* CAREER: Addressing Scalability Challenges in Designing Next-generation GPU-Based Heterogeneous Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Adwait Jog, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 03/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

Graphics processing units (GPUs) are becoming default accelerators in many
domains such as high-performance computing (HPC), deep learning, and
virtual/augmented reality. Their close integration with high-performance multi-
core CPU architectures is also allowing very efficient heterogeneous computing.
Going forward, it is imperative that such GPU-based systems scale both in terms
of performance and energy efficiency to meet the exascale (and beyond) computing
demands of the future. However, sustained scaling of these systems is
challenging primarily because a) fabricating a single large die provides very
low yield, making it prohibitively expensive, b) memory hierarchy remains a
critical performance and energy efficiency bottleneck, and c) programmability
and application scalability is hindered by inefficiencies in the shared virtual
memory and multi-application support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
address these scalability challenges by rethinking the design of future large-
scale GPU-based systems. In particular, this research project revolves around
three major components: a) design space exploration of cores (including their
organization) and the entire memory hierarchy, b) development of data movement
optimization techniques by identifying and then exploiting cache locality via
novel synergistic caching and scheduling techniques, and c) improving resource
utilization of large-scale system resources by enhancing shared virtual memory
and multi-application execution support. All three research components will be
evaluated on a newly-developed comprehensive evaluation infrastructure. The
findings of this research will be incorporated into new and existing
undergraduate and graduate courses. It is expected that the insights resulting
from this research would have a long-term positive impact on GPU-based
computing, thereby making our daily lives more productive.