* 1750748
* CAREER: Ultrasound-based Intent Modeling and Control Framework for Neurorehabilitation and Educating Children with Disabilities and High School Students
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Nitin Sharma, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 01/31/2020
* USD 400,792.00

Each year, more than 17,000 people in the United States experience a spinal cord
injury. Individuals suffering from incomplete spinal cord injuries may have
voluntary control of their limbs, but their strength is weakened compared to
able-bodied persons. Neurorehabilitation is a therapeutic approach used to
recover limb function in individuals suffering from incomplete spinal cord
injury; robotic or electrical stimulation devices encourage repair of the
person's nervous system through repeated, assisted exercise. The amount of
assistance the device provides is based upon the user's remaining muscle
function. However, correctly measuring a person's voluntary effort during
therapeutic exercise is a significant technical challenge. Discrepancies in the
measurement can cause the robot to provide too much or too little assistance,
which can slow recovery and lead to falls during robot-assisted walking. To
address the technical challenge of sensing of voluntary effort, this project
will integrate ultrasound imaging with electromyography-based (i.e., electrical
signals) measurement of ankle muscles that govern walking. The use of ultrasound
imaging will allow direct visualization and measurement of muscle activity and
minimizes interference of electrical signals from neighboring muscles.
Ultrasound imaging will also be investigated as an approach for optimizing
electrode placement to initiate multi-plane ankle movements. The study will test
the hypothesis that ultrasound imaging-based measurement of voluntary effort is
more accurate than electromyography-based prediction alone. Research and
education are integrated through student-led construction of ultrasound imaging
and electromyography-based human-machine interaction platforms for children with
special needs. The human-machine interaction platforms may accelerate learning
in children with special needs and offers research opportunities for high
school-age students from underrepresented groups in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's long-term career goal is to build a full-scale,
feedforward musculoskeletal model that predicts human intent by obtaining
signals from wearable ultrasound sensors attached to different limb muscles.
Toward this goal, the project will derive control strategies that use ultrasound
imaging to predict weakened voluntary effort of a person with incomplete spinal
cord injury and provide assistance as-needed during walking with a hybrid
exoskeleton. The research objectives of the proposal are to: (1) formulate an
ultrasound imaging-based observer to predict voluntary effort in ankle muscles
and (2) use the prediction in an ankle control strategy. An optimal ultrasound
imaging-derived surrogate signal to measure voluntary effort will be determined,
and a functional mapping between the surrogate signals and voluntary effort will
be formulated. The stability and convergence conditions for the observer and the
ankle controller will be established. The new intent prediction and control
framework will be directly compared to electromyography-based prediction and
control methods. Functional electrical stimulation of the ankle muscles that
produce multi-plane ankle movements will also be investigated. To target the
intended ankle muscle, ultrasound imaging-based feedback will be evaluated to
optimize current in the stimulation electrodes. The project facilitates a
breakthrough rehabilitation therapy that uses non-invasive, wearable ultrasound
sensors to collect, monitor, and control muscle activity of persons with
incomplete spinal cord injury.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.