* 1750983
* CAREER: Understanding and Combating Numerical Bugs for Reliable and Efficient Software Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Cindy Rubio Gonzalez, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 552,363.00

The use of numerical software has grown rapidly over the past few years. From
machine learning to safety-critical systems, a large variety of applications
today make heavy use of floating point. Unfortunately, floating point introduces
imprecision in numerical&lt;br/&gt;calculations. Analyzing, testing, and
optimizing floating-point programs are difficult tasks. There is a large variety
of numerical errors that can occur in such programs, including extreme
sensitivity to roundoff, incorrectly handled exceptions, and nonreproducibility.
This has led to numerous software bugs that have caused catastrophic failures.
The goal of this research is to understand and combat numerical bugs. The
intellectual merits are to advance the state of the art in analysis, testing and
optimization of numerical software, and in extending these techniques to new
domains beyond scientific applications. The importance of the research lies in
the impact of the developed techniques and tools on improving the reliability
and performance of real-world numerical programs, on which many other
applications depend.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops program
analysis techniques and tools to (1) find frequent and impactful numerical bugs
in programs, (2) propose&lt;br/&gt;fixes for these bugs, and (3) optimize
numerical programs in different application domains to improve their
performance. The research is driven by empirical studies that encompass several
aspects of numerical software. First, a large-scale empirical study of numerical
software is conducted to categorize real-world numerical bugs and their fixes.
Second, an empirical study of test suites for numerical software is conducted to
determine the effectiveness of testing in real-world numerical software. Based
on the observations made through these empirical studies, a series of dynamic
and static analyses are designed to detect and fix a variety of numerical bugs.
These analyses are made available as part of an analysis and testing framework
for numerical software. Novel precision tuning techniques are developed to
enable scalable optimizations that lead to higher speedups, and to extend the
scope of precision tuning to new application domains such as machine learning.
The research has strong broader impacts in education and outreach. These include
the development of new courses on software engineering and testing with a focus
on numerical software, a Computer Science summer boot camp, and a mentoring
program for underrepresented minorities especially focused on Latino
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.