* 1750598
* Collaborative Research: Human and non-human influences on species biodiversity in an island ecosystem
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Laurie Godfrey, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2023
* USD 207,250.00

Studying large-scale extinction events in the past can help us understand
declines in global biodiversity in our modern world. In this multidisciplinary
project, the investigators want to understand what triggered the recent
extinction of all of Madagascar's large native vertebrates, including its
chimpanzee- and gorilla-sized lemurs, enormous 'elephant birds,' and horned
crocodiles. The discovery of extraordinary deposits of fossils and stalagmites
in previously-unexplored flooded and dry caves at Tsimanampesotse National Park
(TNP) in southwestern Madagascar has opened new opportunities for researchers to
address this question. An international team of anthropologists, geologists and
ecologists will work with cave divers to retrieve and study fossils and
stalagmites from the flooded caves and nearby dry deposits. By taking small
samples of rock from stalagmites and studying their chemistry, the team will be
able to reconstruct with great precision changes in habitat and rainfall over
the past 50,000 years. Team members will also document changes in the presence
or absence of small animals that may be excellent indicators of habitat
transformation. Through this work, they will identify specific turning points in
the catastrophic decline and extinction of Madagascar's large vertebrates, which
will have broad implications for how to avoid future extinctions on the island
and elsewhere. The team will support public science outreach with creation of 3D
maps of the flooded caves and fossil deposits, and multi-language, multi-media
educational displays. The displays will focus on conservation, and how
understanding the past can inform the future. Finally, this project will support
the doctoral dissertations of three graduate students, and build future
opportunities for international collaborative research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will utilize state-of-the-art techniques
from anthropology, ecology, cave science and paleoclimatology to tease apart how
environmental changes and human activities affect communities of plants and
animals. This work is challenging, especially since natural aridification
(through reduced rainfall) and human disturbance (through setting fires, cutting
trees, raising cattle or other introduced domesticated animals, and planting
crops) can have similar devastating effects on the distribution and abundance of
wild plants and animals. However, stalagmites preserve precisely-datable records
of changes in local rainfall and vegetation. Consequently, it is possible to
know when rainfall and vegetation co-varied, and when vegetation changed
independent of rainfall, implying that some other agent, such as humans, was
responsible. Bones and teeth of animals can preserve datable evidence of the
diets, activities, movements and habitats of species that have survived, and
those that have not. Sometimes traces on the surfaces of fossils themselves
preserve evidence of how individuals died - for example, by succumbing to a
predatory bird, carnivore or human. This project will tease apart the relative
importance of environmental change and human activities, and build a chronology
of the survival and extinction of species. Advances in the science of the
chemistry of rocks, bones, and teeth, coupled with the old-fashioned tools of
paleontological analysis (identifying fossils and recording their associations)
have made all of this possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.