* 1750515
* CAREER: Identifying Barriers and Supports for Physics Students and Early Career Physicists with Disabilities
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Jacquelyn Chini, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 04/30/2024
* USD 760,716.00

In U.S. colleges and universities about 25% of undergraduate students and 20% of
graduate students with a disability enroll in science and engineering fields.
Surprisingly, the economic well-being of persons with disabilities has decreased
since the passage of anti-discrimination laws such as the 1990 Americans with
Disabilities Act. However, STEM careers offer better financial outcomes for
individuals with disabilities. Additionally, economic projections suggest an
increasing need to recruit more STEM majors, and students with disabilities are
an under-recruited group who could help to meet this national economic need.
Undergraduate and graduate students with disabilities may be dissuaded from
pursuing STEM careers by instructors and mentors who lack the knowledge to
support the students' participation. This CAREER scholar is investigating the
barriers and supports encountered by undergraduate and graduate physics students
and early career physicists with disabilities in their learning and research
experiences. Results of this work provide information to college instructors and
professional mentors to make physics more accessible and inclusive for persons
with disabilities pursuing physics careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Faculty
Early Career Development (CAREER) program is a National Science Foundation
(NSF)-wide activity that offers awards in support of junior faculty who
exemplify the role of teacher-scholars through outstanding research, excellent
education, and the integration of education and research within the context of
the mission of their organizations. This award is supported through the EHR Core
Research (ECR) program. ECR emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that
generates foundational knowledge in the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this CAREER project is to explore how the attitudes toward and experiences of
physics students and early career physicists vary across multiple components,
including demographic variables, research experience, and physics sub-field.
This research is focusing on individuals with visual, hearing, physical, mental
health and/or cognitive-learning impairments, including those with learning and
reading disorders, Autism Spectrum Disorder and other executive function
disorders. Everyone is conceived to have an ability profile, with strengths and
weaknesses along multiple dimensions. Research questions include: (1) How is the
existing culture in the physics research and instructional communities towards
persons with disabilities shaped by the ability profile and other personal
characteristics of the instructor/mentor and the student/mentee? (2) How does
the existing culture in the physics research community vary across sub-fields
and research types? (3) What are effective strategies for making physics more
accessible and inclusive for persons with disabilities? (4) What are effective
ways to train university faculty to better support undergraduate and graduate
students, and early career researchers with disabilities? In addition to
collecting student data, surveys will be administered in collaboration with the
American Physical Society to capture a broad population of practicing
physicists, and interviews will be conducted with physicists with disabilities
and their mentors. The research is integrated with an extensive education plan
that includes creating learning communities for faculty interested in persons
with disabilities in physics, modifying trainings for graduate teaching
assistants and undergraduate learning assistants to include inclusive teaching
strategies, conducting workshops to train physics teachers and mentors, and
publishing articles for practicing physicists and instructors. Additionally,
undergraduate and graduate students working with the researcher will benefit
from learning about STEM education research methods and integrating research
with educational opportunities for improving physics
instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.