* 1750060
* CAREER: Building Secure Decentralized Applications with Trusted Hardware and Blockchains
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Owen Arden, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 510,767.00

This project explores a new, integrated approach to securing decentralized
applications. The key problem is that decentralized applications are executed by
mutually distrusting entities in a decentralized distributed system (such as a
blockchain), where the entities must collaborate to execute the desired
computation, despite not trusting each other. Building decentralized
applications is difficult and error prone because the low-level security
mechanisms are too removed from the high-level policies, thus it is difficult
for programmers to correctly implement the policies. In these cases, no single
entity is trusted to fully specify or enforce security policies. The project
will develop Flame, a programming language offering more precise abstractions
for expressing security intent in decentralized systems. Using Flame gives
developers assurance that their programs are both secure and realizable without
requiring them to design and implement complex security protocols. This project
will also develop Decent, a decentralized runtime platform for executing
decentralized applications built with Flame. The project will open-source Flame
and Decent and promote them with publications, tutorials, and course materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To explore a new, integrated approach to enforce end-to-
end security for decentralized applications the project will build a prototype
based on techniques for decentralized information flow control, blockchain
networks, trusted computing, and cryptography to create a high-level programming
layer that eases the task of building, verifying, and deploying decentralized
applications. The prototype will support policies that cannot be enforced in
current information control models and are too difficult to realize with
cryptographic and access control mechanisms alone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.