* 1750280
* CAREER:  Rapid evolution of an invasive plant: the role of microbial interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Katrina Dlugosch, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,108,996.00

It is now clear that microbiomes can have large impacts on the health and
performance of organisms. Microbiomes include thousands of microbe species,
however, and what is not clear is how multicellular organisms have evolved to
optimize their interactions with this complex microbial community, particularly
in terms of optimizing immune defenses against many different microbial diseases
at once. In plants, there is a fundamental trade-off between investments in
defense and growth, and optimizing defense activity is essential to maximizing
growth and fitness in a microbial environment. Plant species that have been
introduced by humans to different regions of the globe offer especially good
opportunities to test hypotheses about how plants can optimize their responses
to natural differences in microbial communities. The European plant yellow
starthistle (Centaurea solstitialis) is highly invasive in grasslands of the
Americas, where it enjoys more favorable interactions with soil microbes and it
has evolved increased growth and reproductive ability. This project will
identify the microbes involved in these interactions and the mechanisms by which
the invading plant populations have evolved to increase their growth under
different microbial environments. The research will contribute novel
advancements in the understanding of interactions between organisms and their
microbiomes, with specific opportunities for improved management of agricultural
systems. An important component of the project is the creation of an
undergraduate research community focused on improving the confidence and
retention of disadvantaged students who desire to complete a degree in biology
and promoting the retention of high-achieving students with training in plant-
microbial interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In its severe invasion of the
western US, yellow starthistle experiences more favorable microbial interactions
with the soil, and the principal investigator has recently identified i) reduced
diversity of bacteria and ii) an apparent reduction in plant investment in
aspects of immune function in these populations. The principal investigator has
also identified candidate regions of the genome associated with these rapid
evolutionary changes. This project will identify key microbial taxa involved in
these interactions and their effect on plant evolution through 1) sequencing of
the microbiome across multiple generations of plant-soil feedback experiments,
2) selection experiments with the microbial community to identify the impacts of
microbial evolution on plant traits, 3) selection on plant genotypes to identify
the genetic basis of fitness differences and to quantify trait evolution under
different microbial environments, and 4) gene expression studies to identify
plastic and genetic responses of pathways to microbial interactions.
Undergraduate students from groups underrepresented in STEM will lead studies of
individual microbial taxa in culture and their effects on plant immune
responses. The proposed research will be among the first to characterize the
microbial community responsible for natural variation in microbial interactions
and feedbacks with plant genotypes, to identify the plant loci involved in
plastic and evolutionary response to this community variation, and to test
alternative hypotheses regarding how microbiome variation can contribute to
evolution along growth-defense trade-offs. These contributions will
fundamentally advance understanding of the nature of selection on growth and
defense generated by interactions with a complex microbial
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.