* 1750864
* CAREER: High Integrity Navigation for Autonomous Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2018,01/31/2020
* Grace Gao, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 01/31/2020
* USD 403,367.00

The number of systems developed for applications including package delivery via
small unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and self-driving cars, is growing. To
ensure safe and reliable positioning, it is critical to address not only
positioning accuracy, but also the confidence in accuracy, defined as integrity.
Most of the positioning and navigation studies for autonomous vehicles have
focused on only accuracy, but not integrity. However, navigating autonomous
vehicles equipped with relatively low-cost sensors in complex and rapidly
changing environments -- e.g., urban areas with Global Positioning System (GPS)
signal blockage -- poses great challenges compared to flying aircraft in the
open sky, where positioning integrity has been well addressed by the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA)-regulated aviation industry.

This project aims to assess, monitor and improve positioning integrity for
autonomous vehicles, such as UAVs and self-driving cars, and integrate the
proposed research into education and outreach. The project involves a novel
positioning integrity assessment and monitoring solution that is robust in GPS-
challenged environments and is suitable for navigation sensor fusion. The
investigator will (1) derive a new algorithm to directly assess and monitor GPS
integrity in urban environments; (2) design an integrity monitoring framework
for GPS sensor fusion using camera vision, LiDAR and inertial measurements; and
(3) improve integrity by turning unwanted multi-path signals into a useful
navigational source based on physical interaction with the environment.

This CAREER development plan will also integrate an education plan with the
research goals by broadening participation of under-represented groups, such as
women, by fostering a female researcher community through organizing female
social events at technical conferences; educating and informing the public about
FAA rules and safety issues regarding flying UAVs; and outreach to K-12 students
by demonstrating the results of the proposed research at the Illinois
Engineering Open House and leading hands-on activities for various school girl
camps.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.