* 1750903
* Collaborative Research:  RAPID/Workshop- Antarctic Ecosystem Research following Ice Shelf Collapse and Iceberg Calving Events
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Jeroen Ingels, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Vernet
* 08/31/2020
* USD 29,938.00

Worldwide publicity surrounding the calving of an iceberg the size of Delaware
in July 2017 from the Larsen C Ice Shelf on the eastern side of the Antarctic
Peninsula presents a unique and time-sensitive opportunity for research and
education on polar ecosystems in a changing climate. The goal of this project is
to convene a workshop, drawing from the large fund of intellectual capital in
the US and international Antarctic research communities. The two-day workshop
will be held at Florida State University where a consortium of researchers with
expertise in Antarctic biological, ecological, and ecosystem sciences will be
gathered to share knowledge, identify important research knowledge gaps, and
outline strategic plans for research. The workshop will help advance scientific
and public understanding of the continent-wide changes that Antarctic ice
shelves and surrounding ecosystems experience as ice shelves change. The primary
products will be reports focusing on synthesizing, coordinating and integrating
research efforts to understand the ecological impacts of ice-shelf collapses and
large iceberg calving along the Antarctic Peninsula. The workshop will also
provide an immediate, interactive experience for K-12 school children with a
hands-on ?Saturday Polar Academy?, a children?s poster session, and question-
answer session during the workshop. Children will have the opportunity to
interact with Antarctic researchers and become familiar with Antarctic science,
organisms, ecosystems and current issues, feeding their scientific
curiosity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The calving of A-68, the 5,800-km2 iceberg shed
in July 2017 from the Larsen C Ice Shelf presents a unique and time-sensitive
research opportunity. The scientific momentum and public interest created by
this most recent event will be leveraged to convene a workshop at the earliest
opportunity, drawing from the large intellectual capital in the US and
international Antarctic research communities. The two-day workshop will be held
at Florida State University, Coastal and Marine Laboratory on the Gulf Coast
organized by Jeroen Ingels (Florida State University; FSU), Richard Aronson
(Florida Institute of Technology; FIT), and Craig Smith (University of Hawaii at
Manoa; UHM). A consortium of researchers with a diversity of expertise in
Antarctic biological, ecological, and ecosystem sciences will be gathered to
share knowledge, identify important research priorities and knowledge gaps, and
outline strategic plans for research to advance understanding of the continent-
wide changes that Antarctic ice shelves and surrounding ecosystems experience as
ice shelves change.