* 1750183
* EAGER: Modular design of multiscale models, with an application to the innate immune response to fungal respiratory pathogens
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Reinhard Laubenbacher, University of Connecticut Health Center
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 04/30/2019
* USD 90,000.00

The wealth of biomedical data available today -- often with wide ranging size
and time scales -- allows for the validation and calibration of complex
computational models that integrate across levels from molecules to whole
organisms. For those models to be usable by scientists and clinicians who are
experts in the biomedical phenomenon being modeled, it is important that the
model features and activity be presented visually to make them understandable.
This project seeks to develop a novel, modular computational approach to this
challenge. It will use modeling of the immune response to an important
respiratory fungal infection as a test bed to demonstrate the feasibility and
effectiveness of this approach. This project will advance knowledge in
computational modeling of biomedical systems and in the pathophysiology of
infection. This particular infection has become increasingly relevant as it
occurs most frequently in immuno-compromised individuals, including cancer and
transplant patients. The developed model will examine how an individual's immune
system interacts with the fungal spores to better understand the progression of
this infection. The eventual goal would be to take advantage of this improved
understanding to spur the development of new treatments for this fungal
infection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This complexity of multiscale models of
biomedical processes poses multiple challenges related to mathematical modeling,
software design, validation, reproducibility, and extensibility. The
computational goal of this project is to develop a novel modular approach to
model architecture, using a recently introduced technology of lightweight
virtual machines and a user-friendly open-source platform for the construction
and linking of these so-called "Docker containers" to create complex modular
models in a transparent fashion. A key benefit of software containers is that
they can encompass the entire computational environment of a model, enabling
unprecedented reproducibility of computational results. For this project, this
computational modeling will be focused on the development of a multiscale model
capturing the early stages of invasive aspergillosis. Invasive aspergillosis is
one of the most common fungal infections in immunocompromised hosts and carries
a poor prognosis. The spores of the causative organism, Aspergillus fumigatus,
are ubiquitously distributed in the environment. Healthy hosts clear the inhaled
spores without developing disease, but individuals with impaired immunity are
susceptible to a life-threatening respiratory infection that can then
disseminate to other organs. The increasing use of immunosuppressive therapies
in transplantation and cancer has dramatically increased suffering and death
from this infection, and this trend is expected to continue. The biomedical
focus of the proposed project is the battle over iron between the fungus and the
host. The overarching biomedical goal is to develop a simulation tool to explore
the role of iron in invasive aspergillosis across biochemical and biophysical
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.