* 1750704
* CAREER: Othello Hashing and Its Applications to Scalable and Dynamic Network Forwarding and Functions
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Chen Qian, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 06/30/2024
* USD 516,000.00

Providing high-speed Internet services to communities and businesses while
limiting the infrastructure cost has been a long-term goal of network protocol
designs. There have been challenges in achieving fast, scalable, and fine-
grained network processing while maintaining low network cost, mainly due to the
limited resources on network devices such as fast memory. The promising approach
of exploiting programmable networks, such as software defined networking, were
considered difficult to execute on conventional network devices. This project
aims to use an innovative hashing scheme, Othello, to improve network
performance without special and expensive hardware by exploring fast, memory-
efficient, and portable primitives for network processing based on innovative
data structures and algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes
Othello Hashing, a key-value lookup algorithm developed on the theoretical
foundation of Minimal Perfect Hashing. Othello Hashing achieves faster lookup
speed and much smaller memory cost compared to existing network lookup methods.
It utilizes network programmability to support dynamic updates on its lookup
structures. This project plans to develop a number of important network
primitives using Othello, including forwarding information bases, software load
balancers, distributed data placement, and private data access. The success of
this project will demonstrate Othello Hashing as a fundamental tool in designing
novel network algorithms, protocols, and systems, for which existing tools may
not be suitable. The impact of Othello Hashing may go beyond the networking
research: the collaboration of the PI with genome biology researchers on
applying Othello to metagenomic sequence classification has led to promising
results. The project also offers a number of education activities for student
training, undergraduate research participation, diversity promotion, and
outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.