* 1750809
* CAREER: Taming the Side-Channel Hazards in the Shielded Execution Paradigm
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Yinqian Zhang, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 12/31/2020
* USD 292,149.00

Intel's Software Guard Extension (SGX) is a hardware extension available in
recent Intel processors, which provides software applications with shielded
execution environments, called enclaves, to protect their confidentiality and
integrity against compromised operating systems. The wide adoption of SGX will
foster a shielded execution paradigm for enhancing software security in
situations where the operating systems are not entirely trusted, such as public
clouds. However, recent studies have suggested that SGX is vulnerable to side-
channel threats, in which the system software measures the enclaves' use of
system resources or micro-architectural resources to infer their secrets. Such a
threat will significantly imperil the potential positive impacts that SGX could
bring to the society, such as protecting software intellectual property and
securely distributing and processing secret data.

This research aims to address the side-channel hazards in SGX and advance the
field in two aspects: First, it will develop novel principles and techniques to
detect vulnerabilities in enclave programs, by modeling side-channel
vulnerabilities and differentially analyzing their memory access patterns
according to the model specification. Second, it will enhance enclave programs
to thwart side-channel attacks at runtime by leveraging novel Timed Execution
techniques and/or Address Space Layout Obfuscation mechanisms. The research will
not only push forward the frontier of side-channel studies, but have broader
societal impacts in the following aspects: First, because side-channels are
major security concerns of security-critical applications to which shielded
execution is the most valuable, the project will accelerate the broader
acceptance of the shielded execution paradigm and the SGX technology. Second,
through a set of educational tasks, the project will promote awareness of side-
channel hazards to students, researchers, industry partners, and the general
public, and hence motivate the adoption of the side-channel defense techniques
in real-world applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.