* 1750199
* CAREER:Modulation of the Presynaptic Action Potential Shape and  Impact on Synaptic Function
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Michael Hoppa, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 06/30/2024
* USD 800,000.00

Everything animals see and do is controlled by electrical signals in their
nerves and muscle. Ion channels, which function like tiny pores in the cell
membrane, are crucial for sensing and generating electrical signals. The
synaptic terminal connections between brain cells are where electrical signals
initiate the release of neurotransmitters. Identifying the ion channels present
at nerve terminals holds great promise for the development of future
therapeutics. Measuring ion channels at nerve terminals is difficult due to
their small size. The investigator has recently developed sensitive optical
approaches that allow the measurement of electrical signals in nerve terminals
with light. The goals of this project are to utilize this optical approach to:
(1) identify ion channel compositions within nerve fibers crucial for sensing
and generating electrical signals; (2) understand how the changing electrical
signals alters synaptic communication; as well as (3) promote the understanding
and use of quantitative fluorescent microscopy across undergraduate institutions
in New Hampshire to foster innovation in the research workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transfer of an electrical signal from one neuron to
another (i.e. synaptic transmission) typically involves rapid depolarization of
the presynaptic terminal, the entry of calcium ions, membrane fusion of vesicles
that contain neurotransmitter signaling to the postsynaptic neuron. This
sequence is set in motion by a rapid membrane depolarization, or action
potential (AP), invading the presynaptic terminal. AP shape has often been
ignored as a malleable signal at the subcellular level and is assumed to
propagate as a uniform spike across thousands of synaptic contacts. This project
will challenge this perception of the AP as an unchanging "all-or-none" waveform
and address a fundamental gap in the understanding of axon physiology and
synaptic transmission. The central hypothesis of this project is that after
initiation, an AP is malleable and undergoes local "sculpting" during
propagation throughout the axonal arborization, and this consequentially impacts
presynaptic function. The investigator has developed sensitive optical
approaches that allow the quantification of changes in membrane voltage using
light that bypasses previous technical barriers to measure voltage in small
cellular compartments such as the axon. Using these genetically encoded voltage
indicators the PI will: (1) Determine how and where an AP is sculpted along the
axon and pre-synaptic terminals; (2) Determine how AP shape drives calcium
influx and activation of calcium sensors at the molecular level to impact
vesicle fusion, using a combination of quantitative optical
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.