* 1750208
* CAREER: Elastocapillary fluid mechanics: spreading, splashing, and instability
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Joshua Bostwick, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 12/31/2023
* USD 556,889.00

Liquid transport on soft surfaces such as human tissues, gels, or soft plastics
occurs in nature, medical technologies, and industrial processes. Both the fluid
and the surface may move and their motion is coupled. This coupling makes
prediction of the motion difficult and leads to new phenomena. In this work,
liquid motion on soft substrates will be investigated by both theory and
experiments through four research problems. The first research thrust relates to
the surface-tension driven wave motion in liquids on soft solids, and is
relevant to technologies such as inkjet printing and microfluidics. The second
area involves the motion of a drop on a soft surface due to gradients in the
stiffness of the surface, and is relevant to the motion of cancer cells in human
tissues. The third investigation involves splashing of liquids on soft surfaces,
and could impact forensic analysis and the aerosol delivery of drugs to
neonates. The final objective involves the spreading of liquids on deformable
viscoelastic solids, and is applicable to the manufacture of flexible
electronics and the design of biomedical devices. The research is integrated
with undergraduate education through long-term, focused projects and
undergraduate summer research experiences, and with graduate education through
curriculum development and graduate student research and mentoring
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interaction of soft substrates with fluid
interfaces is common to many biological, medical, and industrial processes;
flexible electronics are manufactured using immersion lithography, ultrasonic
waves are used for medical imaging of soft tissue interfaces, aerosol drug
delivery for neonates suffering from respiratory distress syndrome as well as
adults being treated for asthma and COPD relies upon droplet deposition on
biological tissue, and forensic analysis interprets complex blood splat
patterns. Describing these substrate deformations has led to the development of
the field of elastocapillarity, in which elastic stresses are coupled to surface
tension (capillarity). The aim of this CAREER award is to advance the field of
elastocapillary fluid mechanics through carefully-selected theoretical and
experimental studies of four canonical problems that focus on the dynamic
coupling between the elastic and fluid fields: elastocapillary waves, droplet
durotaxis, spreading on compliant substrates, and drop impact. Theoretical
models will describe capillary instabilities in soft solids, Marangoni-driven
flows that arise from gradients in substrate elasticity (durotaxis), and
contact-line dynamics during spreading on compliant substrates. Table-top
experiments on drop impact will be designed to facilitate undergraduate learning
through research. Elastocapillarity is a new, interdisciplinary field that
encompasses a wide range of traditional disciplines, such as fluid mechanics,
solid mechanics, and mathematics. The lack of a well-developed course curriculum
and a continuously evolving subject matter requires innovative strategies to
educate students in this emerging interdisciplinary field, broadly categorized
as "learning through research", which incorporate focused long-term Creative
Inquiry projects and summer research opportunities. Delivering educational
content via targeted extended research projects can serve as a template for
other emerging scientific fields. Targeted mentoring through the graduate
research and professional development seminar series will improve research
culture and help place under-represented students in academic/scientific
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.