* 1750439
* CAREER: Learning Nonverbal Signatures
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2023
* Louis-Philippe Morency, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 01/31/2023
* USD 597,560.00

Nonverbal communication is an essential component of our daily life. A quick
eyebrow frown from a student will inform the teacher of possible confusion. A
tilt of the head may show doubt during negotiation. A patient's smile dynamics
can even predict their future recovery. This project will build innovative
technologies to allow computers to understand subtle nonverbal behaviors of
human users. The main novelty of this project will be in its capacity to learn
the inherent variability between individuals on how nonverbal behaviors are
expressed. The same emotion can be expressed very differently by different
people. A nonverbal signature is how a specific person gestures visually when
talking with other people. By recognizing these nonverbal communicative
behaviors such as facial expressions, head gestures and eye contact, computers
and mobile devices will be able to better understand the user's emotions and
affective states. In mental health treatment, the developed technologies have
the potential to change how doctors assess disorders with new behavioral
objective measures and possibily to predict eventual relapse for the patient.
For researchers and animators of virtual characters (e.g., movie studies), the
nonverbal signatures will enable an "a la carte" selection of the virtual human
nonverbal signature that best aligns with the character's profile and
personality. In education and online learning, the student's nonverbal signature
will help to assess engagement and perceive affective states related to success
in learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advocate a novel paradigm
for learning visual representations of human nonverbal behaviors: a major focus
on intra-personal variability followed by analysis of group structures and
eventual learning of visual representations generalizable across the population.
The research methodology will be motivated by well-studied concepts of
idiosyncrasy in nonverbal behavior expressions. The project will introduce the
concept of nonverbal signatures which are low-dimensional computational
representations of an individual's nonverbal behaviors contextualized by the
verbal content and affective context. This project will address four fundamental
research challenges: (1) personalized nonverbal embedding -- learning
computational representations that summarize the individual variations in
nonverbal appearance, (2) learning nonverbal signatures -- contextualizing the
nonverbal behaviors with verbal and affective cues to learn more effective
representations, (3) signature portfolio analysis -- discovering structure,
prototypes and idiosyncrasy from a collection of nonverbal signatures, and (4)
generalized nonverbal representations -- learning generalizable nonverbal
representations able to adapt to new individuals. These four research aims will
be complemented by a comprehensive evaluation plan to include four intermediate
evaluations and a continuous overarching evaluation. This research effort will
open the door to new sources of human-centric data where accurate interpretation
of nonverbal behaviors is essential.