* 1750102
* CAREER: Data-driven Models of Human Mobility and Resilience for Decision Making
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Vanessa Frias-Martinez, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 03/31/2024
* USD 500,003.00

This project envisions mobile cyber-physical systems (CPS) where people carrying
cell phones generate large amounts of location information that is used to
sense, compute and monitor human interactions with the physical environment
during environmental dislocations. The main objective will be to identify the
types of reactions populations have to a given type of shock, providing decision
makers with accurate and informative data-driven representations they can use to
create preparedness and response plans. Additionally, the outcomes of this
project will allow for the development of tools to assess and improve the
effectiveness of different types of preparedness and response policies through
feedback loops in the mobile CPS. These feedback loops could show how community
behaviors during shocks change when policies are re-defined based on the
computations of the CPS, and vice-versa. Previous work by the PI and others has
already showed that CPS integrating people and cell phones as sensing platforms
can be used to collect location information at large scale and to compute, using
data mining and machine learning techniques, human mobility behaviors during
shocks. However, most of the results are very limited and ad-hoc, lacking any
type of serious applicability from a preparedness and response policy. This
project will advance the state of the art by developing accurate methods and
effective tools for decision-making during shocks in mobile CPS. From a broader
impacts perspective, the proposed research will contribute in two areas: (a)
real-world deployments, to promote data-driven policy development, data-driven
analyses of human behavior, and the use of feedback loops in mobile CPS for
decision-making assessment; and (b) the creation of an educational plan and
training opportunities in the areas of data science for social good and mobile
CPS for decision making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main outcomes of the project
will include novel data-driven methods for mobile CPS that will reliably
characterize and predict human mobility patterns and resilience during shocks so
as to improve preparedness and response policies. The project will make use of
cell phone metadata and social media to achieve the following three objectives:
(1) to characterize the types of reactions that communities have to different
kinds of shocks using real-time data from mobile CPS, which would allow for the
development of more adequate preparedness policies to be ready for future
events; (2) to create predictive methods to forecast the impact that shock
management policies would have on human mobility behaviors and community
resilience during a shock, using human behavioral information from the CPS
feedback loop when different policies are applied (either in real-time or in
batch processing); and (3) to evaluate the transferability of the types of
reactions and predictive methods across different shocks, spatio-temporal scales
and data sources in mobile CPS, which would provide decision makers with the
possibility of analyzing behaviors and resilience in communities where cell
phone metadata in the CPS is not fully available. From an intellectual merit
perspective, the proposed methods will advance the state of the art in data
analytics and real-time systems for CPS in the area of Smart and Connected
Communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.