* 1750649
* CAREER: Robotic Manipulation Using Deep Deictic Reinforcement Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Robert Platt, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 08/31/2023
* USD 499,904.00

As robot tasks and environments become more complex, it is getting too
challenging to program every detail of the robot's behavior explicitly, by hand.
An alternate approach is to learn behaviors through experience, a type of
machine learning known as ``reinforcement learning'', where the robot learns
through trial and error. Pure trial and error, however, is inefficient, which
means it takes the robot a long time to learn. The goal of this project is to
enable robots to focus attention on the parts of the environment that lead to
effective learning and good generalization to new tasks. A result of this
research is the ability of assistive robots in the home, such as an assistive
wheelchair equipped with a robotic arm, to learn how to better help the infirm
and people with disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a
new approach to applying deep reinforcement learning (deep RL) to robotic
manipulation problems by incorporating deictic representations. A deictic
representation encodes state/action relative to a marker that the agent places
in the environment. In this project, the marker is a 6-DOF reference frame,
placed in a 3-D point cloud, or truncated signed distance function. The robot
decides where to place the marker and how it should move relative to that marker
by solving a Markov decision process using deep reinforcement learning.
Preliminary results suggest that this new method can enable robots to learn
control policies that solve complex manipulation problems without the need for
precise geometric models of the objects being manipulated. While the method
still estimates some elements of object pose implicitly, it does so in a way
that generalizes well to novel objects and does not necessarily estimate full
object pose unless required by the task.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.