* 1750253
* CAREER: Personal Virtual Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* David Choffnes, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 513,364.00

Our mobile devices (e.g. cellphones) regularly encounter and connect to multiple
networks to maintain seamless communication, enabling the variety of services we
increasingly rely on, such as Internet access, text messaging, social media
access, and entertainment. However, such ubiquitous network connections raise a
number of important concerns. For example, our devices regularly send data over
networks they do not fully trust and that are not under our control, which can
lead to security vulnerabilities, poor service, and privacy violations. To
address these issues, this proposal seeks to develop Personal Virtual Networks,
or PVNs, that provide each device with its own network within a network provider
that can provide customizable security and privacy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal introduces the idea of ubiquitous PVNs that can be configured to
provide privacy, security and performance across untrusted heterogeneous
networks. PVNs will allow devices to establish trusted network configurations
inside of network providers, define policies for network traffic, and even
deploy limited code that interposes on their traffic using a software middlebox
environment. By making in-network resources available to devices via a secure
and flexible interface, PVNs can enable more secure, flexible, private, and
performant network experiences for users. The proposed work will design a new
architecture, as well as abstractions and primitives for providing safe,
flexible, and portable user-defined network policies. To support deployments in
untrusted environments, this project will include the development of new
algorithms and network measurements for auditing PVN deployments in untrusted
networks, as well as the design of new frameworks that provide provable privacy
and security guarantees atop trusted hardware. Last, the proposed work will
develop and conduct empirical evaluations of new applications and services that
are enabled by PVNs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.