* 1750399
* CAREER: Staging Compilers for Heterogeneous Platforms
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Louis-Noel Pouchet, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 01/31/2024
* USD 477,998.00

Power density and energy considerations have become the primary constraints
driving technology directions for embedded, mainstream, as well as peta/exascale
computing at the high end. Non-homogeneous CPU cores and increasingly complex
System-on-Chips are on the roadmap of most manufacturers. In a word, computing
platforms are now heterogeneous, after decades of mass marketing homogeneous
single-core x86 processors. Optimizing compilers are a cornerstone of the
software stack: they are in charge of producing high-quality machine-specific
code from the input program. The current development model where either an
application is manually tuned by expert engineers to the specifics of the new
target platform, or simply left untuned and heavily under-utilizing the hardware
resources is not sustainable. This project targets the design of a complete
system to efficiently compile several key computation patterns to heterogeneous
targets, from a single input source. The PI investigates how to automatically
characterize the quality and performance of software transformation systems, so
as to better exploit their strengths; and create new customized compilation
techniques to produce optimized binaries for heterogeneous processors.
&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the PI develops a novel system that automatically
learns what types of programs an optimization tool (e.g., a vendor compiler) can
optimize well, focusing on performance-critical loop-based program regions
amenable to polyhedral compilation. By combining automatic benchmark generation
and deep learning techniques, this system automatically builds a performance
contract for the compiler: a program that meets specific syntactic and semantics
restriction (the contract) is guaranteed to be well optimized by that compiler.
Then, in order to best exploit such compilers, programs are automatically
restructured to expose program sub-regions that meet the contract requirements.
With the assistance of target-specific performance models, the best
restructuring is chosen at compile-time for each hardware target. This system
can then be applied at compile-time for various execution contexts (e.g., for
different CPU frequencies, core counts, etc.), to deliver an adaptive binary
where the best implementation is selected at run-time as a function of the
execution context. The project aims to demonstrate how to best stage various
compilers to exploit their strengths, in turn significantly reducing the time
currently spent by developers to tune their implementation for better
performance. Education material to be produced includes a lecture series for
educators and students on how to write programs that compilers can optimize
well, and a MOOC on polyhedral compilation, the mathematical framework to reason
about programs that is central to this project.