* 1750186
* CAREER: Anomalous spin dynamics in triangular quantum magnets: from materials discovery to quantitative neutron spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Martin Mourigal, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 621,772.00

Non-Technical: &lt;br/&gt;Magnetic phenomena are essential to the quantum
materials revolution. Complex interactions between spins - quantized "compass
needles" carried by electrons bound to crystal lattices - provide magnetic
matter with desirable quantum coherence properties. For instance, a special
state of matter called a "quantum spin-liquids" could be used for new quantum
information and sensing technologies. However, these strange new quantum states
involve many spins and are incredibly challenging to both predict and measure in
real materials. This experimental research brings together materials science,
spectroscopy, and modeling to discover if and how macroscopic quantum effects
emerge in networks of interacting spins. The project focuses on an unexplored
set of inorganic compounds that are designed for new types of behavior. This
research will utilize neutron spectroscopy to accurately map spin states in
custom-grown samples and so, probe directly predictions from realistic
theoretical models. Professional researchers in the project will team with high-
school students, their teachers, and undergraduate students to generate a long-
lasting interest for materials research and provide the network needed to
support the future quantum workforce. Participants not only train in sample
growth and cryogenic measurements in the principal investigator's laboratory,
but also get involved in experiments at world-class facilities for crystal
growth and neutron scattering, for instance at Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
Participants subsequently engage the general and university public to expose the
beauty of "the Universe" within condensed matter and communicate the promise of
the quantum materials revolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;Correlated magnetic insulators are unique materials at the heart of
the current quantum revolution. They often provide definitive answers to a
universal question: how do macroscopic quantum phenomena emerge in crystalline
matter from assemblies of atomic-scale entities? Several systems of interacting
spins host desirable quantum phases with no classical analogues - characterized
by a high degree of entanglement, their excitations are non-local like spinons
or Majorana fermions. In most cases, however, these many-body states are
difficult to predict with existing techniques. Realizing and detecting genuine
quantum phases in real materials is therefore extremely challenging. This
experimental research merges in-house efforts with the use of world-class
centers for crystal growth and inelastic neutron-scattering in the United States
to track and expose quantum phenomena in triangular networks of interacting
spins. Low-dimensional and geometrically frustrated, triangular-lattice
antiferromagnets are at the boundary between semi-classical and quantum
behaviors. This tendency, when combined with spin-space anisotropies and quantum
fluctuations tuned by compositional variations, produces novel phases and
quasiparticles. The research activities advance inelastic neutron scattering
instrumentation and data analysis tools to accurately map spin excitations in
laboratory-grown samples and to benchmark predictions from realistic models.
Three related directions are explored: (1) nonlinear dynamics and possible
breakdown of magnon quasiparticles in transition-metal compounds; (2) spin-
orbit-induced anisotropies and spin-liquid phenomenology in rare-earth magnets;
(3) discovery and characterization of new triangular-lattice materials. Teams of
high-school, undergraduate and graduate students participate in every step of
the research process in the principal investigator's laboratory and at large-
scale central facilities. Mentoring of participants by professional researchers
provides the scaffolding needed to support the future quantum
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.