* 1750563
* CAREER: Tying Design to Outcomes: Open-sourced Analytics for Mobile App Testing
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Ranjitha Kumar, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/29/2024
* USD 514,091.00

Developing methods to do effective, usable design for mobile applications is an
important problem, affecting domains ranging from healthcare to finance. Current
methods for app design are largely based on either individual designer expertise
and intuition, leading to variable results, or else require a large number of
active users and engineering resources that are typically only available to
large companies. This project's goal is to solve the research challenges
involved in automatically capturing and aggregating design features and user
interactions across the large number of existing mobile applications already
available for download and develop a platform allowing designers to learn from
the choices and experiences other designers have made. The platform will allow
designers to find relevant third-party apps that have relevant design
requirements and features, define experiments involving those design choices,
and run the experiments by leveraging the existing user base of those apps. This
will help individual designers explore options more cheaply than developing
their own prototypes while providing data-driven arguments to support design
decisions and communicate with other members of their project teams. The
platform could also lead to tools to accumulate collective design knowledge,
identifying emerging trends as well as best practices, useful for both
practicing designers and as an educational resource for existing courses on web
and app design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing the platform will require a
number of technical advances. The first involves developing scalable systems for
capturing design features and interaction data from large numbers of mobile apps
and combining them into representations useful for data mining. To do this, the
team will expand the existing ERICA platform for black-box design capture in a
single application, developing it into a background monitoring app that captures
interaction and design data for any app the user gives permission for, while
detecting and obscuring personally identifying information. The monitoring app
will be deployed primarily via long-term crowdworkers who are paid to install it
and participate in designer-defined experiments. The second main advance is
creating functional semantic embeddings for interface components based on the
collected data that define common features, app states, and functions. To do
this the team will capture visual, textual, structural, and interactive
information about each interface element, then use multimodal embeddings of the
data to first classify individual interface elements, then use those labels to
identify semantics of app screens and interaction flows between elements and
screens. The third advance involves developing a series of tools to use the data
and semantic embeddings. This includes working with designers to develop query
techniques and views over sets of applications to find relevant applications and
flows; creating visualizations of user behavior based on Sankey flow diagrams
that allow designers to make sense of user behavior across applications; and
designing app analytics tools to support meta-analysis across applications and
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.