* 1750946
* CAREER:  Ecological Speciation and Heterogeneous Genomic Differentiation in Hybridizing Haplodiploids
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2024
* Catherine Linnen, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2024
* USD 968,000.00

There are an estimated nine million species on earth, with diverse habits and
appearances. To explain this diversity, scientists examine how new species form
and describe how differences accumulate between them. Most scientists agree that
adaptation to different habitats frequently initiates the formation of new
species. The genetic causes and consequences of species formation, however,
remain a mystery. This project takes advantage of two pine tree-feeding insect
pests that are "caught in the act" of species formation. Although there are many
differences between them, the redheaded-pine sawfly and the white-pine sawfly
interbreed at low levels in nature. This suggests that species formation is not
quite complete. Adaptation to different pines appears to be a key factor that
reduces gene exchange between these species. Laboratory crosses and field
experiments will be used to identify the genetic regions responsible for
different pine adaptations. The results should reveal how these differences
affect rates of gene exchange between these species in the wild. This work will
provide essential knowledge for preserving biodiversity and combatting pests.
Additionally, this project will develop integrated research/teaching projects
that provide scientific experiences for the public and diverse undergraduates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the genetic basis of ecological speciation
requires identifying links among genotypes, reproductive isolation, and genome-
wide genetic differentiation. This project takes advantage of this pair of
hybridizing sawfly species that differ in host-use traits and reproductive
barriers. First, a QTL mapping approach will link genetic variation to variation
in host-preference and host-performance traits. Second, a field trapping
experiment will link host-preference phenotypes to adult habitat isolation.
Third, a field experiment manipulates both the host plants and host-use traits
to link host-performance traits to fitness and reproductive isolation. Fourth,
full-genome re-sequencing of overlapping and isolated pairs of populations of
these species will reveal the demographic history of divergence and patterns of
genetic differentiation. The complementary educational efforts will train
citizen scientists to trap and identify sawflies and non-STEM students to screen
samples and interpret a diagnostic PCR assay. Together, these data will be used
to evaluate spatial and temporal variation in hybridization. Additionally, STEM
students will participate in field and lab experiments that connect genotype,
phenotype, fitness, reproductive isolation, and
differentiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.