* 1750040
* CAREER: Confined Ionomeric Systems and Imaging of Ionic Distribution
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Shudipto Dishari, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2024
* USD 609,949.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ion containing polymers (ionomers)
are integral parts of materials developed for many important applications, such
as energy conversion- storage, water purification, bioseparation, and others.
Ionomers in an energy conversion device (such as hydrogen fuel cell) allow
conduction of ions and generation of electricity. Utilizing hydrogen fuel cells
can greatly benefit the environment since it does not emit any harmful gas (such
as carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide) while generating electricity. However, such
an eco-friendly technology is not economically viable due to the expensive
ionomers and catalysts used. Also there is much data available on ionomer
behavior in thick (several tens of micron thick) materials, but it is still not
very well understood how ionomers behave in very thin (less than a micron thick)
materials. Thin ionomer layers suffer from poor ion conductivity which
negatively impacts the performance of energy conversion and storage devices.
Without a sound understanding of nanoscale properties of ionomers at catalyst
interfaces, more efficient, next-generation ion conducting materials cannot be
designed. To address these needs, this project will systematically study how
proton conducting ionomers interact with low-cost catalysts (with lower content
of precious metals) and how those interactions impact the ion conduction
environment in nanothin films. This understanding will lead a chemical synthesis
effort to design new ionomers that can improve ion conductivity in thinner
materials. This project will address technical challenges in understanding
polymers at nanoscale and advance the existing knowledge. It will contribute to
potentially making eco-friendly hydrogen fuel cells more efficient and cheaper;
aid improvement of other energy conversion and storage devices (e.g. batteries,
supercapacitors); and improve the quality of life. This work will also
contribute to educating and training students (including women and
underrepresented minorities) at all levels in STEM areas and inspire them toward
technologically and societally important
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the future demand for thinner energy conversion
and storage device continually increases, ionomer confinement and interfacial
phenomena studies continue to become more important. Ionomers behave very
differently under thin film confinement (e.g. at ionomer-catalyst thin
interfaces) as compared to bulk membranes. Nanoscale ion conduction behavior
determines the energy efficiency of fuel cell based devices. The project aims to
systematically probe the impact of gradual changes in ionomer confinement and
distinguish the ion conduction behavior of nanoconfined and bulk materials as a
function of ionomeric material thickness, ionomer structure, nature of catalyst,
and hydration. Ionomer-catalyst-water interactions and characteristics of local
hydration environment will be qualitatively explored in sub-micron thick films
of an array of proton exchanging ionomers over low-Platinum group metal (low-
PGM) catalyst layers. By combining the qualitative picture of nanoscale ion
conduction environment with quantitative values of proton conductivity, a true
insight into interfacial proton conduction will be obtained. Depth profile
imaging of ionomeric materials (upon incorporation of ratiometric fluorescent
probes) will offer information about distribution of properties (such as proton
concentration profile) across the thickness of materials. Since the issues
associated with thin ionomer films (confinement, interfacial interactions, ill-
connected ionic domains, poor proton conductivity) are different from bulk
membranes, a new range of ionomers will be chemically synthesized aiming to
improve proton conduction in confined systems. The presence of macrocyclic
moieties within ionomer structure will allow the formation of pores and ion
conducting channels with controlled diameter, which will offer additional proton
conduction pathways and facilitate proton conduction in nanothin ionomer films.
The project's educational objectives are to: 1) prepare a diverse, future energy
workforce by educating and inspiring middle school, high school, undergraduate
and graduate students and post-doctoral researchers, and 2) contribute to public
awareness and societal behavior regarding sustainable energy through outreach
for families and adults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.