* 1750359
* CAREER:  Elucidating the hormonal regulation of cellulose synthase complexes by post-translational phosphorylation
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Ian Wallace, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 03/31/2024
* USD 927,075.00

This project seeks to understand how plants control the synthesis of cellulose,
a critically important polysaccharide that governs plant growth and development.
Cellulose is an important component of food, fiber, textiles, and fuel for human
and forage animals. While many of the enzymes that participate in cellulose
synthesis in land plants have been identified, it is still unclear how plants
make the decision to produce more or less cellulose. The Wallace lab will use
advanced genetic, biochemical, and cell biological techniques to elucidate how
cellulose biosynthesis is controlled during normal plant development and in
response to changing environmental conditions, such as heat, drought, salt
stress, and limiting nutrients. This information will be utilized to engineer
plants with increased cellulose contents that could be used as biomass
feedstocks for the synthesis of sustainable value-added products or as more
efficient feedstocks for forage animals. By understanding how cellulose
biosynthesis is controlled, the investigator also expects to provide a
foundation for understanding how this fundamental feature of plant cell biology
is linked to plant growth and development. Additionally, this project will
support the research training of graduate, undergraduate, and high school
students from diverse and under-represented backgrounds. This project will also
support the course development of a quantitative mass spectrometry module for
undergraduate students as well as public outreach through local agricultural
events and web-based videos.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal is to
understand how plant cellulose biosynthesis is controlled by post-translational
phosphorylation, and to utilize this knowledge to increase cellulose output
under changing environmental conditions. The central hypothesis guiding this
research effort is that CESA (Cellulose synthase A) subunits and other CSC
(Cellulose Synthase Complex) components are phosphorylated by protein kinases
involved in the brassinosteroid signaling cascade, and these phosphorylation
events regulate CSC velocity or subcellular localization. Specific Aim 1 employs
biochemical and genetic methods to identify brassinosteroid-regulated protein
kinases that phosphorylate and regulate components of the CSC and to understand
how these regulatory events control plant growth and development. Specific Aim 2
utilizes advanced quantitative proteomic methods to investigate how changing
environmental conditions lead to alterations in CSC phosphorylation. Specific
Aim 3 focuses on determining how phosphorylation of CESA subunits influences the
in vitro enzymatic activity of cellulose biosynthesis. The unifying goal of this
work is to develop a holistic understanding of how post-translational
phosphorylation regulates that activity of the CSC both in vitro and in
vivo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.