* 1750742
* CAREER:Intracellular Survival Strategies of Amoeba-Resistant Bacteria
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Maria Neunuebel, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 06/30/2024
* USD 750,496.00

The interaction between amoebae and bacteria is one of oldest predator-prey
relationships in nature and a major driving force for bacterial diversity,
persistence, and pathogenesis. The amoebae ingest the bacteria and enclose them
in a compartment for degradation. The bacterium Legionella pneumophila resists
degradation by changing the membrane-bound compartment so that it can
proliferate. This intracellular survival strategy is common to many bacteria,
however, the mechanisms that underlie this strategy are not well understood. The
research supported by this award will define the molecular mechanisms through
which Legionella controls and manipulates the eukaryotic cell and resists
degradation. This information will lead to novel insights into how bacteria are
able to survive within eukaryotic cells, including immune cells such as
macrophages. As such, this research has the potential to provide a better
understanding of bacterial pathogenesis. The educational goal of this project is
to stimulate interest in science at multiple educational levels with a focus on
retention of students from underrepresented minority groups. This goal will be
accomplished by partnering with the Upward Bound Math/Science program at the
University of Delaware to stimulate enthusiasm for scientific research by
providing high school students with authentic research experiences, developing a
research-based module to enhance the current undergraduate microbiology
curriculum at the University of Delaware, and developing and implementing
interactive materials and hands on activities for families attending the
Delaware Children's Museum. Since diverse undergraduate and graduate students
will participate in these community outreach activities, children will observe
that people of various ages and ethnicities can be scientists. This project is
co-funded by the Symbiosis, Defense, Self-recognition Program in the Division of
Integrative Organismal Systems and by the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In nature, amoebae ingest bacteria by
phagocytosis, and once internalized, bacteria remain enclosed in a plasma
membrane-derived compartment that is destined for degradation by fusion with
lysosomes. However, L. pneumophila remodels the cytosolic surface of the
vacuolar membrane to avoid degradation. The integrity and remodeling of the
vacuole is critical for survival of L. pneumophila and its establishment
requires the activity of bacterial proteins delivered into the host cell via a
specialized secretion system. The overarching hypothesis of this project is that
remodeling of the replication-permissive vacuole depends on the bacterium's
ability to target and regulate host membrane trafficking. The principal
investigator will apply microbiological, biochemical, and cell biological
approaches to determine the molecular mechanisms that bacterial proteins use to
selectively target host vesicles in order to promote bacterial survival. The
focus is on refining our understanding of how bacterial proteins manipulate the
activity of two key components that regulate host vesicular traffic: Rab GTPase
proteins and phosphoinositide lipids. Results obtained here will advance the
field of host-microbe interactions by further defining how free-living bacteria
can acquire the capacity to grow within eukaryotic cells. The project will
provide educational opportunities for URM high-school and undergraduate students
and will facilitate interactions between students and the local community
through outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.