* 1750082
* CAREER: Visual Recognition with Knowledge
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Yezhou Yang, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 550,000.00

This project will address the problem of Visual Recognition with Knowledge
(VR-K): a challenging Artificial Intelligence task to enable a seeing machine to
identify unknown visible concepts from previous encounters (annotated data
samples) and knowledge (other contextual information). For example, consider
such a system that has never encountered a zebra, but which has previous visual
encounters with "horses" and "black and white striped" patterns. Incorporating
the linguistic input that, "A zebra is a horse-like animal with a black and
white striped appearance", the machine's task is to formulate a new recognizer
for the visual concept "zebra" and to recognize this new concept later. A system
that integrates visual and linguistic information in this way can provide the
basis for robust personal mobile applications or service robots, such as visual
assistants to the vision-impaired, and voice-enable agents for elder
care.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Conventional supervised learning techniques have
been perfected to perform increasingly well on narrow performance tasks. To
enable satisfactory performance in service robots and mobile multimedia
applications, this research will integrate background and commonsense knowledge
models to enable higher level reasoning together with such high-performance
recognizers. This project will develop the VR-K framework focused on enabling
more generalizable computer vision algorithms through integration with natural
language understanding and grounding in knowledge-based reasoning. The research
program will include 1) developing efficient probabilistic reasoning engines to
construct recognition models of unseen concepts (object and attribute) without
new annotation through probabilistic semantic parsing; 2) setting up new large-
scale visual challenges and testbeds as the basis for rigorous performance
evaluation of visual recognition with knowledge models and ablation analysis;
and 3) prototyping the proposed framework on service robots and mobile devices
for evaluation of the proposed framework's performance in complex real-world
applications over a variety of user studies. The project will include education
and outreach activities advancing AI in undergraduate research, diversity
enhancement, Entrepreneurial Mindset (EM) education, and K-12 classrooms, and
will include workshops to introduce AI and deep learning to professionals in
non-CS professions such as medical research and
pathology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.