* 1750606
* CAREER: Structure and resilience of social networks under population turnover
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2024
* Daizaburo Shizuka, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 03/31/2024
* USD 781,111.00

Animals live within social networks of individuals that affect each other's
lives. However, social networks must change across time; for example, all social
networks eventually lose individuals through death or dispersal, and new
individuals join social networks through birth and immigration. Thus, the simple
and universal processes of birth, death and movement fundamentally shape the
structure of social networks at any given time. A major goal of this project is
to understand how demography and social behavior interact to affect the
development and stability of social networks across time. The project will
integrate theoretical models with long-term field research focusing on the
social network of flock associations in a wintering migrant bird species, the
golden-crowned sparrow. Seasonal social networks in migratory birds allows for
the repeated study of the process of network formation with a mix of old and new
individuals present in the population each year. As a whole, this project will
pose new questions that can shed light on the processes that govern how
societies take shape, and the resilience of social structure in the face of
constant change, in animal populations and even in human societies. The project
will integrate research goals with two different types of educational
activities: development of teaching curricula on reproducible research and the
recruitment of students of immigrant/refugee background to higher education and
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes a general framework for
understanding the temporal dynamics of social networks under population
turnover. The model breaks the process into three steps: node loss, node
attachment and social integration. Node loss and node attachment dynamics
describe the effects of demography, while social integration captures the
processes underlying the formation of new flock associations. This model will
enable the study of the joint effects of demography, social processes, and
fitness consequences of social position on social network structure. The field-
based empirical work will explore natural long-term dynamics in social networks
spanning multiple generations of a single avian species. Field experiments will
be conducted to test the effects of social position on behaviors such as finding
novel food sources, as well as, the effects of social relations on dominance
interactions. The educational objectives of this project will make significant
contributions towards improving education and enhancing diversity in STEM. This
project will enhance the capacity for reproducible research among hundreds of
undergraduate and graduate students through development of new curricula. The
project will also work to increase recruitment of a significantly overlooked,
under-served community, i.e., refugee and immigrant populations in the Midwest.
Refugees are hidden sources of diversity in Nebraska and enhancing opportunities
for these students will strengthen the U.S. workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.