* 1750316
* CAREER: Intelligent Corrosion Mitigation System of Steel Structures with Duplex Coating
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Ying Huang, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project is to explore,
develop and promote an autonomous decision supporting system for the life-cycle
corrosion management of steel structures and steel reinforced concrete
structures. The innovative technology can transform the current practice of
time-based visual inspection with inconsistent decisions to a sensor/data-based
decision-supporting process for timely corrosion management. The intelligent
system can not only inform end users identify and reduce safety risks to avoid
unexpected failure and associated fatality but it can also achieve operational
excellence by enhancing the service life of aging infrastructures where
corrosion degradation is a main concern. As corrosion has shown to cost about
3.1 percent of the national gross domestic product, this mitigation/management
technology can have significant cost saving, and thus greatly benefit national
economy. The results and findings from this interdisciplinary research can be
directly integrated into corrosion-related curriculums, attracting a broader
participation of both undergraduate and graduate students from several
disciplines. The pre-college, CORrosion Engineers (CORE), program with learning
activities from video lectures on corrosion fundamentals to hands-on
qualification tests of clothes as corrosion protection coating for minimum water
penetration can stimulate the interests for STEM educations among K-12 young
girls. In addition, two CORE programs are designed to involve middle and high
school students from the underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
system consists of a corrosion protective duplex coating of an inner thermally-
sprayed non-ferrous metal layer and an outer nanomaterial modified polymeric
sealing paint layer, a corrosion assessment strategy with distributed fiber
optic sensors embedded in the duplex coating, and a decision-making tool with
dynamic risk assessment modeling. This research will advance the duplex coating
technology by 1) optimizing composites of non-ferrous metal coating to achieve
robust mechanical and corrosion resistance, and 2) understanding the chemical
interaction between nano-additives and polymeric paints to accomplish the
desirable dispersion. The interface bonding mechanics and behavior of duplex
coating with both steel substrates and fiber optic sensors, more importantly,
the effect of metal composites and nano-additives on improving the bond strength
will be investigated using pull-off tests, scanning electron microscopy (SEM)
with energy dispersion system (EDS) for interface structure and state analysis,
and X-ray diffraction (XRD) technique for phase composition analysis. With the
distributed fiber optic sensors embedded in duplex coating layers, this research
also aims to understand the in-situ corrosion deterioration mechanism of coated
structural steel with combined cathodic and barrier protection. The in-situ
corrosion data availed by the intelligent system enable the understanding on the
path and rate of moisture and oxygen penetration through duplex coating to
assess scenarios of the uniform corrosion through a large area of porous
coatings or coating degradation, or pitted corrosion through local defects and
damage. The corresponding assessment will be fed into a real-time corrosion
condition updating algorithm to develop a self-updated hybrid corrosion risk
management model for a cost-effective prioritization of mitigation
actions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.