* 1750666
* CAREER: CDS&amp;E: Protein Structure Prediction from Covalent Labeling Mass Spectrometry Data
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Steffen Lindert, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 02/29/2024
* USD 575,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Prof. Steffen Lindert and his group at Ohio State University are
working to significantly extend the capabilities of mass spectrometry (MS) from
simply characterizing the composition of molecules (e.g. metabolites, proteins,
small chemical molecules) to helping predict detailed structures (especially of
proteins). This is achieved by chemically reacting accessible sites on a protein
with specific chemical labels and subsequently using MS to discover which sites
on the protein were labeled. Prof. Lindert's "MS-Fold" software then infers the
protein structure from this labeling information. Given the importance of
proteins in regulating the chemistry of life, better tools for probing protein
structure supports better understanding of that chemistry in both healthy and
diseased organisms. To help convey these principles to a general audience, the
Lindert group is also developing an MS-Fold version of the popular scientific
video game Foldit. This work aims to increase public scientific literacy, and to
expand interest and engagement in STEM science and technology-related
disciplines. The ultimate goal is to increase STEM participation, particularly
of underrepresented groups, and to improve STEM education at the undergraduate
and graduate level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sophisticated mass spectrometry (MS)
techniques in conjunction with covalently-labeled protein residues can yield
important information about protein structure. However, easy and reliable
translation of this information into accurate structural models remains
particularly challenging. The overall goal of research in the Lindert lab is to
develop advanced computational tools that can convert MS-generated covalent
labeling data into protein structural models in an automated fashion.
Specifically, the research objective is to develop and validate a software tool,
termed "MS-Fold", that will allow data generated from covalent labeling MS
studies (e.g. solvent-exposed protein residues) to be effectively used to guide
protein structure prediction algorithms. MS-Fold is intended to provide the
analytical biochemistry community with a user-friendly computational tool with
which covalent labeling MS data can be integrated into high-resolution analysis
of protein structure and macromolecular interactions. This in turn will
dramatically improve interpretability of MS data, constituting a significant
advance in the field of structural MS and providing new opportunities for
investigators to extract useful information from results of advanced MS
experiments. The educational objectives entail novel approaches to
interdisciplinary training for complex, joint computational-experimental
chemical methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.