* 1750908
* CAREER: The Role of Emotion and Social Motives in Communicating Risk: Implications for User Behavior in the Cyber Security Context
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Mohammad Khan, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 559,786.00

Prior research notes that many cyberattacks are preventable if end users take
precautionary measures, such as keeping systems updated, but they often fail to
do so. This proposal builds upon theories of risk communication, emotional
intelligence, and self-determination to design new approaches to cybersecurity
risk communication and training. The goals are to enable users to assess risks,
costs, and benefits consistently and correctly, to promote task-focused coping
responses, and to facilitate their internalization of values, promoting
spontaneous diffusion of cybersecurity knowledge. By enabling non-expert users
to make informed security decisions through raising cybersecurity risk awareness
and self-efficacy development, this project directly addresses an increasingly
serious threat to economic growth and national security. This project also
creates cybersecurity research and training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students, and members from the underrepresented groups through
outreach initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project systematically tests two
hypotheses: (i) that addressing gaps in mental models along with development of
self-efficacy can promote task-focused coping responses and early conformance
behavior, and (ii) that communicating social motives can lead to the development
of intrinsic motivation and spontaneous diffusion of information. Towards that
end, the researchers design and conduct a series of interview-style user studies
including both expert and non-expert users, and they develop effective risk
communication modules that address gaps in mental models and enable non-expert
users to evaluate risks, costs and benefits of security decisions. This project
will also test the efficacy of different interventions to promote task-focused
coping responses and promote spontaneous diffusion of information. By
systematically testing the aforementioned hypotheses, this project provides in-
depth understanding regarding the influence of emotions and social motives in
cybersecurity behavior and makes a valuable contribution to the theoretical
foundation of risk communication. By investigating mental models of high school
students as well as adults, this project advances the theory of risk
communication for adolescents in the cybersecurity context and enables
cybersecurity professionals to design risk communication modules specifically
targeting this vulnerable demographic. Research results are synthesized in
modular tutorials and made publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.