* 1750386
* CAREER: Multidimensional Support to Improve Distance Learning Experience in Community College STEM Gateway Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2024
* Di Xu, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 05/31/2024
* USD 655,237.00

In this CAREER award, the investigator will document teaching practices in
online STEM courses at community colleges and promote effective practices for
online teaching. This work is significant because community colleges are a key
point of access to postsecondary STEM education for millions of low-income and
ethnic minority students each year. Thus, community colleges play a critical
role in the national STEM pipeline. Unfortunately, community colleges face many
challenges, including space and faculty constraints and a large proportion of
nontraditional college students who find it difficult to attend on-campus
courses. Distance learning through fully online coursework is a promising
approach to mitigating these barriers by enabling colleges to offer additional
courses or course sections, thus increasing student access to and progression
through required courses. This project aims to promote the effectiveness of
distance learning in STEM gateway courses at community colleges through
evidence-based intervention strategies and practices, with the ultimate goal of
supporting improved student engagement and performance.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project has five specific objectives: (i) to document typical
instructional approaches in online STEM gateway courses offered at community
colleges; (ii) to identify promising intervention strategies with the potential
to better support student engagement and learning in fully online coursework;
iii) to evaluate the impacts of these strategies on student learning outcomes
through rigorous randomized controlled trials; (iv) to understand the student
experience of learning within online environments through investigation of
learning behaviors and the ways in which an intervention strategy may influence
these behaviors; and (v) to evaluate which intervention strategies reduce
performance gaps in online courses between learners from less and more
disadvantaged backgrounds. To achieve these objectives, two core studies will be
conducted. The investigator will implement and evaluate two specific
intervention strategies that have shown promising results in a four-year
setting: skill scaffolding and increased interpersonal interaction. A
descriptive study will systematically collect information on instructors'
perceptions of distance learning and their instructional practices in a large
swath of online STEM gateway courses in a large state community college system.
Subsequently, the investigator will develop additional intervention strategies
based on both theoretical recommendations and information collected from the
descriptive study. An intervention study will conduct a series of random-
assignment experiments. These experiments will assess the impacts of strategies
for more effectively engaging and supporting students in online STEM gateway
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.