* 1750295
* CAREER: A Toolkit to Modulate the Mitochondrial Calcium Uptake Machinery
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Justin Wilson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 06/30/2023
* USD 565,384.00

Mitochondria are critical components of a cell because they produce most of the
chemical energy the cell needs and influence the cell survival and death
pathways. Calcium ion entry in, and exit from, mitochondria is crucial for the
function of these cellular components; conversely, deregulation of mitochondrial
calcium levels was implicated in several human diseases. The understanding of
how the calcium ions influence the function of the mitochondria depends on
having appropriate tools to selectively decrease the uptake of calcium by
mitochondria. With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the
Chemistry Division is funding Professor Justin Wilson from Cornell University to
develop such tools based on small-molecule regulators of mitochondrial calcium
uptake. These tools are valuable to the larger research community that studies
the important roles of calcium in biology and in human health and disease. The
graduate students who conduct research in Professor Wilson's lab gain knowledge
of bioinorganic chemistry and acquire skills in synthetic chemistry and cell
biology that prepare them to become members of the next generation of
scientists. Professor Wilson also works on enhancing STEM education in rural
communities by organizing outreach activities and workshops for K-12 STEM
teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project develops inhibitors of the
mitochondrial calcium uniporter (MCU), which is the only known calcium
transporter protein in mitochondria. The MCU was conclusively identified in
2011. Its precise role in modulating the biological effects of mitochondrial
calcium levels remains uncertain. Efforts to elucidate the roles of the MCU in
mediating cellular processes would be strengthened by a toolkit of selective MCU
modulators that operate in a range of biological conditions and settings. The
only known selective inhibitor for the MCU is the dinuclear oxo-bridged
ruthenium complex Ru360. However, the experimental use of this compound is
limited by several factors. The complex is useful only for studying isolated
mitochondria or permeabilized cells because it cannot penetrate into cells;
isolated mitochondria or permeabilized cells are too simple to afford the
extrapolation of results and conclusions to in vivo systems. Furthermore, the
mechanism of action of Ru360 is unknown, which prevents the design of improved
analogues. Professor Wilson develops MCU inhibitors based on Ru360. The
development of these inhibitors is first based on gaining mechanistic insight
with respect to how Ru360 functions. The interactions of this compound with
biomolecules relevant to its MCU-inhibitory activity is studied by NMR and EPR
spectroscopy. The insight gained from the mechanistic studies is applied in the
design of new ruthenium-based MCU inhibitors with enhanced cell permeability and
aqueous stability. These new inhibitors are evaluated in living mammalian cells
to verify that their MCU-inhibitory activity is retained in complex biological
systems. The new tools may be used to elucidate the role and importance of the
MCU in mediating physiological and pathophysiological cellular processes,
thereby leading to deeper insight into the fundamental cell biology of calcium
and its importance in human health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.