* 1750225
* CAREER: Multi-Objective Optimization of Sensor Placement for Reliable Monitoring and Control of Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Lauren Linderman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 07/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant aims to sustain the
long-term performance of civil infrastructure by identifying the most effective
measurement types and locations for monitoring and isolating structural
response. Continued performance of civil structures in daily use and after a
natural hazard event is critical to the resilience of our communities and the US
economy. The integration of sensor networks and physical systems is essential
for maintaining this continued performance of civil structures while facing
challenges in aging, energy, and the environment. The interaction of these
cyber-physical components impacts almost every endeavor today and is
indispensable in tackling today's broader challenges and continued US economic
growth. This research project will identify optimal network systems for
infrastructure applications through the integration of virtual and physical
sensors and actuators. Unlike current approaches that are limited to specific
measurement technology, function, and/or application, the new network approach
is scalable to monitor large structures, as well as to provide insight on
performance limits and maximize the reliability of the selected network
configuration. Experimental modules will be developed based on the framework of
this research through student's design projects and will be used to create an
interactive outreach platform for students in secondary
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effective implementation of sensor and actuator
networks necessitates that limited sensor resources provide the most informative
measured data and are reliable in the face of uncertainties. The objective of
this research is a framework to identify the bounds of algorithm performance for
structural health monitoring and control applications through optimization of
sensor placement, type, and configuration in the presence of uncertainties. The
multi-objective optimization sensor approach will be validated with results from
physical tests ranging from laboratory-scale monitoring and control experiments
through in-situ deployments. Key results include: (i) a sparsity-promoting
algorithm to determine near-optimal sensor requirements for effective response
and parameter estimation, (ii) insight into the performance bounds for
estimation-based algorithms, and (iii) a novel experimental approach for
validation of the technique under repeated, non-idealized conditions to
establish the reliability of estimation-based
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.