* 1750254
* CAREER: Existence and Regularity of Solutions to Variational Problems in Geometric Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Christine Breiner, Fordham University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 09/30/2021
* USD 275,680.00

This project studies optimization questions in geometric analysis, namely
constructs that optimize energy or area subject to a constraint. Existence and
structural results are of interest in areas such as engineering, physics, and
chemistry. Classical examples are minimal surfaces, which locally minimize area
subject to fixed boundary conditions, such as soap films supported by wires of
various shapes. This project studies constant mean curvature (CMC) and minimal
surfaces as well as harmonic maps. CMC surfaces optimize area, but with
constraint given by enclosed volume -- CMC surfaces appear in nature as soap
bubbles. Harmonic maps optimize energy rather than area and are closely related
to minimal surfaces. The objects studied in this project have characterizations
in many branches of mathematics; the questions and desired results are of broad
interest in mathematics and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
primarily studies CMC surfaces immersed in smooth manifolds and harmonic maps
into metric spaces. In the work on harmonic maps, the project aims to provide a
new direction for resolution of Cannon's conjecture. It is planned to establish
the existence of a harmonic homeomorphism from the round unit sphere into a
sphere with a metric possessing upper curvature bounds. In a second direction,
the project aims to refine techniques that produced a compactness theory for
harmonic maps into metric spaces with upper curvature bounds. While the
techniques for proving compactness in this setting are necessarily geometric and
variational (rather than analytic), the results are analogous to those that
establish compactness in the smooth setting. Using the refined techniques, the
investigator plans to establish a harmonic replacement argument using energy
rather than modulus of continuity methods. Other research directions relate to
the study of CMC surfaces. The investigator plans to extend and refine a gluing
construction that produced CMC hypersurfaces in Euclidean space. The new
construction is expected to produce non-rotational, toroidal drops in Euclidean
space and will serve as a model for a subsequent construction to produce CMC
tori in three-manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.