* 1750624
* CAREER:  Iron-sulfur cluster assembly in Bacillus subtilis
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Jeffrey Boyd, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,035,140.00

All forms of life require that many of their proteins have non-protein parts
known as cofactors added to them so that they can function properly. Many of
these cofactors are built from vitamins and minerals that are important in the
diet. One such cofactor is the iron-sulfur (Fe-S) cluster, which allows proteins
to perform many important types of chemistry. Because free Fe and S are toxic to
cells, elaborate protein systems are used to build these cofactors. Once they
are built, the Fe-S clusters must be trafficked to, and inserted into, proteins
that require them. Cells that cannot properly build Fe-S clusters or maturate
Fe-S proteins have chronic complications, which often results in cell death. The
nature of this cellular machinery, however, is not well understood, and many
questions remain about how organisms build Fe-S clusters and deliver them to
proteins that require them for function. Novel Fe-S protein maturation proteins
continue to be discovered, highlighting the fact that a global understanding of
this process is lacking. The studies to be conducted in this project will impact
the understanding of iron-dependent processes from bacteria to humans. The
project will also provide unique educational opportunities for two postdoctoral
scholars and up to ten undergraduate students. These trainees will be
technically and intellectually trained and will receive the necessary guidance
and resources to aid their transition into the next phases of their careers. The
trainees will focus on enhancing their communication skills, technical skills,
teaching skills, and personnel management skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gram-
positive bacterium Bacillus subtilis utilizes the SufCDSUB Fe-S cluster
biosynthetic system and at least two Fe-S cluster carriers. Additional factors
have been identified that have roles in Fe-S protein maturation, including SufT
and YlaN; however, the functions of these molecules are unknown. Moreover, the
Fe and electron donors for Suf-directed Fe-S cluster synthesis, as well as
additional carrier molecules, are unknown. To properly understand how Fe-S
proteins are maturated, the components involved must be identified and their
functions defined. This project combines classic genetics and biochemistry with
state-of-the-art, next-generation technologies and computational biology to 1)
determine the physical interactions between SufT, YlaN, and Fe-S cluster
synthesis, assembly, and target proteins, 2) quantify the necessity of SufT and
alternate Fe-S cluster assembly factors for the function of specific metabolic
pathways that require Fe-S enzymes, 3) assign biochemical functions to SufT and
YlaN, and 4) model and predict the effect of faulty Fe-S protein maturation and
validate the effects in vivo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.