* 1750065
* CAREER:  Intercellular regulation of protein oxidation during aging
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2024
* Javier Apfeld, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 902,839.00

This project will identify new principles by which communication between tissues
affects the oxidation of proteins as a function of age in a model organism, a
roundworm. The simultaneous oxidation of proteins is increasingly recognized as
an important means of coordinating protein function both within and between
cells. Specifically, the oxidation of cysteine residues (an amino acid within
proteins) plays an important role in regulating proteins involved in fat
metabolism, gene expression, and cell shape. However, little is known about how
cysteine oxidation is coordinated between cells because it has been difficult to
measure oxidation non-destructively in live organisms. Recent innovations in
imaging of cysteine oxidation in living animals enable the researcher to fill
this critical gap in knowledge, which currently limits understanding of how
multicellular organisms coordinate diverse cellular processes. It is expected
that the proposed research will have a wide-reaching impact on aging,
metabolism, inflammation, and other fields where physiological processes are
influenced by protein oxidation. The project integrates research and education
by providing research and learning opportunities on the science of aging for
students in grades 6-12, undergraduate and graduate students, and the public.
These opportunities include laboratory research experiences and educational
leadership development for undergraduates, research modules that engage hundreds
of new undergraduates in cutting-edge research experiences, and an open
classroom that will outreach to hundreds of senior citizens and establish inter-
generational relationships between them and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cysteine oxidation disrupts enzyme catalysis and
is an important regulatory mechanism for hundreds of proteins that control a
wide variety of cellular processes. Little is known about the intercellular
signaling pathways that can affect the oxidation of these proteins in a
concerted manner. The objective of this project is to determine how
intercellular signaling pathways regulate cytosolic protein oxidation in
specific target tissues and with aging, using the nematode Caenorhabditis
elegans as a tractable model system. Protein oxidation will be measured with
single-cell resolution in live animals, using a genetically-encoded, fluorescent
sensor. The research questions addressed are: (1) How do sensory neurons
regulate protein oxidation in distant target tissues? (2) How does local
intercellular signaling regulate protein oxidation in specific target tissues?
(3) How is the trajectory of protein oxidation with aging determined by
intercellular signaling? This project will provide research opportunities in the
science of aging for elementary to graduate level students, develop new courses
and authentic research modules for undergraduate students, and improve public
awareness and knowledge about aging science by offering courses designed to
engage senior citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.