* 1750411
* CAREER: Site-Differentiated Bimetallic Catalysts for Precise Polyolefin Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Loi Do, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 03/31/2024
* USD 626,300.00

Polymers are one of the most widely used man-made materials today. Their
applications range from common plastic bags to life-saving medical devices. Many
methods currently used to make polymers are inefficient, energy intensive,
and/or require expensive raw materials. To promote more sustainable
manufacturing practices, Dr. Loi Do is developing new ways to create polymers
directly from naturally occurring and readily available raw materials. The key
to Dr. Do's technology is the use of new catalysts that control how the raw
material building blocks are connected to form polymers. This research benefits
society by providing new materials that can improve our quality of life. Dr. Do
is also actively involved in outreach activities that integrate his interests in
industrial chemistry at the University of Houston (UH). Dr. Do is creating
programs that give high school and undergraduate students the opportunity to
interact with professional scientists and learn about chemistry in everyday
life. Dr. Do excites students about pursuing careers in STEM fields. Dr. Do is
also engaging in hands-on laboratory training and mentoring of young chemists to
prepare them to become the next generation of scientific leaders.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the
Chemistry Division, Dr. Do at the University of Houston (UH) is developing new
sustainable routes to access technologically useful polyolefins. This research
seeks to eliminate the need to use expensive alpha olefin co-monomers in the
preparation of low- and medium-density polyethylene and to overcome the tendency
of transition metal catalysts to be inhibited by polar vinyl olefins. Dr. Do's
bimetallic catalysts take advantage of metal-metal cooperativity to achieve
reactivity patterns that are distinct from those of conventional monometallic
catalysts. These studies are being guided by mechanistic investigations using
spectroscopic tools to interrogate the nature of observable reaction
intermediates and computational methods to evaluate the energy barriers of
discrete reaction steps. This work is critical to our understanding of olefin
polymerization catalysis and may provide insights into where catalyst design
improvements could be made. Dr. Do is also initiating educational outreach plans
that will introduce young students to the chemical profession. The objectives of
Dr. Do's educational activities are to make learning chemistry accessible to the
general public and give chemistry majors at UH the practical skills that they
need to be successful in their independent careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.