* 1750322
* CAREER:   Genomic, transcriptomic, and developmental drivers of thermal adaptation among natural populations of Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Brent Lockwood, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,054,119.00

Extreme temperature can kill thermally sensitive individuals in a population and
lead to the evolution of thermal tolerance, because only thermally tolerant
individuals survive and reproduce under these conditions. Young individuals may
be particularly vulnerable to thermal stress, but there is a gap in knowledge
about how effects of thermal stress experienced early in life impact later life
stages, and how such developmental constraints affect thermal adaptation. This
project will uncover the genes and cellular processes that have evolved to
enable natural populations of the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster to survive
and thrive across a wide range of thermal environments across the globe. This
research is important because it will characterize how organisms respond to
environmental change during their lifetimes and how populations respond to
environmental selection over longer evolutionary time scales. The results from
this project will advance the fields of ecological and evolutionary physiology.
This project will have broad societal impacts through the training of the next
generation of scientists from diverse socioeconomic backgrounds and through
dissemination of science to the public by producing an educational video about
physiological change in relation to environmental change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to reveal evolved
mechanisms of thermal tolerance across life stages among natural populations of
Drosophila melanogaster. In oviparous animals with external embryonic
development, embryos are vulnerable to changes in temperature because they are
directly exposed to the external environment, have low thermal tolerance, and
cannot behaviorally avoid extreme conditions. Thus, thermal selection is likely
to target the embryonic life stage. Accordingly, embryos of tropical populations
of D. melanogaster are more heat tolerant than embryos of temperate populations,
whereas adult heat tolerance is the same across populations around the globe.
Yet, it is not known how tropical embryos physiologically cope with extreme
heat. To fill this gap in knowledge, the project will integrate genomic mapping,
transcriptomics, protein biochemistry, and confocal fluorescence microscopy to
identify the genetic and physiological bases of divergence in embryonic thermal
tolerance among temperate and tropical populations. This CAREER award will
integrate research and educational goals to (1) develop assessment tools of
undergraduate student performance in scientific reasoning, (2) train a
postdoctoral associate as a teacher-scholar, and (3) create an online science
educational video on the physiology of environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.