* 1750996
* CAREER:   Regulation of mitochondrial integrity and mitophagy between distinct mitochondrial subpopulations
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Dori Woods, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,143,588.00

This project evaluates fundamental but largely unexplored mechanisms as to how
cells maintain the integrity of one of their most critical internal
compartments, their energy factories termed mitochondria. To maintain proper
mitochondrial function, it is thought that damaged or dysfunctional mitochondria
are routinely removed and replaced with new ones, but how cells coordinate this
process is poorly understood. The project is designed to determine how different
mitochondrial subpopulations within cells, distinguished from one another based
on differences in size, energy-producing activity, and other endpoints, are
either amplified or removed in response to specific cues that work in concert to
coordinate cellular function. This research incorporates many important teaching
and training goals by engaging students across academic levels (including high
school, undergraduate, and graduate students) and backgrounds through their
participation in research activities involving the application of next-
generation scientific tools to drive new discoveries. The project specifically
encourages, and implements a recruiting strategy for, the active participation
of under-represented high school and undergraduate students interested in
pursuing careers in STEM (Science Technology Engineering Mathematics).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How subpopulations of mitochondria are differentially
governed to maintain homeostatic balance between mitochondrial integrity and
dysfunction are not known. Although mitochondria are heterogeneous with respect
to function, DNA content, and morphology, little is understood regarding how
mitochondrial properties are regulated on a per organelle basis, and why some
mitochondria have a function distinct from others in the same cell. A major
unresolved question in cell biology revolves around how 'mitochondrial
heterogeneity' arises, and how variability between mitochondrial subpopulations
can impact cellular functions. This project will test the hypothesis that
distinct populations of mitochondria are preferentially allocated and set aside
by the cell, but can be triggered to activate under certain physiological
conditions, while dysfunctional mitochondria are preferentially eliminated via
mitophagy (selective degradation of mitochondria by the cell). This fundamental
knowledge and insight into how mitochondrial subpopulations can be
differentially governed extends the current understanding of intracellular
organization and is broadly applicable across eukaryotes. It is anticipated that
this research will drive novel discoveries in normal cells, and will lead to new
mitochondrial-based therapeutic platforms and molecular interventions in
pathophysiologic states.