* 1750615
* CAREER: Conversational Intuition: Modeling Latent Interactional Dynamics to Improve Online Discussions
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mi, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/29/2024
* USD 539,331.00

This research will develop computational tools and understanding that can endow
online discussion platforms with an artificial intuition about ongoing
conversations. While in the offline world we are attuned to subtle
conversational signals that help us align our intentions and expectations with
those of our interlocutors, online we have not yet developed an acute
sensibility for such (often muted) meta-conversational signals. This project
will develop a computational framework for (1) reconstructing aspects of this
lost meta-conversational channel in online goal-oriented discussion; for (2)
detecting warning signs of misalignment and conversational failure; and for (3)
developing mechanisms aimed at keeping at-risk conversations on track. This work
introduces new methods for tracking the balance of conversational behavior of
interlocutors throughout a conversation. It proposes new hypotheses connecting
these dynamics of interactional balance to the outcomes of goal-oriented
conversations and tests these hypotheses in prediction settings on large-scale
conversational data and through experimental interventions on real-world goal-
oriented discussion platforms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A transformed understanding
of the meta-conversational channel and new computational models for capturing it
will have broader impacts along many dimensions. First, the project will provide
new knowledge that organizations building online discussion platforms can adopt
to maximize their effectiveness. Second, it provide new research methods for
disciplines where computational treatment of conversations plays a key role.
Third, the project will add to research infrastructure through the release of
datasets, code, and working applications. Fourth, the project will develop a new
interdisciplinary undergraduate course that will integrate the code, data, and
knowledge generated by the research activities. Finally, there will be an
extensive outreach program aimed at empowering disadvantaged high-schoolers
through hands-on interactive activities highlighting the strengths and potential
pitfalls of online teamwork.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.