* 1750789
* CAREER: Towards an Intermittent Learning Framework for Smart and Efficient Cyber-Physical Autonomy
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2018,10/31/2018
* Kyriakos G Vamvoudakis, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Sprinkle
* 10/31/2018
* USD 89,442.00

This project expands how reinforcement learning frameworks can be used for
Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) for autonomy. The research utilizes intermittent
reinforcement, where a reward is not given every time the desired response is
performed. This differs from traditional reinforcement learning mechanisms, in
which a reward is given for each point during online training. What is novel in
this framework is that it can demonstrate how reinforcement learning can be used
when rare events, or noisy and adversarial data, can affect the training and
performance of these algorithms. The work will be validated on collaborative
road freight transport and collaborative robotics testbeds, through
international partnerships with Sweden and the United Kingdom. The project
includes activities that integrate high-school students into challenging
problems in machine learning areas, motivated through drone racing
competitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to expand
foundational knowledge through deepened ties between the learning, control, game
theory, and CPS communities. The approach is to, (i) unify new perspectives of
learning in engineering with respect to resiliency, bandwidth efficiency,
robustness, and other aspects that cannot be achieved with the state-of-the-art
approaches; (ii) develop intermittent deep learning methods for CPS that can
mitigate sensor attacks and can handle cases of limited sensing capabilities;
(iii) incorporate nonequilibrium game-theoretic learning in CPS with components
whose decision-making, rationality, and information usage are fundamentally
different; and (iv) investigate ways to transfer learning to new platforms. The
project's education and outreach component includes internships that will lead
to technology transfer, summer camps with a special focus on reaching out to
underrepresented minorities and women, and collaboration with institutions in
Sweden and the United Kingdom through student exchange
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.