* 1750489
* CAREER: Towards General-Purpose Manipulation of Deformable Objects through Control and Motion Planning with Distance Constraints
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Dmitry Berenson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 03/31/2024
* USD 540,000.00

This project seeks to advance the capabilities of autonomous robots in
environments such as factories, hospitals, and homes. To be effective in such
settings, robots need to manipulate many kinds of deformable objects, such as
cloth, string or wires, and plant or animal tissue. Giving robots the ability to
manipulate such objects has the potential to revolutionize the use of robots in
several application domains: In manufacturing, allowing robots to pack boxes and
handle food and fabric; in medicine, allowing robots to perform tedious tasks in
surgery and make hospital beds; and in service, allowing robots to handle
clothes and prepare food. However, such tasks are beyond the current state-of-
the-art, largely because deformable objects are difficult to model and control.
This project will develop new theory, validated with extensive experimentation,
that aims to model deformable objects in ways that are amenable to both planning
and control. This project will also use manipulation of deformable objects as a
motivating problem for students studying robotics at the undergraduate and
graduate levels, and in K-12 outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates the fundamentals of modeling, control, and motion planning for
deformable objects. This problem is challenging because deformable objects have
large state spaces, are extremely-underactuated, and motion planning for these
objects requires numerical simulation, which can be computationally expensive
and inaccurate. The main hypothesis of this project is that these challenges can
be overcome by representing the object and task in terms of distance
constraints, which represent allowable distances between parts of the deformable
object as well as between the object and parts of the environment, and
formulating control and planning methods based on this representation. The
expected outcome of this research is an enhanced ability of robots to perform
useful tasks, based on a better understanding of deformable object manipulation
and a set of broadly-applicable experimentally-verified controllers, planning
building-blocks, and planning algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.