* 1750833
* CAREER:  Image speed and visual acuity during fly flight
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2024
* Jamie Theobald, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 04/30/2024
* USD 850,000.00

The work in this project investigates how insects cope with fast image motion
during flight. Insects use their brains to coordinate quick and accurate aerial
maneuvers, but with coarse eyes that are immovably fixed in their heads, they
cannot stabilize images the way humans do. The result is significant motion blur
of objects they need to see in order to fly. How insect brains can so quickly
gather information from a fast-moving image, then process it to generate
appropriate flight responses, is an important, unresolved problem in visual
science. These experiments study the steering efforts of tethered and freely
flying fruit flies as they are presented with moving images under increasingly
challenging circumstances, such as dim light and low contrast. The results will
contribute to better understanding animal flight, human vision, and improve the
performance of autonomous robots, such as flying drones. This project produces
outreach and training opportunities to impact underrepresented groups through
three activities. First, training undergraduates at Florida International
University, most of whom identify from traditional minority groups, to carry out
some of the laboratory work. Second, hosting in the lab at-risk local high
school students from a non-profit organization that aims to inspire at-risk and
delinquent youth. Third, demonstrating a portable version of these experiments
to the Miami Science Museum's annual Brain Fair, a community outreach event with
local neuroscientists directed at teaching brain and behavioral sciences to
children in the broader Miami area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this work
is to determine the consequences of photon noise that is coupled to self-motion,
and reveal the neural and behavioral mechanisms flies use to counteract its
effects. The discrete and random nature of light absorption dictates that when
photons are scarce, images suffer from low signal to noise ratios. This occurs
whenever light intake is limited, such as when the environment is dim, or when
eyes are physically small, or when objects move quickly across the visual field,
which is often an inevitable result of quick flight. This project aims to
determine how the fruit fly nervous system contends with degraded images just
when it needs accurate visual information to coordinate responsive aerial
movements. Tethered flies will view quickly moving projected patterns, which
will establish the relationship between flow-induced photon noise, regional
acuity, and attention. In the next stage, freely flying flies moving through
obstacles will help determine the trade-offs of flight-induced noise and
steering decisions, in other words the behavioral strategies that address and
possibly minimize flow induced signal noise. And finally, sharp electrode
elecrophysiological recordings will characterize spatial and temporal responses
in early visual neurons while they view fast-moving patterns, which will then
form the basis of biological models for viewing fast optic flow. The results of
this project will offer neurobiological insight to the study of visual
performance in moving animals, and practical insight to the design of artificial
visual systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.