* 1750125
* CAREER:  Uncovering the strange biology of elusive Shigella phages and their roles in horizontal gene transfer
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2022
* Kristin Parent, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 12/31/2022
* USD 794,331.00

Microbes rarely exist in isolation. Instead, they interact with multiple other
partners in the broader context of a microbiome. Microbiomes play a large role
in the health of the organisms with which they interact. Microbiomes are complex
networks of organisms that frequently include bacteriophages, which are viruses
that infect bacteria. Since bacteriophages, or phages, play essential roles in
shaping bacterial evolution, it is imperative to understand the impact of these
viruses within the context of complex microbial communities. The goal of this
project is to fully characterize the mechanism(s) of phage-mediated evolution
within complex microbial networks and ultimately examining these networks in an
environment that mimics the human gut. The Broader Impact activities involve a
phage hunting project that will involve middle school, high school and
undergraduates in the discovery of new phages (this will involve a collaboration
between MSU and Grinnell College). Blog posts, along with YouTube videos, will
keep the community informed regarding progress in the identification of newly
discovered phages. Teacher training, along with curriculum development in the
K-12 classroom, are prominent components of the proposed workplan.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some phages can "transduce", or package host genetic
information, and pass it along to the next host during infection. This
profoundly affects microbiome evolution by mobilizing and moving genes
horizontally within the community. A recent discovery has uncovered novel
evolution within Shigella phages that potentially increases genetic exchange
within bacterial populations. To truly understand mechanisms of phage-mediated
evolution, it is imperative to consider transduction within complex communities.
This can be done by building on traditional studies of experimental microbial
evolution, which solely use purified cultures and non-transducing phages, to
multi-species communities that include transducing phages. The objective of this
research is to determine mechanisms by which phage-mediated genetic transfer
affects microbiome evolution. The first step in building these communities will
be to isolate and characterize diverse Shigella phages. The PI will isolate
Shigella phages from diverse environments, characterize their life cycles on
different hosts, and perform experimental co-evolution studies between phages
and hosts. These co-evolution experiments will initially be used to determine
how phages evolve to infect new hosts. Combined, these results will help
parameterize computational models, which will be used to build experimental
networks with increasing complexity. The PI will determine selection pressures
that influence rapid evolution to develop a predictive tool that can ultimately
be applied to other bacteria:phage interactions. The PI will then experimentally
test computationally predicted hypotheses using conditions that resulted in
interesting and novel outcomes. Ultimately cell culture microfluidics (i.e.
"Gut-on-a-Chip") will be developed to mimic a native microbiome and be used to
study phage:host interactions in the context of a mammalian gut. The PI will
track evolution and genetic mobility between phages and host bacteria using
genetic sequencing of isolates after a population has evolved in this native,
but easily-controlled, environment.