* 1750549
* CAREER: HiPer: A CFD solver for High-Performance Turbulent Flow Simulations on Massively Parallel Machines
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Aparna Chandramowlishwaran, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Li
* 05/31/2024
* USD 516,000.00

Evolution of physics-based simulations and Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) in
particular has fundamentally reshaped the design and engineering process in the
last several decades. However, in spite of noteworthy success, today's CFD still
remains limited to a small design space. One of the grand challenge problems is
the simulation of a full aircraft envelope. Today's computing platforms are
based on massive parallelism and heterogeneous processor designs to deliver
petascale performance (10^15 floating point operations per second). This
research has the potential to effectively harness this level of performance and
significantly address grand challenge problems through advances in numerical
schemes, efficient parallel algorithms, and implementation strategies to enable
underlying simulations that are currently infeasible. It also aims at
transforming CFD simulation capabilities to dramatically reduce the cost and
time needed to solve complex multi-physics problems. As such, this research
fills a gap in the understanding that lies at the intersection of computational
fluid dynamics and parallel computing. This interdisciplinary research also
shapes the next-generation of students and researchers with a multi-faceted
skill set required to solve challenging problems at the boundary of domain
sciences, applied mathematics, and computer science to promote the progress of
science and advance national prosperity and welfare as stated by NSF's
mission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research creates HiPer, a CFD solver for
high-performance turbulent flow simulations on massively parallel machines.
HiPer solves the Navier-Stokes equations on multi-block structured grids for
complex geometries by combining the following key components: (i) a novel time-
delayed implicit time-marching scheme tailored for heterogeneous architectures;
(ii) parallelization strategies for shared- and distributed-memory systems aimed
at reducing the synchronization and communication time; and a hybrid multi-block
structured grid enhanced by geometric multigrid to increase convergence as well
as reduce the number of grid cells. Applications that are drivers in the near-
and long-term serve as benchmarks for continually measuring progress towards the
grand challenge goals. In particular, two application case studies serve as
drivers for the near-term: (a) the simulation of the complex unsteady flow
through multi-stage compressors and turbines, and (b) noise generation and
propagation in a high-speed turbulent jet. The intellectual merit of this work
is the development of novel numerical techniques, parallelization strategies,
and scalable software that enable turbulent-separated flow simulations that are
computationally intractable today. To engage and inspire young generations to
this approach, this project strives to (i) organize hands-on workshops at
relevant conferences, (ii) design and develop an educational kit targeted to
teaching CFD and high-performance computing (HPC) concepts, (iii) design lab-
based courses on HPC for computational scientists, including hands-on labs using
HiPer on large-scale systems for on-site students, and (iv) release videos and
guest lectures through University of California's Early Academic Outreach
Program.Â &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.