* 1750911
* CAREER: SPARK: A Theoretical Framework for Discovering Complex Patterns in Big Attributed Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Feng Chen, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Wei Ding
* 12/31/2019
* USD 206,164.00

Recent advances in sensing and computing techniques have led to a need for
massive quantities of data to be aggregated from heterogeneous information
sources in fields such as science, engineering, and business that are naturally
modeled in the form of big attributed networks. A big attributed network (BAN)
is characterized by a combination of (a) high-dimensional and heterogeneous
network topologies and (b) high-dimensional and heterogeneous attribute data.
Effective analysis of BAN data relies on simultaneous subgraph mining and
feature selection for discovering complex patterns that are interesting or
significant. However, as yet little has been done to bridge these two important
research areas. The focus of this project is therefore to unify a wide range of
complex pattern discovery tasks including, for example, the detection and
forecasting of societal events (disasters, civil unrest), anomalous patterns
(disease outbreaks, cyberattacks), discriminative subnetworks (cancer
diagnosis), knowledge patterns (new knowledge building) and storylines
(intelligence analysis), and to resolve the fundamental modeling, algorithmic,
and interactive challenges associated with ubiquitous BAN data in today's big
data era. This project incorporates the resulting research outcomes into the
curricula of interdisciplinary courses on topics such as complex pattern
detection in BAN data presented at seminars, tutorials, and workshops, and will
include outreach activities such as a big data analytics summer camp for local
K-12 education in New York's Capital Region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
objectives of this project are: (1) the development of a unified, theoretical
framework for discovering complex patterns in BAN data in various kinds of
tasks; (2) making the inference computationally tractable in extremely large
combined spaces composed of vertices, edges, and attributes; and (3) rendering
the detected heterogeneous patterns transparent and interpretable and
incorporating heterogeneous user feedback into the detection process. The
research approach includes the development of: (1) novel principled methods
capable of learning complex patterns of interest directly from BAN data; (2)
near-linear-time common inference algorithms capable of optimizing a variety of
BAN-specific model objectives that are subject to different constraints on
subgraph topologies and structured sparsity models; and (3) a computer-
interpretable language-based system capable of modeling and interpreting rich
user feedback schemes in BAN data. More details can be found at:
http://www.cs.albany.edu/~fchen/projects/BAN/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.