* 1750531
* CAREER: A Scalable Optimization-Based Framework for Modeling and Analysis of Cascading Failures
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Makan Fardad, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The phenomena of cascading behavior in a network is the process in which certain
small shocks or malfunctions are massively amplified and propagated by the
network. Examples include progressive collapse in civil infrastructure systems,
social contagion and diffusion of innovations in sociology, epidemics in
biology, viral marketing in economics, default cascades in financial systems,
and blackouts in power networks. The ability to model, analyze, and control the
cascade behavior in networks enables detection of sensitivities to shocks, helps
develop vulnerability mitigation strategies for increased resilience, and serves
the public interest in the areas of human health, infrastructure, and national
defense. Due to their surprisingly intricate behavior and wide applicability,
this Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project focuses on
networks in which components take binary states, such as zero or one, inactive
or active, healthy or failed. Here, a cascade is a process in which the
irreversible activation or failure of a relatively small number of components
spreads through the network and ultimately results in the activation or failure
of a substantial portion of the network's components. To date, progress in the
prevention and promotion of binary cascades has been hampered by the complexity
of such behavior. The techniques and algorithms developed in this project are
expected to provide theoretical and computational tools for the modeling,
analysis, and design of cascades in large-scale networks. This project will not
only promote fundamental science of network systems but also improve our
preparedness to avoid failures in critical networks such as, health, traffic,
power, communication, and financial systems. The project also has strong
education and outreach plan that includes K-12, undergraduate and graduate
students, and local community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To advance scalable
techniques for the modeling, analysis, and design of cascading behavior in
emerging networks, this CARRER project considers the optimal cascade seeding
problem: For a given network find the set of components whose failure at time
zero maximizes the failure amplification ratio -- the ratio between the number
of final and initial failures. Two concrete classes of networks are employed as
motivational applications of optimal cascade seeding: transportation networks
and threshold networks. Threshold networks are ones in which a component fails
if at least a certain fraction of its neighbors have failed. The transformative
idea of the fundamental research is to utilize piecewise-linear functions to
approximate the complex temporal dynamics of cascading networks. A special
relaxed version of these nonlinear dynamics is embedded in a high-dimensional
linear program with a cascade-promoting objective. Combinatorial aspects of
finding the most critical initial failures are overcome through the use of
regularization techniques from sparse optimization and compressed sensing. The
developed approach scales gracefully to large-scale networks and has the
potential to enhance the systems-theoretic toolset for analysis and design in
general classes of Boolean and nonlinear systems. The broader impacts of this
project include prevention of epidemic outbreaks and spread of disease,
triggering positive social change and collective action in sociopolitical
networks, and vulnerability detection and mitigation in the emerging smart grid.
The education effort is focused on filling the educational pipeline from K-12 to
graduate students using engaged learning strategies and is centered around
networks and optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.