* 1750450
* CAREER: Enabling Brian-like Computing through 3D Neuromorphic Circuits and Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Yang Yi, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 516,530.00

This project addresses design challenges in building a brain-like computing
system through three-dimensional (3D) neuromorphic circuits, and using Through
Silicon Via (TSV) - based 3D Integrated Circuits. The approach is expected to
reduce the design area occupied by conventional capacitors, resulting in chip
design-area reduction and improvement in chip performance and efficiency. A
Computer Aided Design framework will be developed to optimize the use of these
reconfigured TSVs. The resulting devices, circuits, and framework will be
validated using silicon tape outs and emerging applications, e.g., advanced
wireless broadband communications. In addition to enabling educational and
outreach programs, the project provides industrial experience for
underrepresented students, thus contributing to the development of workforce in
this area of technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project undertakes a
systematic attempt to explore the alternative use of TSVs as capacitors in 3D
Neuromorphic Computing (NC) circuits. The NC chips require membrane capacitors
to power the process of "neuron firing", and, depending on specifications, these
capacitors can occupy from 25-75% of state-of-the-art electronic neuron's design
area. This project entails the design of a NC chip in which idle TSVs are co-
opted to function as capacitors. Three specific thrusts are proposed:
reconfiguration and adaption of idle TSVs as capacitors; scalable, robust, and
energy-efficient 3D NC circuit design; and system prototype and emerging
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.