* 1750865
* CAREER:  GPU-Accelerated Framework for Integrated Modeling and Biomechanics Simulations of Cardiac Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Adarsh Krishnamurthy, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Li
* 02/29/2024
* USD 516,000.00

Cardiovascular diseases, such as heart failure, are one of the leading cause of
death in the U.S. and pose a severe burden to the healthcare system. Most
current treatments for cardiovascular diseases are based on rough estimates of
outcomes from the results of clinical trials, which might not apply to
individual patients due to patient-specific variations. Computational models of
the cardiovascular system, developed from patient-specific clinical data, can
help refine the diagnosis and personalize the treatment, significantly improving
patient care and reducing mortality. The current patient-specific methods for
cardiovascular diseases have been demonstrated mainly in simple, isolated
examples. For widespread adoption of personalized medicine, a flexible and easy-
to-use framework for integrating patient data and simulating cardiac
biomechanics needs to be developed. This project focuses on creating an
integrative framework with simulation, analysis, and visualization tools that
will significantly advance the state-of-the-art in personalized medicine,
ultimately improving patient care and treatment outcomes. Results from this
research will benefit the U.S. healthcare system, society, and economy, while
supporting the NSF mission to promote the progress of science and advance the
national health. The tools developed as a part of this research involves several
disciplines including computer science, bioengineering, and mechanical
engineering. The multidisciplinary components of the project is being integrated
into a larger educational effort that offers the students a solid foundation in
developing computational tools and algorithms, while also broadening the
participation of underrepresented groups in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary objective of this research is the advancement of the state-of-the-art in
translational medicine with the help of computational modeling and interactive
analysis tools to improve the basic understanding of the cardiac muscle and
personalize treatment of cardiovascular diseases in patients. The research
focuses on creating a novel computational framework to automate biomechanics
finite-element simulation and analysis of patient-specific cardiac systems.
Further, it aims to advance the knowledge of disease and therapeutic mechanisms
by developing advanced multiscale methods to model muscle contraction and
growth. Some of the key computational tools and methods proposed as part of this
framework include: (1) a geometric mesh generation tool for systematic
generation of patient-specific finite element meshes from clinical data; (2) an
algorithm for accelerating high-order finite-element simulations using the
graphics processing unit (GPU) for fast tuning of model parameters to match the
patients' baseline cardiac function; (3) new methods for multiphysics
simulations of cardiac systems to model multi-scale muscle mechanics and tissue
growth; and (4) new visualization and virtual reality tools to enable animated
volume rendering and visual analytics of the results of the cardiac simulations.
Successful development of these open-source tools will enable faster adoption of
patient-specific computational models by the research community to understand
therapeutic mechanisms. This framework can significantly advance the state-of-
the-art in personalized medicine, ultimately improving patient care and
treatment outcomes. The multidisciplinary components of the project is being
integrated into a larger educational effort to offer students a solid foundation
in combining biomedical engineering with scientific computing. The education and
outreach plans of this research can inform the community about the crucial role
of computational models in improving patient-care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.