* 1750698
* CAREER:   Building an informative machine learning model of plant gene regulatory control
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Molly Megraw, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 584,992.00

Despite the enormous potential of plant research for transformative advances in
sustainable food and energy production, environmentally responsible materials
biosynthesis, and safe effective medicines, a basic understanding of how plant
genes are 'turned on' or 'turned off' in order to produce these useful products
remains a primary scientific bottleneck. In order to understand how these
genetic pathways function, one must identify and understand the patterns of DNA
elements that ultimately control these genes. To address this fundamental
scientific challenge in biological informatics, this project will use pattern
recognition techniques in order to develop a detailed understanding of the way
in which plant genes are controlled by DNA-encoded information. In order to do
this, we will develop specific computational techniques for building and
interpreting pattern recognition models. The most important aspect of this
research is creating algorithms with the ability to recognize when a number of
different DNA element patterns provide biologically relevant solutions for gene
control. The algorithms, models, and biological outcomes developed by this
project will be made available to the scientific community, including the plant
science community. The underlying computational methods are expected to be
applicable in many other fields of science and engineering. Teaching and
training modules developed by this project will include outreach to our
underserved communities of rural Oregon, including hands-on science experiences
for high school students, as well as teacher training. The modules will draw
special attention to the need for computationally trained researchers in the
plant sciences, and to the need for a dramatically increased understanding of
plant gene regulatory networks as a foundation for new drug discovery,
agricultural, and materials biosynthesis challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
combinatorial control of gene expression by Transcription Factors (TFs) is one
of the most fundamental regulatory mechanisms across the eukaryotic tree of
life, from plants to humans. The DNA region surrounding the start of a gene,
called the promoter region, contains short regulatory sequence elements known as
Transcription Factor Binding Sites (TFBSs). In plants, despite the many exciting
potential advances that hinge on a detailed understanding of plant gene
regulation, relatively little is known about the specific TFBS patterns that
lead to gene expression. This project uses and extends a machine learning model
developed by the Megraw lab that is able to predict the presence of
Transcription Start Sites (TSSs) with high accuracy and resolution. A primary
advantage of this model is that it suggests specific sets of TFBS:promoter
interactions which have the potential to 'turn on' a particular gene. This model
makes novel use of currently available high-throughput TSS data to examine the
global structure of promoters in the model plant Arabidopsis, and in preliminary
research suggests striking unanticipated differences between plant and animal
DNA regulatory codes. The goal of this project is to rigorously test and expand
this promising new computational approach for dissecting which TFBS sets are
optimal predictors of gene up-regulation in a biological sample. The relative
simplicity of the Arabidopsis genome makes this challenge tractable, yet capable
of providing transformative insight into gene regulation in a multicellular
organism. The results of this project can be found at
http://megraw.cgrb.oregonstate.edu/projects/PlantReg&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.