* 1750607
* CAREER: Engineering Molecular Adjuvants for Cancer Vaccines
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Haipeng Liu, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 03/31/2024
* USD 539,422.00

PI: Liu, Haipeng&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: 1750607&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vaccines are
biological substances that represent inactive forms of unwanted germs/diseases.
When a person is inoculated with a vaccine (by injection, nose or mouth) the
body's immune system learns how to confront the harmless version of the disease
by creating appropriate antibodies. The body then "remembers" the germ and what
is required should another attack occur. To achieve clinical benefits, since
tumors use many strategies to suppress the body's immune system, therapeutic
cancer vaccines must include strong "adjuvants," which are substances that are
added to vaccines to improve the body's immune response to the vaccine. The use
of adjuvants decreases the amount of vaccine needed to overcome the tumor-
related immune suppression, which improves vaccine safety. Though a wide variety
of adjuvants are available and have been shown to activate immune cells in
laboratory experiments, only a few have reached the clinical stage.
Effectiveness and safety concerns are the major challenges that have limited the
translation of many adjuvants to the clinical setting. To amplify the
effectiveness and safety of two representative molecular adjuvants, this project
uses "rational molecular design," which is a strategy for creating new molecules
with a desired functionality, based upon having the ability to use physical
models to predict how the molecule's structure will affect its behavior. The PI
will construct a series of chemically modified immune response modifiers (IRMs)
and define the molecular structure-based design rules governing the adjuvant-
immune system interactions at the tissue, cellular, and subcellular levels. The
knowledge gained through these efforts will bridge the gap between synthetic
chemistry and immunology, and give rise to the design of the next generation of
molecular adjuvants for cancer vaccines. The results obtained from these studies
can be applied to vaccines other than cancer, where adjuvant efficacy and safety
are needed. In addition, the research will be directly integrated into
educational programs, including enhancement of the Graduate Certificate Program
in Polymer Engineering, with the goal of attracting underrepresented minorities
to the excitement and career opportunities in the emerging field of
immunobioengineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
integrating molecular engineering and immunology to gain fundamental insight
into important aspects of how to rationally design molecular adjuvants for
therapeutic cancer vaccines that are safe and can overcome tumor related immune
suppression. Although potent in vitro, most adjuvants do not have the desired
physiochemical and pharmacokinetic properties to activate antigen presenting
cells (APCs) in lymph nodes (LNs), the anatomical sites where the anti-tumor
immunity is initiated. A comprehensive set of studies involving synthetic
chemistry and immunology has been designed to amplify the adjuvant function and
safety of two representative immune response modifiers (IRMs). A series of lymph
node targeting IRMs will be constructed and used to define the molecular
structure-based design rules governing the adjuvants-immune system interactions
at the tissue, cellular, and subcellular levels. The research objectives are: 1)
To synthesize LN-targeting immune response modifiers (IRMs) with a pH sensitive
linker and define the structure-based design rules that govern lymph node
accumulation via "albumin-hitchhiking" (adjuvants bind to endogenous albumin
protein and transport to lymph nodes), immune cell uptake and activation; 2) To
amplify the magnitude and function of the T cell immunity by combining LN-
targeting IRMs and an LN-targeting, thymidine-rich oligonucleotide and 3) To
establish the functional and safety impact of this localized IRMs approach in
therapeutic treatment of cancer. Vaccine efficacy, both prophylactic (prior to
injection of melanoma producing OVA-B16F10 cells) and therapeutic (after
melanoma establishment), will be evaluated in C57BL/6
mice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.