* 1750407
* CAREER: Bridging the Data-Model Gap -- Leveraging Surveillance for Propagation Mining over Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2020
* B Aditya Prakash, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wei Ding
* 06/30/2020
* USD 230,716.00

The long-term goal of the proposed research is to understand, manage
efficiently, and utilize dynamical mechanisms like propagation on large
networks, occurring across natural, social, and technological systems.
Understanding such processes enables us to manipulate them for our benefit.
Propagation and networks have numerous applications in areas as diverse as
public health and epidemiology, systems biology, cyber security, viral marketing
and social media---hence progress in this domain promises scientific, commercial
and social benefits. The proposed research aims to develop extensible, data-
driven frameworks for propagation-related problems getting more implementable
and generalizable tools. The PI's investigations will lead to novel mining and
learning problems and scalable techniques which can be applied to massive
datasets, helping make more informed choices for future. Educational activities
are also closely integrated with this research agenda, including integrating
research with education through courses, tutorials, and other university
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most current work in propagation mining assume
the existence of well-calibrated models. Performing model calibration is
typically very expensive, and not robust. Indeed, in many situations it is not
clear which parameterized model should be calibrated. However there is an
increasing availability of surveillance data like online media and medical
health records. The PI's approach is unique in the sense that the aim is to
directly use surveillance data and formulate optimization problems based on the
data and network together. The proposed problems include inventing data-driven
immunization policies for diseases like influenza, automatically finding missing
infections/activations in cascade datasets, and automatically learning graph
summaries based on distributed feature representations of propagation data as
well as the network. The PI proposes to develop a flexible and expressive
framework for all these problems. In addition, the developed algorithms will be
applied to various domains, leveraging multiple
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.