* 1750788
* CAREER: Biomaterial-mediated control over macrophage activation
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Kara Spiller, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 03/31/2024
* USD 499,962.00

Non-technical &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inflammation, and our ability to control it,
is a central theme in modern medicine. The success of implanted biomaterials in
particular hinges on the behavior of macrophages, the primary cells of the
innate immune system that dictate whether a biomaterial will be successfully
integrated with the body or will be rejected. Thus, there is a need for a
versatile biomaterial modification strategy to precisely control the behavior of
infiltrating macrophages for different applications. The protein-ligand binding
pair biotin and avidin is known for its exceptional strength. However, it was
recently discovered that this binding strength decreases when biotin is attached
to larger molecules like proteins and drugs, causing the bond to break and the
protein to be released, with resultant effects on the behavior of infiltrating
immune cells. The rate of protein release can be tuned over a wide range by
modifying preparation parameters, and the selected protein can be chosen to
precisely manipulate macrophage behavior, allowing the biomaterials designer to
tune the immune system for each intended application. When this system is
incorporated into the three-dimensional environment of a biomaterial, the rate
that the bond breaks and the protein diffuses from the biomaterial likely
depends on the biomaterial environment, including the biomaterial itself and its
surrounding milieu, but these phenomena have never been explored. Thus, in this
project the effects of biomaterial properties like microstructure and density,
and how these properties are changed by the inclusion of the dynamic biotin-
avidin-binding system, will be thoroughly characterized, in order to advance
fundamental knowledge of the interactions between the binding system and
biomaterials. In addition, the effects of the external biomaterial
microenvironment will be assessed, including the infiltration of immune cells
and blood vessels, an inevitable outcome for all implanted biomaterials. The
results of this project will pave the way for the design of biomaterials that
can modulate the immune system for biomedical applications, while contributing
fundamental understanding of binding interactions in three dimensions with
applications in basic biology, biosensors, and nanotechnology. In addition, this
project integrates an educational program with Drexel engineering students in
collaboration with early childhood educators to repeatedly introduce
Philadelphia school students to biomaterials engineering principles as they
progress from kindergarten to grade 3. The major goals of this program are to:
1) pilot educational activities for development as curriculum units to share
with other teachers, and 2) improve mentorship skills of Drexel students. A
secondary goal of this program is to collect preliminary data on the
effectiveness of the program to improve students' STEM
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
success of implanted biomaterials hinges on the behavior of macrophages, the
primary cells of the innate immune system that dictate whether a biomaterial
will be encapsulated in a fibrous capsule or vascularized and integrated with
the surrounding tissue. Thus, there is a need for a versatile biomaterial
modification strategy to precisely control the phenotype of infiltrating
macrophages for different applications. The goal of this project is to determine
how changes in affinity binding interactions and the biomaterial
microenvironment affect the release of cytokines from biomaterials to modulate
macrophage behavior. The affinity binding pair biotin and avidin will be
utilized to identify how dissociation kinetics are altered upon conjugation of
biotin to larger molecules like proteins to result in controlled release from
biomaterials, a new application of biotin-avidin technology that has never been
explored. The effects of bioconjugation parameters like biotin valency and the
length of the spacer arm as well as biomaterial properties like crosslinking
density and spatial distribution on release of macrophage-modulating cytokines
will be determined in vitro. Combination with biomaterials design strategies for
spatiotemporal control will be explored, including 3D bioprinting and the
sequential release of multiple proteins. Finally, the effects of interactions
with the in vivo microenvironment, such as the presence of endogenous biotin,
number of infiltrating macrophages, and biomaterial vascularization, on cytokine
release will be investigated using a combination of in vitro and in vivo
experiments. These results will also contribute preliminary data on how
biomaterial-mediated control over macrophage behavior affects biomaterial
vascularization. In addition, this project integrates an educational program
with Drexel engineering students in collaboration with early childhood educators
to repeatedly introduce Philadelphia school students to biomaterials engineering
principles as they progress from kindergarten to grade 3. The major goals of
this program are to: 1) pilot educational activities for development as
curriculum units to share with other teachers, and 2) improve mentorship skills
of Drexel students. A secondary goal of this program is to collect preliminary
data on the effectiveness of the program to improve students' STEM
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.