* 1750542
* CAREER: Mechanistic Investigations to Enable Rationally Designed Biomanufacturing of Mesenchymal Stem Cell Exosomes
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Steven Jay, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 02/28/2023
* USD 607,061.00

Therapies that use a patient's own cells show great promise in the treatment of
a variety of diseases, including cancer. Manufacturing therapeutic cells
reliably is a major challenge. This project will define design and control
parameters to make this possible. The initial focus is on producing a cell-based
therapy for wound healing. If successful, the technology that is developed could
lead to breakthroughs in treatments for other life-threatening diseases. An
education plan will promote opportunities and training at the high school
through post-graduate levels. A progressive program at the high school level
that impacts hundreds of students per year will increase exposure to research
opportunities and promote retention in STEM career paths. Community outreach
programs will also be supported, and research findings will be integrated to
enhance these programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Establishing new criteria for
rational design of biomanufacturing approaches for therapeutic mesenchymal
stem/stromal cell (MSC) exosomes is the focus of this project. Exosomes have
therapeutic bioactivity, including vascularization. Many of the therapeutic
effects associated with cell-based therapies are now being ascribed to protein,
nucleic acid, and/or lipid transfer from exosomes and other extracellular
vesicles secreted by implanted cells. The general hypothesis is that MSC exosome
production and therapeutic bioactivity are defined by the cell culture
microenvironment and the status of producer MSCs. The research objectives are
to: 1) investigate the mechanism of vascularization bioactivity; 2) investigate
the mechanism of cell density effects on production; and 3) develop quantitative
predictive criteria to enable quality control of exosome production. If
successful, this technology will impact patients by enabling new therapeutic
options for wound repair, and ischemic and other
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.