* 1750192
* CAREER: Fundamental Intelligent Building Blocks of the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) of the Future
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Parisa Rashidi, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 03/31/2024
* USD 543,730.00

In the United States, intensive care units (ICUs) costs exceed 4% of national
health costs, and ICU mortality rates can be as high as 29%. Precise assessment
and prediction of patient status in the ICU can enable early interventions, and
can result in improved patient outcomes. However, today's ICUs still face many
barriers for assessing and predicting patient status. First, essential
information such as pain and functional status are not captured automatically,
but rather are repetitively measured by overburdened ICU nurses, with new
assessments added each year. Second, existing methods for predicting patient
status have limited accuracy and are used infrequently (e.g. every 24 hours as
opposed to in real-time). This leads to missing opportunities for early
interventions. Finally, existing models cannot automatically incorporate family
caregiver feedback for improved patient status prediction. Together, these
challenges point to the critical need for developing several fundamental
intelligent building blocks of future ICUs. These building blocks should
address: (a) how to learn new patient status prediction models without
compromising performance on previous prediction models, (b) how to handle the
complex clinical data for precise prediction of patient outcome, and (c) how to
incorporate family caregiver feedback into the prediction
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will pursue three specific research
objectives that will address these issues: (1) Lifelong Multi-Task Learning:
Novel multi-task deep learning models will be developed for recognizing clinical
expressions and functional activities related to pain and functional status
assessments. These models will be customized in an innovative manner to maximize
information sharing among related tasks. (2) Multi-Scale and Dynamic Learning:
Novel multi-scale recurrent neural networks will be developed to predict precise
patient outcomes while handling multiple temporal scales and implicit input
changes over time. (3) Continual Opportunistic Learning: Novel active deep
learning models will be developed to query the labels of the most informative
data points for improving the models over time, with minimum burden on users.
The proposed project will bring together novel elements of machine learning
algorithms and critical care medicine. This will represent the first attempt to
autonomously assess pain and functional status in the ICU, to predict precise
patient trajectory from high-resolution data, and to improve predictive clinical
models through user feedback. In addition, the research will be impactful
because what is learned here, will contribute to a broader understanding of
future design considerations for the next generation of lifelong learning
systems and intelligent hospitals. The PI will also provide a highly-integrated
research and educational program for Florida high school teachers and students,
and University of Florida (UF) undergraduate students in the context of the
intelligent ICU. The PI proposes to: (1) sponsor summer internships for math
teachers, (2) organize an Intelligent Machines workshop on coding and machine
intelligence for the high school students, and (3) develop focused research and
training activities for undergraduate students. These outreach and training
programs will be used to promote interest in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) fields among Florida high school students and UF
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.