* 1750428
* CAREER: Inferring Graph Structure via Spectral Representations of Network Processes
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Gonzalo Mateos Buckstein, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 03/31/2023
* USD 407,944.00

Coping with the challenges found at the intersection of Network Science and Big
Data necessitates fundamental breakthroughs in modeling, identification, and
controllability of distributed network processes -- often conceptualized as
signals defined on graphs. There is an evident mismatch between the scientific
understanding of signals defined over regular domains (time or space) and graph-
valued signals. Knowledge about time series was developed over the course of
decades and boosted by real needs in areas such as communications, speech, or
control. On the contrary, the prevalence of network-related signal processing
problems and the access to quality network data are recent events. In this
context, research in this project aims to push the frontiers of knowledge in
network-analytic information processing, and thus make progress towards
understanding the inherent complexities of strongly coupled systems such as the
brain. Students will also be trained to tackle the problems at the intersection
of Big Data and Network Science, thereby contributing to workforce development
as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the assumption that the signals are related
to the topology of the graph where they are supported, the goal of graph signal
processing is to develop algorithms that fruitfully leverage this relational
structure, and can make inferences about these relationships when they are only
partially observed. Most graph signal processing efforts to date assume that the
underlying network is known, and then analyze how the graph's algebraic and
spectral characteristics impact the properties of the graph signals of interest.
However, such assumption is often untenable in practice and arguably most graph
construction schemes are largely informal, distinctly lacking an element of
validation. The intellectual merit of this research project is to investigate
how to use information available from graph signals to learn the underlying
graph topology, through innovative approaches that operate in the graph spectral
domain. The idea is to consider the graph Fourier transform of the snapshot
signals associated with an arbitrary graph and, among all the feasible networks,
search for one that endows the resulting transforms with target spectral
properties and the sought graph with appealing physical characteristics. Aligned
with current trends in data-driven scientific inquiry into complex networked
systems, the aim is to shift from: (i) descriptive accounts to inferential graph
signal processing techniques that can explain as well as predict network
behavior; and from (ii) ad hoc graph constructions to rigorous formulations
rooted in well-defined models and principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.