* 1750037
* CAREER:   How do host and pathogen diversity interact to shape disease ecology?
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Andrea Swei, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 03/31/2024
* USD 863,616.00

An important goal in ecology is understanding the ways that biological diversity
influences the functioning of ecosystems. One aspect of biodiversity that
directly impacts human health is its importance in mitigating risk of disease
transmission from wildlife. A prominent theory in ecology is that greater
diversity of species reduces the risk of disease transmission, through an effect
called dilution. Evidence for the dilution effect has been found in several
disease systems, including Lyme disease. Greater species diversity of small
mammals that serve as hosts for Lyme disease result in less transmission of the
disease. However, even in this well-studied system, there is little research on
the importance of genetic variation within the Lyme disease pathogen. This
project focuses on the Lyme disease system, to address a critical question in
disease ecology: how does species diversity of hosts influence pathogen genetic
diversity and what does the culmination of these interactions mean for disease
risk? This project also will provide research training to undergraduate and
graduate students, will develop active learning focused courses on disease
ecology, and will engage the public in tick-borne disease biology through
citizen science opportunities. This research has clear public health
implications as Lyme disease is the most reported tick transmitted disease in
the United States&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will incorporate empirical
field studies and mathematical modeling to characterize and predict the
relationship between host diversity and pathogen genetic diversity in the Lyme
disease system in the western United States. Pathogen genotypic diversity will
be characterized using novel microfluidics technology and next generation
genetic approaches. A stage structured continuous time model approach will be
used to characterize and predict the impacts of host diversity on pathogen
genotype diversity and disease risk. This study's emphasis on host and pathogen
diversity will have important consequences for understanding the community level
impacts of diversity on disease ecology in both natural and human
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.