* 1750750
* CAREER: Drones in Public: Foundational Interaction Research
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Brittany Duncan, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2024
* USD 599,647.00

Small Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (sUAVs), or drones, are one of the most adopted
types of robot and have become ubiquitous in outdoor public spaces for
applications in agriculture and public safety. But design limitations and lack
of interaction principles have limited their adoption for indoor uses. The goal
of this research is to discover broad interaction principles for communicative
sUAV flight paths in various spaces and with diverse users, so that when design
limitations such as indoor navigation and battery life are solved the drones
will be capable of safe, efficient, and informative interactions with people. To
this end, the first challenge will be to identify key communication failures, or
barriers between humans and robots, which can create unsafe and inefficient
interactions, and to define strategies for avoiding these problems. Guidelines
will be developed for gestural communication from a vehicle to a user in order
to generate safer and more natural interactions, while respecting personal space
requirements. The two central hypotheses underlying this research are that
gestural communication will allow better visibility of robot state or knowledge
to bystanders while being applicable to existing platforms without
modifications, and that interaction distances will need to adapt to the design
of the vehicle, the user, and the environment to maintain comfort and efficiency
in interactions. This work will have broad impacts both on education and on
society through directed activities to improve understanding of human-robot
interaction. Education will be supported through activities such as lesson plans
for K-12 students, integration of the research into an undergraduate human-
computer interaction class, and informing a semester-long course for both
undergraduate and graduate students on human-robot interaction (HRI). Additional
outreach efforts will include a month-long interaction with 6-8th grade students
from local Title 1 schools teaching K-5 students about the scientific method,
and an evening class for adults to inform them about current robotics and HRI
research. The PI will continue her ongoing efforts to broaden participation in
computer science research. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research will encompass
three parallel objectives related to gestural communications by sUAVs and
comfortable distancing. Objective 1 will focus on communicative motions of state
information from the vehicle; gestures will be generated through participatory
design and tested using methods from the social sciences. Objective 2 will also
be informed by methods from the social sciences, but will focus on distancing
with sUAVs and will take advantage of an existing room in the PI's lab with
movable walls, video cameras, and a motion capture system. Each of these two
research objectives could be carried out in the absence of progress from the
other; however, their exploration together is natural since the gestures are
conveyed by different vehicles, scaled to spaces, and the robots perform tasks
which may require human involvement. This combined investigation will comprise
Objective 3, which will focus on efficient signaling, incorporating the
distancing work into the flight paths, and reception with users performing a
variety of tasks. Project outcomes will transform close-proximity HRI by
enabling sUAVs to generate communicative flight paths that are optimized based
on likelihood of receipt and comfort in highly independent human-robot
teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.