* 1751113
* CAREER:  Spatiotemporal Regulation of Clathrin-mediated Endocytosis
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2023
* Comert Kural, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 12/31/2023
* USD 915,084.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project is designed to understand
the mechanisms employed by cells to regulate the uptake of membrane-bound
molecules into cells. Cells often use a protein called clathrin to coat
membranes which in turn engulf molecules that are bound for internalization. The
results of this project will provide a comprehensive understanding of clathrin-
mediated internalization that can be extended to the everyday interaction of
cells with their environment. This research program will also help establish
educational outreach activities for high school students from underrepresented
areas of Columbus, OH. To attract young generations to science, research
opportunities and a program of seminars will be organized in collaboration with
a local tuition-free public high school. The PI will initiate a new program,
Self Efficacy in STEM thRough Vicarious Experience (SERVE), to alleviate gender
imbalance in STEM fields by boosting female student's self-efficacy in math and
sciences. The PI will ensure that the graduate students in his research group
will actively participate in the outreach activities and develop skills required
for conveying their scientific knowledge and experience to non-scientific
audiences. The PI will also work in partnership with the Ohio State University
Master's to PhD Bridge Program to support and train a master's level student
from underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite being the most
intensely studied membrane transporters, due to the lack of experimental
approaches that allow correlation of structural and temporal properties of
clathrin coats, fundamental aspects of clathrin-mediated endocytic mechanism
remain unclear. Research led by the PI revealed that the mechanical properties
of cells dictate the dynamic and structural properties of endocytic clathrin
coats. In the first part of this CAREER research program, the PI will
characterize the initiation and maturation dynamics of endocytic clathrin-coated
structures at distinct membrane tension and curvature levels to establish the
factors determining the initiation, stability and curvature of endocytic
clathrin coats. The PI will then determine the dynamics of clathrin-coated
structures during cellular processes associated with spatiotemporal tension
gradients to elucidate the origin of heterogeneity in clathrin-mediated
endocytic trafficking in cells. Characterizing the spatiotemporal regulation of
clathrin coat formation and identifying the molecular underpinnings of its
heterogeneity will develop a holistic view and systems level understanding of
clathrin-mediated endocytosis. The long term goals of this CAREER development
plan will allow researchers to delineate the interplay between mechanical cues
and membrane traffic during cellular and tissue level morphological changes that
are essential for normal biological function.