* 1751696
* CAREER: Integrated Modeling of Hazard Mitigation Stakeholder Networks for Compassionate, Sustainable Risk Reduction
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Ward Lyles, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 05/31/2024
* USD 516,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project aims to advance
natural hazard mitigation by examining decision-making carried out by local
networks of stakeholders involved in risk reduction planning and implementation
with the goal to further reduce property losses and social and economic
disruptions from disaster events. The study of the interlinked networks of local
public and private actors, including the champions who foster and maintain
cohesion in the networks that translate knowledge and federal and state policy
into action, is critically important, and will support NSF's mission to advance
the nation's welfare in this case, following disaster events. This project
develops, tests, and refines a new model which explicitly incorporates
stakeholders' thoughts and emotions as factors that interact to enhance or
constrain hazard mitigation decision-making. Anticipated contributions of the
project include an improved process for more effective, sustainable hazard
mitigation decision-making at the local level and expansion of a generation of
hazard mitigation champions across multiple professional and academic
disciplines. The integrated education and research program will foster
dissemination of findings widely and cost-effectively, including to historically
underrepresented populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
involves three research elements to test new hypotheses generated by the
networks for compassionate and sustainable hazard mitigation model. Surveys,
interviews, document review, multivariate regression modeling, case studies, and
in-person observation will be used to apply analytical concepts and techniques
from network science to understand local stakeholder decision-making. Testing a
novel compassionate systems course for professionals will open new lines of
research on analytical and deliberative techniques for identifying and
prioritizing mitigation needs, goals, and actions. Interdisciplinary engaged
learning modules involving strategically integrated sets of seminars, lecture,
conferences, and graduate-level courses, will generate discrete and cumulative
education and practical outcomes. Together, these strategically ordered and
integrated elements will increase our understanding of the role of local hazard
mitigation stakeholder networks and champions in the face of increasing natural
hazard risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.