* 1751791
* CAREER: Promoting Selective Electrochemical CO2 Reduction by Controlling a Catalyst's Primary, Secondary, and Outer Coordination Spheres
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Charles McCrory, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Tong Ren
* 08/31/2023
* USD 675,000.00

The conversion of carbon dioxide (CO2) into value-added products is of
fundamental importance as a means of storing intermittent energy sources like
solar and wind as chemical fuels. One of the challenges in CO2 conversion is
that the most active catalysts for this reaction tend to simultaneously produce
a number of different products such as carbon monoxide, methanol, methane,
ethylene, and the side product hydrogen gas (H2). While the reduction of CO2 to
any one of these chemicals is desired, the non-selective generation of multiple
products is non-ideal due to problems in product separation and isolation. Using
natural enzymes as inspiration, Dr. McCrory is creating synthetic systems in
which catalysts are embedded within polymers that control the active site
environment and reactant delivery to facilitate selective CO2 reduction to
single products. The proposed research has significant broader societal impact
in that it provides a framework for the development of new catalyst systems for
CO2 recycling and energy storage. Concurrently, Dr. McCrory is focused on
increasing energy literacy in Michigan using a 3-step education plan involving
1) graduate student training in scientific communication, 2) community outreach
through interactive demonstrations at public events, and 3) the development and
implementation of an exhibit at the University of Michigan Natural History
Museum focused on renewable energy storage. Through this approach, Dr. McCrory
is working to enable the broader community to better engage in energy policy and
usage decisions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis
Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Charles C. L. McCrory of the University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor is synthesizing new electrocatalytic materials for
selective carbon dioxide reduction by controlling the primary, secondary, and
outer coordination spheres surrounding the catalyst's active site. The central
hypothesis for this proposal is that the reactivity and selectivity of molecular
electrocatalysts for multi-electron transformations such as CO2 reduction can be
modulated not only by modifying the ligand framework surrounding the metal
center, but also by modifying the catalyst?s chemical environment to control H+
and substrate delivery to the metal active site. To test this hypothesis, Dr.
McCrory is encapsulating planar transition metal complexes with macrocyclic
ligands inside of coordinating polymers. The coordination environment,
electronic structure and catalytic activity of the resulting polymer-catalyst
systems are studied using a variety of spectroscopic and electroanalytical
techniques. Through systematic modifications of the ligand, polymer, and
reaction conditions, Dr. McCrory is independently controlling the primary,
secondary, and outer coordination spheres surrounding the metal center and
determining the effect of each coordination sphere on the overall catalytic
activity and product selectivity. The knowledge gained from this study is
crucial for the development of new catalyst-polymer composite systems for
selective CO2 reduction and has significant broader societal impact in the
design of new electrocatalytic systems for renewable energy storage and CO2
mitigation. In addition, Dr. McCrory is working to increase energy literacy in
Michigan through the design of interactive demonstrations relevant to renewable
energy storage for the general public and the development of an exhibit at the
University of Michigan Natural History Museum highlighting progress and
challenges in renewable energy storage. Together, the research and integrated
education components of this proposal highlight a new approach to overcoming
challenges in energy storage and carbon dioxide conversion and will impact the
way these important issues are addressed, both at the scientific and societal
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.