* 1751801
* CAREER: Distribution Resource Elasticity: A New Hierarchical Approach  for On-Demand Distribution Platforms
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Jennifer Pazour, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will support research that
addresses modern product and service distribution challenges through innovation
and education, promoting both the progress of science and advancing national
prosperity. The emergence of sharing economies has enabled individuals and small
businesses to supplement traditional manufacturing and service markets with on-
demand supply. This project focuses on novel methods to coordinate decentralized
distribution resources on-demand through customized recommendations made to
multiple suppliers simultaneously. Such methods will improve the efficiency of
the supply network by tapping into otherwise underutilized or idling supply
capacity. By increasing capacity through more flexible use of suppliers, this
approach can impact both commercial and non-commercial supply networks,
improving e-commerce profitability and enabling a new on-demand volunteer base.
Collaborations with community nonprofits and on-demand grocery delivery systems
for mobility-restricted clients will provide test cases to validate the
developed methods and opportunities for positive societal impact. Undergraduate
engineering students, trained in effective communication, will create activities
informed by this research to inspire K-12 students to pursue engineering.
Undergraduate and graduate students will interact with the research via new
curriculum, classes, service learning, and research experiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports fundamental research in methods to
coordinate decentralized suppliers in real-time for on-demand distribution
platforms and to quantify the impact of supplier choice on platform efficiency,
effectiveness, and equity. New bi-level optimization formulations will capture
performance as a function of both the platform's decisions and suppliers'
interdependent choices. New optimization models and algorithms will guide
platform's interdependent supplier recommendations and categorize responses to
outcomes created by supplier choice. Specialized exact approaches will exploit
problem structure, while heuristic approaches will generate large-scale
solutions quickly. To affect suppliers' selection behaviors, compensation
decisions will be considered jointly with recommendation decisions. Iterative
techniques will set compensation for rejected requests, determine how supplier
performance should influence future platform decisions and utility estimates,
when to deploy platform resources, and how to manage dynamically arriving
requests and suppliers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.