* 1751759
* CAREER:"ASSURED" electrochemical platform for multiplexed detection of Cancer Biomarker Panel using Shear-Enhanced Nanoporous-Capacitive Electrodes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Sagnik Basuray, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Many biosensors used in point-of-care devices suffer from selectivity and
sensitivity limitations that restrict their application in detecting and
monitoring infectious diseases (such as HIV and certain cancers). To mitigate
these limitations, a new electrochemical biosensor with high sensitivity and
selectivity will be developed. The improvement in selectivity and sensitivity
will be realized through packing nanostructures between electrodes to generate
high shear forces. The expected outcome is a biosensor which detects, identifies
and quantifies multiple breast cancer biomarker proteins at very low
concentrations. The related science opens exciting new avenues such as
electrochemical measurements for the detection of opioids in water and the
development of new manufacturing techniques for therapeutic drugs. The principal
investigator will seek close integration among research, experiments and
education. The PI will train the next generation of scientists and engineers who
are interested in the area of biosensing technology, and mentor researchers
(including minorities and female) at undergraduate and graduate level, as well
as inspire K-12 students in science and engineering fields at the early stage of
their learning career through hands-on demonstrations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biosensors for early diagnostics of infectious diseases or
cancer are vitally important for early intervention, patient care, and reduction
of patient mortality. Current biosensors often fail at low concentrations, as
they are not sufficiently sensitive (to prevent false-negatives) nor selective
(to prevent false-positives). The overall objective of this project is to
develop a new electrochemical sensing method that uses a shear-enhanced, flow-
through, nanoporous and capacitive electrode technology, resulting in a very
sensitive and selective biosensor. The performance of new biosensor will exceed
that of current biosensors as (i) the electrode nanoporosity will facilitate the
development of shear forces of the order of a hydrogen bond that will
significantly increase selectivity by mitigating non-specific adsorption; (ii)
the design of the biosensor will negate signal artifacts such as the parasitic
double layer capacitance, thus facilitating rapid, high-resolution
characterization of the binding signal with a significant reduction in noise
leading to increased sensitivity; and (iii) the nanoporous electrode
architecture will increase convective transport of the analyte of interest to
the sensing element, thus overcoming diffusion limitations and reducing assay
times. To facilitate the development of the biosensor, the PI will investigate,
analyze and model the electrochemical response of the biosensor from the binding
of a single species of target biomolecule to its complementary biological
sensing element. The effects of physiochemical characteristics of the nanoporous
capacitive electrode along with the enhanced shear forces will be studied in
detail. A multiplexed electrochemical characterization method will be developed
to test for breast cancer biomarker panel using real-world, complex samples and
to validate the biosensor technology against commercial assays. The
multidisciplinary nature of this project will be used to train students at all
levels in laboratory and experimental techniques, and increase the likelihood
that they would choose interdisciplinary research as a career path. This
outreach effort will harness social media, leverage our existing educational
relationships, and include classroom demonstrations, teacher training, and
educational peer-mentored conference with NJIT Honors College. Among the target
populations of this STEM awareness campaign are inner-city high schools in the
locales of Newark, NJ and Union, NJ that primarily serve largely
underrepresented student bodies. Statistical training workshops and related
tools will be also developed for graduate students to increase statistical
evidence-based training. Validated assessment tools will be used to evaluate the
success of these outreach and educational activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.