* 1751989
* CAREER: Integrated Research and Education on the Dynamic Behavior of Metal-ceramic Layered Solids
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Leslie Lamberson, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award supports research
to generate new knowledge related to an emerging class of unique materials,
known as MAX phases. These hybrid metal-ceramic materials form layers on the
atomistic scale, much like pieces of paper stacked together, which allows the
layers to locally kink instead of crack under load. This kinking behavior has
only recently been discovered, yet if understood, has the potential to provide
tougher, lighter and more damage-tolerant materials for our nation's aging
energy, communication and transportation systems. As a result, MAX phases will
be investigated with varying stacking sequences and layer orientations across a
variety of real-world loading conditions, including impact, and dynamic fatigue
and fracture. In addition, experimental techniques utilizing cutting edge high-
speed imaging coupled with surface acceleration mapping under these complex-
loading scenarios will be performed, that are able to extract more material
behavior information than classical techniques. These findings will provide
meaningful input for predictive computational models in structural design
leveraging MAX phases, as well as other similar advanced materials. This work
brings together multidisciplinary efforts in materials science, and applied and
theoretical mechanics. Novel means to reach untapped local communities at all
ages will be enabled through a dance-mechanics education and outreach program.
The research and outreach components highlight the innate creativity and
correlations involved in both, and aims to inspire the next generation of STEAM
(science, technology, engineering, arts and mathematics) enthusiasts.

This research focuses on an emerging class of materials, MAX phases, a family of
layered hexagonal early transition-metal carbides and nitrides. These materials
exhibit a newly classified defect deformation mechanism termed ripplocations, a
nanoscale buckling phenomena, which accommodates strain in a different manner
than dislocation motion in plasticity or bond rupture in fracture, and leads to
the formation of nonlinear kind bands (NKB) under load. While a notable portion
of the materials science community is examining these 3D layered solids,
relatively little research exists pursuing their behavior on the meso- to
continuum level. This effort aims to fill that gap through three highly
integrated experimental research foci. The first characterizes deformation
behavior varying strain rate and stress states, as well as layer orientation and
stacking sequences, utilizing nonlinear buckling theory to determine the driving
parameters in NKB formation. The second quantifies crack tip energetics in
dynamic fracture leveraging a hybrid experimental-numerical scheme, as well as
explores impact fatigue, extending the classic Paris Law for temporal effects.
The third pursues damage behavior, conducting inertial impact experiments
exploiting the Grid Method and the Virtual Fields Method, an emerging inverse
technique. The extensive investigations on MAX phases will shed light on
competing ductile, pseudo-ductile and brittle deformation mechanisms across
length and time scales, thus making a significant contribution towards
systemically capturing, understanding and optimizing these unique layered
solids. More broadly, the findings will help understand how anisotropic
materials accommodate strain under complex loading conditions, and paves the way
for specifically textured (defect engineered), functionally graded, and/or
hierarchical material design.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.