* 1751197
* CAREER:  High-resolution profiling of histone modifications responsible for heterochromatin repair
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Irene Chiolo, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,416,675.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA is continually subject to damage and life
depends on repairing it. The consequences of failure are especially high in
heterochromatin, the which mostly consists of highly compact DNA-protein
structures and repeated DNA sequences. While repair failures in normal chromatin
can lead to deleterious mutations, incorrect repair within repetitive
heterochromatic regions can trigger rearrangements that cause cell death or
genome instability. This project will use new experimental approaches and
methods in the fruit fly to understand heterochromatic repair pathways at the
chromatin level. This work will yield fundamental advances in our understanding
of the role of chromatin modifications on genome integrity, and the project
itself creates excellent educational opportunities for junior researchers to
participate in training, teaching, mentoring and outreach activities, launching
their careers in science while inspiring others. Specific attention for
inclusion of undergraduate and high school students from underrepresented groups
will expose more women and low-income students to STEM fields. These research
and educational activities will increase their career opportunities while
diversifying the pipeline of future scientists and broadening perspectives to
solve future societal challenges. This project will also involve organizing a
"SoCal Genome Stability" symposium that will enhance the dissemination of
knowledge, open new networking, research and career opportunities for junior and
senior scientists at colleges and universities across Southern California.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nearly 30% of the human genome comprises pericentromeric
heterochromatin, where defective repair of double-strand breaks (DSB) can lead
to widespread genome rearrangements. Previous studies revealed specialized
mechanisms required for 'safe' homologous recombination (HR) repair of these
sequences, including a poorly understood role for histone marks. This study will
shed light on the role of chromatin composition and regulation in
heterochromatin repair in Drosophila. It will combine the unique strengths of
the Drosophila model system, with innovative tools for site-specific DSB
induction and next-generation sequencing. This combination of approaches will
enable the first high-resolution profiling of chromatin dynamics responsible for
heterochromatic repair, significantly advancing the understanding of genome
stability mechanisms in multi-cellular eukaryotes.