* 1751386
* CAREER: Circumpolar Variability and Exchanges Across the Antarctic Slope Front
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Andrew Stewart, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 945,910.00

The Antarctic Slope Front almost completely encircles the Antarctic continent,
separating relatively cold shelf waters from warmer waters at mid-depth in the
open ocean. It serves as a ``gatekeeper'' for waters intruding onto the
Antarctic continental shelf, such as the warm Circumpolar Deep Water that
supplies heat to melt the bases of Antarctica's ice shelves, and for waters
escaping the continental shelf, such as the dense water outflows that fill more
than one-third of the global sub-surface ocean. A series of high-resolution
numerical ocean simulations will be conducted to assess whether past and ongoing
regional models and observational campaigns are capturing the ``hot spots'' of
heat transport toward the continent, and identify which small-scale/high-
frequency processes must be resolved to capture this heat transport. The
educational component will substantially broaden participation of undergraduates
in oceanography by combining field trips and research-based exercises which have
been shown to increase student learning and retention compared to conventional
teaching methods. The educational initiative will engage hundreds of
undergraduate students per year in research cruises to the local continental
shelf and slope off the coast of California. A captain/technician will be
recruited to facilitate dozens of cruises annually using the UCLA Zodiac
research vessel. The project investigator will develop organizational and
educational materials to support the research cruises, with students guided to
form their own research hypotheses and analyzing their own data using scientific
computing tools. By the end of the project period this educational program will
become self-sustaining, drawing from a combination of course fees,
research/education grants, donations and direct support from UCLA. The project
will also provide research training for a graduate student and support for an
early-career faculty member.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Practical constraints imposed
by Antarctica's climate and the small scales of variability have limited
previous quantification of cross-slope exchange processes to localized regions.
There remains a substantial gap in understanding how continental-scale exchanges
of water between the open ocean and the shelf seas are modulated by seasonal
variability in atmospheric conditions, hetereogenous bathymetry, and small-
scale/high-frequency sources of variability such as eddies, tides, overflows and
topographic waves. The project investigator proposes to close this gap in
understanding by developing the first ocean/sea ice model simulations of the
entire Antarctic margins, including the ocean beneath the floating ice shelves,
that can resolve small-scale variability and tides. Using analysis techniques
based on multiple separation of time scales, the cross-slope exchanges of mass
and properties will be quantified and thereby identify regimes in which the
Antarctic Slope Front serves as a ``barrier'' vs. a ``blender''. The same
framework will then be used to diagnose the dynamics of the Antarctic Slope
Current, for example the energy and vorticity budgets, to distinguish the
relative roles of atmospheric forcing, bathymetric steering and small-scale
variability in localizing exchanges across the Antarctic Slope Front. Finally,
idealized process models will be constructed to explore specific hypotheses
derived from the circum-Antarctic model simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.