* 1751487
* CAREER: MULTIPHASE FLUID-MATERIAL INTERACTION: CAVITATION MODELING AND DAMAGE ASSESSMENT
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Kevin Wang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2023
* USD 577,833.00

Cavitation describes the formation, growth, and violent collapse of bubbles in a
liquid when exposed to rapid pressure variations. If carefully controlled,
cavitation can be a unique approach for high-precision material modification and
fabrication, as it allows high-intensity energy pulses to be generated safely,
released remotely, and focused within a small target region. The goal of this
project is to understand how cavitation affects solid materials close to the
bubbles; and to use this knowledge to be able to predict how cavitation modifies
nearby material. The proposed research will provide new scientific insight for a
broad range of engineering and biomedical applications, from fabricating
materials to curing diseases. The educational and outreach component of the
project will directly impact the education of K-12 schoolchildren in Central and
Western Virginia, through collaboration with the Center for the Enhancement of
Engineering Diversity at Virginia Tech and the Science Museum of Western
Virginia in Roanoke, VA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous research on cavitation
has primarily focused on either the fluid part of the problem, without
considering the material's response, or the material part, particularly the
macroscopic fracture (e.g., pits, cracks, holes) after multiple cycles of bubble
collapse. This project will start with developing and experimentally validating
a computational fluid dynamics/computational solid dynamics - coupled model,
which will enable direct numerical simulation of up to hundreds of bubbles
interacting with a broad range of materials, including fluid-induced damage and
fracture. Next, the comprehensive characterization of single bubbles, tandem
bubbles, and small bubble clusters collapsing near various materials will create
a theoretical foundation for clarifying the micro-scale mechanisms underlying
cavitation-induced material damage. Further, the direct numerical simulation
model will be used to examine simplified bubbly flow models and, in combination
with machine learning, design new models with improved predictive capability.