* 1751462
* CAREER: Relativistic Electron Driven Magnetic Reconnection
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Louise Willingale, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 04/30/2024
* USD 600,000.00

The goal of this project is to test theories of astrophysical magnetic
explosions with laboratory plasma studies of magnetic reconnection. Most of the
known matter in the universe is in an ionized state, a plasma, comprised of
electrons and ions that strongly interact with electromagnetic fields. Magnetic
reconnection is an explosive phenomenon that occurs in plasmas where magnetic
field lines suddenly rearrange themselves to release large amounts of energy.
This has important implications here on Earth for fusion energy schemes and
prediction of space weather events that can disable satellites used for
communication and navigation. Magnetic reconnection is also theorized to occur
around violent astrophysical events such as in the vicinity of gamma-ray bursts
or active galactic nuclei where the magnetic fields are very large and the
particles move at close to the speed of light. This project will investigate
magnetic reconnection under similar conditions in the laboratory and test the
accuracy of existing theories. In addition, this award will support efforts to
improve the climate for women and other underrepresented groups in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) disciplines in general, and in
plasma physics, in particular.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Relativistic magnetic
reconnection occurs when the energy density of the reconnecting fields exceeds
the rest mass energy density. The experiments to be performed will use laser
pulses focused to ultra-high intensities to heat a small volume of electrons on
a solid foil target to relativistic energies. The electrons are mostly confined
to the target surface and expand radially outwards at the speed of light. This
generates a very large azimuthal magnetic field. Focusing two laser pulses in
close proximity forms oppositely directed magnetic fields in the midplane to
form a driven reconnection geometry. Numerical modeling has indicated the
conditions created by the laser pulses will satisfy the requirement for
accessing the relativistic magnetic reconnection regime. Measurements of the
timescale of the reconnection and the characterization of accelerated particle
jets will be used to benchmark and test existing theories and numerical models.
Further, the education and outreach goal of the project is to help address
under-representation of women and minority groups within many fields of STEM,
and specifically in plasma physics. This will be done by developing curriculum
to educate undergraduate students about unconscious bias and when this may lead
to unintentionally discriminatory behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.