* 1751011
* CAREER: A Programming Language for Developing Software to Execute Reliably on Unreliable Hardware
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Michael Carbin, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2024
* USD 525,000.00

The landscape of software development has changed as computing platforms have
reached the end of Moore?s Law. Specifically, the tactic of aggressively
shrinking computer processors to yield increased computer performance has been
paused as modern processors have -- as a result -- become more vulnerable to
errors in their manufacture and operation. As a result, applications executed on
many emerging systems need to be specifically designed to execute through faults
in the underlying execution platform. This project provides a new programming
language with a supporting compiler and verification system that enables
developers to work with a model of the execution platform to deliver provably
reliable computations even in the presence of faults in the underlying execution
platform. The project's intellectual merit is the development of state-of-the-
art techniques for reasoning about program behavior that capture the growing
availability of soft-computing fabrics, such as unreliable computer processors,
energy-harvesting systems, and cyber-physical systems. Moreover, in a society
that is increasingly dependent on computing systems, the project?s broader
significance is to provide software developers, engineers, and scientists with
new tools to build efficient and powerful systems that fully exploit the
benefits of new hardware platforms while simultaneously delivering the reliable,
resilient execution that society needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key idea behind
this project is to extend a language, compiler, and verification system to
support programmatic, first-class execution models that capture the semantics of
execution platforms that deliver alternative results for a given operation. Such
execution models are first-class in that the developer can communicate with the
verification system to verify correctness properties of the computation that are
related to the explicit state of the execution model itself. A key driver behind
the feasibility of this approach is that the project leverages relational
verification. Specifically, the system can reason about two separate executions
of the program: 1) the idealized reliable execution of the program and 2) the
actual, faulty execution as specified by the execution model. Such reasoning 1)
enables a user to specify properties, such as accuracy, that relate values
between the two executions and 2) enables the system and user together
efficiently verify programs by, for example, demonstrating that a desired
property holds of the faulty execution because faults do not interfere with the
property's validity. Building upon these key directions, this project also
investigates new mechanisms to build reliability-aware optimizing compilers that
still soundly transform the program even in the presence of alternative
execution models. Together, the results of this project will enable developers
to leverage the wide variety of new computing platforms for which execution
models are non-standard, highly configurable, and approximate -- yet still
produce an application that has strong guarantees. Moreover, the proposal is to
validate the approach by integrating the results into new coursework on
programming language design and implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.