* 1751535
* CAREER: Understanding the Predictability and Dynamics of Spring Onset in North America
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Toby Ault, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2023
* USD 939,971.00

The onset of Spring is a critical transition for agriculture and ecosystems, as
plants leaf out and the growing season begins. The timing of onset can vary
considerably from year to year, thus skillful onset predictions would be
valuable for agricultural planning. But the predictability of Spring onset, and
the processes that lead to year-to-year differences in onset date, are not well
known. Research conducted here addresses both issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
onset is clearly linked to local meteorological factors such as sunlight,
warmth, and rainfall, but preliminary work by the PI and collaborators suggests
that onset indicators such as the leaf-out of lilacs have greater predictability
than the associated meteorological variables. The predictability of such
phenological indicators based on the observational record is thus a focus of the
research. The predictability of the associated meteorological conditions is also
a target of the research, addressed using long-range forecasts from the National
Multi-Model Ensemble (NMME) project. Onset predictability is further analyzed
through a new crowdsourced retrospective forecasting project, in which the
Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model is configured for personal
computers and disseminated to local high school students. Students create WRF
forecasts using different versions of the model physics, thereby accounting for
uncertainties inherent in the forecast model. Further work on ensemble
prediction compares ensemble forecast skill to a baseline provided by a simple
empirical linear inverse model (LIM). The LIM comparison determines the
advantage of using complex nonlinear forecast models over statistical methods
based on past behavior, and tests the hypothesis that the predictable dynamics
of the transition are essentially linear.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The changes in
local meteorology that control the timing of leaf-out and other phenology are in
turn controlled by a reorganization of the large-scale atmospheric circulation
that occurs rapidly in Spring. In particular, the splitting and northward
migration of the jet stream over the central and eastern Pacific have been
identified as a key factor. The dynamics of the jet transition are examined
using a hierarchy of models of varying degrees of complexity, including a global
atmospheric model with prescribed realistic sea surface temperatures (SSTs), the
same model with the landmasses removed and simplified sea surface temperatures,
and a linear baroclinic model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of
this CAREER award involves the use of WRF as a tool for teaching weather and
climate science to students in 20 regional high schools. The PI works with the
Paleontological Research Institution's Museum of the Earth (MoE) to conduct
training workshops for teachers on the use of the WRF model as a teaching tool.
The workshops emphasizes learning by doing, interactively showing the teachers
how their students can set up and run the model, make daily forecasts for nearby
weather stations, and validate the forecasts the following day. In addition, the
educational activities are an integral part of the research activity, as the WRF
forecasts produced by the students are collected into ensembles used for
research on spring onset predictability. Aside from the educational broader
impacts, the research has broader impacts due to the potential value of skillful
predictions of spring onset, which would benefit farmers and other decision
makers in the agricultural sector. The project provides support and training to
a graduate student and a postdoc and summer support for an
undergraduate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.