* 1751723
* EAGER: Consumer Innovation Survey Development
* SBE,NCSE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Jon Krosnick, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2023
* USD 359,986.00

Groundbreaking studies in countries outside the United States have observed that
private individual residents invest substantial time and money creating
innovative products and services for their own use, and sometimes for use by
others. The results from these studies suggests that few individuals publicly
diffuse their innovations, and fewer still apply for intellectual property
protection. If this is true in the United States, then innovators, businesses,
and the general public are not fully capitalizing on the creativity and
ingenuity of American innovators. Unfortunately, no rigorous studies have
undertaken the task of documenting the prevalence and dynamics of private
innovation activities in the United States. As a result, we know little about
the number of Americans creating innovative products and services, the number of
innovations they create, their motivation for innovating, how much time and
money they invest in innovation activities, and if they disseminate the results
of their efforts. This project aims to fill this knowledge gap by: first,
developing and validating a survey instrument to measure consumer innovation
activities; and, second, administering the validated instrument to a random
sample of the United States adult population in order to estimate population-
level rates of consumer innovation. The results from this project will be useful
to other researchers as it will create baseline estimates of consumer innovation
activity against which future studies may be compared. The results may also
influence the practice of consumer innovation. By identifying factors that
impede private individuals from diffusing their innovations to others and from
applying for intellectual property protection, this research can inform public
policies that help individuals overcome these barriers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this project is to develop an
instrument and methodology for accurately estimating the prevalence with which
private individuals in the United States create or modify consumer products.
Secondary objectives include developing better understandings of the motivations
for consumer innovation, the personal resources expended in developing consumer
innovations, and how (and how often) consumer innovators attempt to protect
their innovations and/or share their innovations with others. Two data
collections are planned. First, after refining a draft survey instrument through
cognitive interviews with individuals who are pre-identified as likely
innovators, the revised survey will be administered to another 500 pre-
identified likely innovators. The data from this initial survey will be
validated against known benchmarks, and open-ended items will be coded to ensure
reliability. The second data collection will produce 3,000 completed
questionnaires from a random sample of the U.S. adult population. By utilizing a
sample of U.S. adults, rather than sampling from groups likely to include
innovators, the results will enable the validation of the survey instrument as a
tool for estimating population-level rates of innovation activity.