* 1751785
* CAREER: Mechanobiology of Mesenchymal-Epithelial Transition
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Esther Gomez, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 04/30/2024
* USD 532,000.00

When cells are weakly attached to each other, they are able to migrate. This
happens when cancer spreads, but also when an embryo grows. Whether cells can
change from ones that move into ones that remain in the same place is partly
dependent on the tissue stiffness. If we better understand this change in cells,
it will improve our understanding of how cancer progresses and how our organs
grow. The change from mobile to a static cells is call mesenchymal-epithelial
transition (MET). MET is important to kidney and heart development, wound
healing and cancer metastasis. When MET happens, migrating cells change so that
they are immobile and tightly bound to neighboring cells. MET depends on tissue
stiffness, but the details of the dependence aren't known. This Faculty Early
Career Development Program (CAREER) project will measure the response of cells
to dynamic changes in matrix stiffness and determine how EMT is affected by
tissue stiffness. This will help in understanding how embryos grow, how to
better manufacture artificial tissues and in building 'organs on a chip' that
can be used for drug discovery research. The PI and graduate student supported
through this project will develop and implement a workshop for grade 6-12
teachers focused on biomechanics and mechanobiology concepts so that they can
better teach their students, including how engineering research impacts society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET) is a phenotypic
change in which migratory cells with weak cell-cell contacts transition to
tightly bound cells exhibiting apical-basal polarity. MET is central to
embryonic remodeling, establishment of organ architecture, wound healing,
reprogramming of somatic cells into induced pluripotent stem cells, and
metastatic dissemination of cancer cells. While it is recognized that mechanical
properties of the cellular niche change dynamically during MET-associated
processes in vivo, important questions still remain regarding how
microenvironmental physical properties regulate MET. The goal of this CAREER
project is to develop a dynamic hydrogel system that recapitulates changes in
tissue mechanical properties during MET-associated events, and then to use this
system to determine the expression of genes associated with epithelial and
mesenchymal phenotypes, cytoskeletal remodeling, and cell migration. Further
studies will elucidate the role of key mechanoresponsive signaling molecules and
epigenetic remodeling in regulating MET response to mechanical signals. The
establishment of molecular mechanisms linking tissue mechanics and MET will
result in a better understanding of mechanotransduction processes and will
provide insight into how mechanical signals regulate cell plasticity. The
research program provides the foundation for educational and outreach efforts
aimed toward incorporating positive themes about the impact of engineering and
mechanobiology on society into engineering curricula and into recruitment
efforts directed toward grade 6-12 through graduate-level students. A workshop
for grade 6-12 teachers focused on biomechanics and mechanobiology concepts will
be developed and implemented and will demonstrate how research impacts
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.