* 1751590
* CAREER: Rational Design and Manufacturing of Nanostructured Surfaces and Interfaces in Lightweight Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Neil Dasgupta, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award supports
fundamental research on scalable manufacturing of lightweight structural
materials including polymer-matrix composites and lightweight magnesium alloys.
The grant looks to develop new surface modification techniques, relying on
atomic layer deposition (ALD) which can deposit sub-monolayer thick layers which
serve as seeds to subsequently grow new structures three-dimensional structures
at the nanoscale. These designed nanostructures are remarkably versatile. They
can serve to improve the strength of polymer composites allowing for light-
weight materials as well as impede corrosion on metal surfaces. This addresses
critical needs, for example, in the transportation sector to improve fuel
efficiency and vehicle performance, while maintaining safety. Beyond the direct
impact on lightweighting, the scientific knowledge generated will provide an
alternative design paradigm to the bottom-up design and manufacturing at the
nanoscale. The educational goal is to promote public awareness of the importance
of nanomaterials for the future of domestic manufacturing. The educational plan
integrates concepts of design and manufacturing, nanotechnology, and surface
science across multiple levels, including a new 6th grade materials curriculum,
integrating materials education into undergraduate student team mentorship, and
promoting a more diverse STEM workforce through research demonstrations to
encourage underrepresented students to apply to graduate school and participate
in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current manufacturing processes for
controlling surface and interfacial structure in bulk structural materials
suffer from poor control of geometric parameters such as feature size, shape,
geometric orientation, which is particularly challenging within hierarchical
assemblies of nanomaterials on non-planar surfaces. This lack of deterministic
control of structure limits our ability to fundamentally understand how the
nanostructuring produces specific material properties and a route to rationally
design optimized structures to achieve application-specific properties. This
project's effort addresses this limitation by quantitatively identifying the
process-structure relationships needed to achieve deterministic control of
interfacial geometry and composition at the nanoscale. The approach uses the
concept of spatial ALD to generate sub-monolayer seeding areas for the growth of
nanostructures through solution-based processes. The process can be repeated to
develop three dimensional nanostructures on surfaces to precisely tune the
interfacial geometry, composition, and microstructure of lightweight structural
materials, and quantify the impact on their mechanical properties and corrosion
resistance. An improved understanding of these process-structure relationships
will provide the fundamental knowledge needed to ?encode? the manufacturing
instructions for the controlled hierarchical assembly of nanoscale building
blocks into surface architectures. This approach will be used to address two
critical challenges in lightweight structural materials: 1) rational design of
nanostructured interphases in polymer matrix composites to tune their mechanical
properties, and 2) improving corrosion-resistance of magnesium
alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.