* 1751520
* CAREER: Damage Evolution in Polymeric Materials undergoing Hydrolysis or Photo-Degradation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Shawn Chester, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 07/31/2024
* USD 520,272.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program supports fundamental
research to improve the Nation's health by advancing the understanding of the
combined effect of chemical reactions and mechanical deformation on degradation
(material damage evolution) in polymers. As an example, for repairing broken
bone, knowledge of the evolving damage determines how the polymeric biomedical
implant can provide proper support and commensurately degrade and absorb into
the body, while a broken bone heals. Currently design engineers lack the
information necessary to predict the load carrying capacity of degradable
polymeric components and, therefore, the designs are not optimal. The results of
this research will generate experimental data, mathematical models, and
simulation tools that will uncover the relationship between chemical
constituents and applied load on the degradation behavior of polymeric
materials. That knowledge will enable improved engineering design in numerous
applications where polymeric degradation occurs, thus advancing national
prosperity and welfare along with scientific progress. The proposal includes an
integrated education plan with several components, one of which is the
development of new courses for undergraduate and graduate students at NJIT. The
course material will also be modified and adapted into outreach programs for
pre-college students through university-wide
initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to bridge
the behavioral knowledge gap currently limiting our predictive ability for
polymeric materials undergoing degradation reactions due to hydrolysis or photo-
degradation. Accordingly, the following research tasks are proposed: (i)
Development of a pair of thermodynamically consistent, frame-indifferent,
experimentally validated multiphysics constitutive theories for the behavior of
soft materials undergoing hydrolysis and photo-degradation reactions. (ii)
Experimentation on the industrially important and intellectually stimulating
polymer PLA, under conditions that specifically probe the coupling between
chemistry and mechanics in support of the constitutive effort and for validation
purposes. (iii) Formulation of a new set of robust finite elements that couple
large deformation implicit solid mechanics with reaction-diffusion systems and
radiative transfer. (iv) Integration of research and education to train and
spark interest in students of all levels, from pre-college to graduate schools.
This project will allow the PI to advance the knowledge base in mechanics of
materials under multiple field effects?from modeling to computation?and
establish a long-term career in mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.