* 1751143
* CAREER: Reliable and Efficient Data Encoding for Extreme-Scale Simulation and Analysis
* CSE,OAC
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2024
* Seung Woo Son, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Li
* 03/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Transformative research in science and engineering to address challenges of our
time, such as designing new combustion systems, depends on progressively
sophisticated computational models and simulations that operate on high
performance computing systems. These simulations and analyses are increasingly
constrained by the massive volumes of data that they must use, generate, and
analyze. To manage this enormous amount of data, this project explores
innovative mechanisms to optimize the performance of these simulations by
reducing data movement and maximizing the use of computing power, while
minimizing errors and information loss. Such performance improvements support
NSF's mission to advance emerging, data-intensive science discovery and
contribute to solving the world's most pressing and complex contemporary science
and engineering problems. This project implements comprehensive outreach and
education to train the next-generation of professional workers and researchers
in the latest computing architectures and programming methodologies, and
provides rich opportunities for student engagement, research, and employment. It
leverages multiple campus and national resources and implements proven,
research-based interventions to attract, retain, and educate female and
underrepresented minority populations in computer engineering, which furthers
the US national goal of increased participation in engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this project is to adapt techniques
and formats for compressing video data to the investigation of novel data
encoding and decoding schemes to optimize data movement and computation in data-
intensive simulation and analyses. Innovative new mechanisms have the potential
to efficiently reduce the volume of data generated and transferred while also
enabling rapid execution of various analysis kernels using compressed data, and
permitting seamless scaling of their performance on current and future extreme-
scale platforms. The research objectives are to investigate data
encoding/decoding of scientific datasets and harness encoded data, employ and
scale encoded datasets seamlessly within current extreme-scale scientific
workflows, and optimize machine learning and data mining algorithms with the
goal of maximizing the use of computing power while minimizing errors. These new
mechanisms are applied to an evaluation framework and validated on multiple
extreme-scale data-driven scientific applications, including climate,
multiphysics, and fluid dynamics. This approach is expected to transform data
representation and encoding while incurring minimal disturbance to existing
applications, responding to the trends in hardware architecture and dataset
characteristics. It is anticipated to improve the overall performance of
computational scientists' workloads by reducing defensive and productive I/O
costs, respectively, up to 100x and 200x data reduction spatially and
temporally, potentially resulting in up to an overall 50x I/O cost improvement.
The project leverages multiple collaborations in order to establish the
governing principles for system co-design and scalable system software layers
for better data encoding within world-class computational infrastructures. This
project strengthens the University of Massachusetts Lowell computer engineering
curriculum, broadens participation in computer engineering, and creates a
collaborative, interdisciplinary research program geared toward exploiting ever-
evolving computing paradigms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.