* 1751605
* CAREER: Understanding Forces in Far-from-Equilibrium Materials Processing Under Electromagnetic Fields
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* B. Reeja Jayan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 03/31/2024
* USD 622,078.00

Electromagnetic (EM) waves such as microwave radiation (used to rapidly heat our
food) can enable low temperature, energy-efficient manufacturing processes, even
for materials that conventionally require processing at extremely high
temperatures, such as ceramics. This Faculty Early Career Development Program
(CAREER) Award supports fundamental research that will investigate how EM waves
exert forces inside ceramic materials, potentially enabling the three-
dimensional (3D) printing of ceramics. These 3D printed ceramic parts will find
use in various areas including sustainable infrastructure, transportation, clean
energy, water management, aerospace, and healthcare. Such technological advances
in manufacturing advanced materials using EM waves will lead to a smaller energy
footprint compared to conventional methods and as such can provide significant
savings in energy use in the manufacture of high-strength materials. This
research requires linking together advances in multiple disciplines such as
electrical and computer engineering, electromagnetics, materials science,
mechanical, and chemical engineering. Accordingly, an integrated research and
education plan using game-based technology enhanced learning will allow students
to explore this multidisciplinary area through hands-on training and
visualization of materials processing. Popular builder's games are well equipped
for teaching students how building (processing) can change the way materials
assemble (structure) and lead to differences in properties such as mechanical
behavior and strength. Games create a higher level of student engagement and a
more stimulating learning environment, reaching a broader spectrum of learners
in classrooms, addressing the challenge of cultivating a diverse and highly
skilled workforce in manufacturing in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will support a multifaceted
investigation to discover the mechanisms of electromagnetic (EM) field induced
charge transport in refractory ceramic oxides such as zirconia, under
ponderomotive driving forces. EM field interactions will be selectively
localized to conduct both solid and liquid phase synthesis experiments to grow
ceramic films on conducting (metal) layers under microwave radiation. The
research team will first use various nanoscale characterization tools to conduct
static ex-situ studies on atomic structure; defect structure; and
microstructural changes in films grown under (i) no applied field and (ii)
different intensity, frequency, and polarizations of the applied field. Next,
dynamic in-situ studies will use polarized neutron reflectometry to follow
tracer ions in a film, comparing transport properties like diffusion
coefficients for varying field parameters at fixed temperature. Computational
methods including molecular dynamics simulations will predict and compare
diffusion coefficient values for each experimental case. This study is the first
to combine experiment and computation to demonstrate the effect of ponderomotive
forces on atomic scale transport phenomena under EM fields. Finally, knowledge
about the influence of ponderomotive forces on ceramic processing will be
applied to create a novel platform for additive manufacture of ceramics at low
temperatures, using a layer-by-layer approach. The research tasks will proceed
simultaneously with an education and outreach program, which involves an
integrated game/classroom approach to learning processing-structure-property
relationships in additive manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.