* 1751463
* CAREER: Improving the Understanding of Coastal Erosion during Extreme Events and with Sea Level Rise through Geotechnical Investigation
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Nina Stark, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 05/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant will support
research that will contribute new knowledge to the underlying mechanisms of
coastal erosion, particularly with regard to extreme events and sea level rise.
Coastal erosion and land loss is threatening many sections of the U.S.
coastlines and coastal communities. Extreme events such as hurricanes driving
storm waves and surges, as well as sea level rise are accelerating coastal
erosion. The prediction and assessment of coastal erosion has advanced
significantly over the last decades. However, significant knowledge gaps exist
with regard to the characterization and mechanics of impacted coastal soils.
This award supports fundamental research to advance the understanding of soil
behavior in response to waves, currents, tides, and associated morphodynamics in
the coastal zone. This knowledge will contribute to the improvement of the
prediction, assessment and mitigation of coastal erosion and stability of
coastal infrastructure. The award involves several disciplines including
geotechnical engineering, coastal sciences and engineering, geophysics, and
oceanography. The multi-disciplinary approach will feature field and laboratory
experiments. The education plan includes a field research experience for
freshman undergraduates with an emphasis on students from low-income
backgrounds. It also includes an adult education program to educate the public
about risks to coastal infrastructure associated with sea level rise, coastal
inundation and erosion. The education plan will help to train a new generation
of coastal and geotechnical engineers, broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in civil engineering, and raise public awareness for
risks associated to sea level rise, coastal inundation and erosion, and is
aligned with NSF INCLUDES.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role of geotechnical soil
behavior for coastal erosion processes is still not fully understood, mostly
resulting from a lack of geotechnical data in coastal areas affected by
energetic hydrodynamics and morphodynamics. This research is to fill this
knowledge gap by: 1) measuring sediment strength and pore pressure of coastal
and nearshore sediments under hydrodynamic forcing and morphodynamics, 2)
testing a new formulation of the Shields parameter integrating shear strength
and pore pressure, and 3) investigating the impact of variations of geotechnical
soil parameters in coastal areas on erodibility during inundation and flood
events. The research objectives will be achieved through multi-disciplinary
field and laboratory testing programs, enabling simultaneous observations of
geotechnical parameters, morphodynamics, and hydrodynamics. The knowledge gained
will contribute to improving the understanding of the interaction between soil
mechanics and subaqueous sediment transport processes, as well as to the
improvement of current prediction methods for coastal
erosion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.