* 1751878
* CAREER: Unified Design Framework for Advanced Power Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2024
* Daniel Costinett, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 01/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Power electronics are ubiquitous in the modern
technological age. They enable battery-powered mobile electronics, energy-
efficient lighting, high-performance electric vehicles, renewable energy,
advanced medical technologies, and prolific computational power in the smart
home. By 2030, 80% of all electricity in the United States will be processed
through at least one power converter. In consumer applications, power is often
processed through five or more functionally disparate converters, each of which
is individually designed for the target application. Rapid advances in
constituent technologies, circuit topologies, and control schemes have enabled
high-performance and high-efficiency in many applications, but require
considerable dedication of design effort to achieve. The goal of this research
is to develop the fundamental knowledge and centralized resources necessary to
bridge the gap between current approaches to the design of power conversion
technologies and true, formal design optimization techniques. In order to
promulgate new approaches to the design and application of power conversion, the
project integrates the research program with education developments that seek to
broaden participation and effectively train the future generation of power
electronics engineers. Research products will be incorporated into the
curriculum at the graduate and undergraduate levels, and into pre-college
outreach and engineering discovery events. At all levels, the education program
emphasized hands-on design-oriented experiences to engage
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design of high-performance power
electronics is a complex interplay of nonlinearities, approximations, intuition,
and prototype/revision cycles. Attempts at optimization are limited due to the
inherent complexity of the design and performance spaces. The former is high
constrained, containing both continuous and discrete, ordered and unordered
dimensions. The latter is multi-objective and highly non-convex. This project
advances the state-of-the art in converter analysis and modeling, facilitating
the application of formal design optimization techniques for greater design
capabilities and achievable performance. The approach leverages a framework
developed from techniques in nonlinear element modeling, reduced-order converter
modeling, and switching analysis of power converters. By integrating these
efforts, while creating an open-source characterization repository, the
developed techniques will allow computationally efficient and highly accurate
design and modeling of power converters, significantly advancing the state of
the field. The result will be a new analytical framework that allows designers
to rapidly select topology, operating mode, semiconductor and passive devices,
and switching functions which will achieve maximal performance in a given
application. The framework is developed to retain designer engagement, allowing
for shorter design cycles, while providing the tools to allow a greater level of
achievable design optimization.