* 1751035
* CAREER: Discovery of the molecular mechanisms underlying microevolution of phenotypic plasticity in a developmental trait
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Erik Andersen, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 530,812.00

When organisms are exposed to environmental differences, like changes in
temperature conditions, they can grow into alternative forms that are more
adapted to particular environments. This project investigates how a nematode
roundworm makes the decision to become a long-lived and stress-resistant form
instead of a proliferative form that is stress-sensitive. Currently there is
little understanding how these types of decisions are made at the molecular
level. High-throughput measurements, genome sequencing, and genetic methods will
be used to examine this mystery and lay the groundwork for future projects
examining how animal development changes in responses to divergent environmental
cues. Undergraduate and high school student training is an important component
of this grant. High school teachers will develop classroom activities for STEM
students in cooperation with the principal investigator and high school students
will visit the laboratory to carry out hands on experiments with the
worms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phenotypic plasticity, or the expression of
different phenotypes by the same genotype, drives evolutionary adaptation to
shifting environments. Despite numerous well-known examples, little is known
about the genetic underpinnings and molecular mechanisms that generate
phenotypic plasticity. The goal of this grant is to discover how microevolution
of this plasticity occurs using the tractable metazoan system Caenorhabditis
elegans. Depending on environmental conditions, these nematodes enter an
alternative developmental fate, called dauer, or continue development to
reproductive adults. Early larval-stage animals that sense high temperature, low
food availability, and high population density initiate the development of the
dauer stage. Once conditions improve, dauers re-enter development to become
reproductive adults. Much of what is known about dauer comes from the study of a
single laboratory strain. Although natural variation in dauer formation has been
observed, the molecular mechanisms that lead to phenotypic differences remain
unknown. An unbiased approach is needed to discover the genes that underlie
natural variation in dauer formation in order to understand how phenotypic
plasticity evolves. Species-wide association mapping will be performed using a
novel high-throughput assay in order to identify loci that underlie differences
in this developmental trait. These loci will be narrowed to candidate genes
using well tested experimental and computational techniques and then variants
will be validated using genome editing. These approaches will lead to discovery
of the number and the sizes of genetic effects, the signatures of selection that
occur at those loci, and then define the parts of the dauer network involved in
the microevolution of phenotypic plasticity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.