* 1751231
* CAREER: High-Performance Packet Processing with Programmable NIC Data-Planes
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2018,05/31/2022
* Simon Peter, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 05/31/2022
* USD 550,000.00

In today's data centers, network performance is surging,
outstripping&lt;br/&gt;the capacity of modern processors, and turning them into
a performance&lt;br/&gt;bottleneck for demanding data center applications.
Examples of&lt;br/&gt;applications suffering from this problem include the back
end services&lt;br/&gt;implementing Facebook, Google, Amazon, and other
popular&lt;br/&gt;websites. These services spend most of their time conducting
network&lt;br/&gt;input/output. As the gap between processor and network
performance widens,&lt;br/&gt;these services become less and less efficient.
More efficient server&lt;br/&gt;software can ameliorate the situation,
increasing the performance of&lt;br/&gt;applications while also reducing a data
center's prodigious energy&lt;br/&gt;consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project investigates a re-design of the server hardware and&lt;br/&gt;software
network stack, with the aim to streamline and improve network&lt;br/&gt;I/O
energy-efficiency. To do so, the project utilizes a new&lt;br/&gt;programming
model for energy-efficient packet processing in network&lt;br/&gt;cards, called
match-and-action processing. The approach allows&lt;br/&gt;applications and
operating systems to install packet processing rules&lt;br/&gt;to the network
card that instruct it to execute simple operations on&lt;br/&gt;packets while
transferring them to and from the host. This model is&lt;br/&gt;highly energy
efficient, yet allows to retain network protocol&lt;br/&gt;implementation
flexibility and compatibility with
existing&lt;br/&gt;applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has the potential
for dramatic improvements in application&lt;br/&gt;and server performance, as
well as data center energy&lt;br/&gt;consumption. Network intensive data center
applications are used by&lt;br/&gt;billions of people around the globe on a
daily basis. By reducing the&lt;br/&gt;overhead of networking, the hardware
needed to support existing&lt;br/&gt;services can be reduced, making it cheaper
for new services to be&lt;br/&gt;developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To evaluate the
space of design alternatives, the project builds a&lt;br/&gt;working prototype
and an emulator capable of running standard server&lt;br/&gt;applications. All
source code, along with configuration files and&lt;br/&gt;instructions for
reproducing published measurements of the system,&lt;br/&gt;will be made public
and accessible from the project website at UT&lt;br/&gt;Austin
(http://www.cs.utexas.edu/~simon/flexnic). The website will
be&lt;br/&gt;actively maintained for the duration of the project.&lt;br/&gt;