* 1751929
* CAREER: Materials and Interphase Engineering in Rechargeable Aluminum Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Juchen Guo, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 12/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Electrochemical energy storage technologies play a critical role in the
utilization of electricity generated from intermittent renewable resources such
as solar and wind. Current rechargeable battery technologies including Li-ion
batteries and lead-acid batteries cannot fully fulfill the requirements for
sustainable energy storage in terms of stability, cost, and environmental
impact. This project investigates a new type of rechargeable battery based on
aluminum (Al) metal anode, namely Al-ion batteries. Aluminum is the most
abundant metal in the earth's crust; it is non-toxic, domestically available,
and potentially low-cost. Furthermore, due to the charge state of the Al ion
(its trivalency), the resultant Al-ion batteries can achieve the high capacity
required by renewable energy storage applications. This research project will
result in fundamental knowledge of the electrochemical processes and materials
properties in the Al-ion battery systems. This project also provides new avenues
for educational and outreach activities for underrepresented minority students
in STEM through mentorship and Electric Vehicle club programs for local high
school students and research opportunities for undergraduates of UC-Riverside.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to gain a fundamental
understanding of the electrochemical processes and materials properties in a
rechargeable Al-ion battery system. The project's approach addresses the
cathode, anode, and electrolyte as a unified system. The scientific and
technical challenges to rechargeable Al-ion batteries are centered at feasible
room-temperature, chloride-free organic electrolytes that are beyond Lewis acid
ionic liquids. Aim 1 of the project focuses on understanding the solvent-salt
coordination chemistry and its effect on reversible Al plating and stripping
from Al-ion electrolytes based on organic solvents. Aim 2 addresses the
formation and composition of the solid-electrolyte interphase (SEI) on the Al
metal anode, to design an artificial SEI for facile Al plating-stripping. New Al
salts and additives for Al-ion electrolytes to eliminate chloride are also
investigated. Aim 3 investigates the intercalation-type and conversion-type
cathode materials and synergistically benefits from the first two aims on Al-ion
electrolytes. The investigations will combine theoretical prediction and
experimental validation to expedite the research progress.