* 1751686
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Descent Locomotion Behavior in Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Douglas Boyer, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/29/2020
* USD 24,380.00

Primates are distinguished from other mammals by their grasping hands and feet,
and nails instead of claws. These anatomical features are thought to have helped
the earliest primates to navigate thin terminal branches of trees. However, the
lack of claws may also have led to different locomotor (movement) behaviors for
navigating large trees that could not be grasped. This doctoral dissertation
project will study different primate and non-primate mammalian species to better
understand locomotor changes with age, and in response to changing environments.
These findings can help elucidate broader patterns of interaction between
locomotor evolution and life history in the primate lineage. This project will
support student training and mentoring at the K-12 through graduate levels. Data
generated by this project will be used in an outreach lesson plan demonstrating
how animal motion can be understood as simple machines for a STEM education
program for elementary to middle school age girls in Durham, NC through Duke
University, and for all ages attending annual public outreach days at the Duke
Lemur Center. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand
primate locomotor tradeoffs between selection for or maintenance of
morphological specialization for movement in specific places (e.g. thin
branches), while still needing to move through and between more general (e.g.
trees, the ground) environments. Through comparative analysis of descending
locomotion and mechanics in eight primate species, and three non-primate
mammals, this project examines behavioral shifts in response to changing
environmental conditions by experimentally modifying support orientation and
size. Animals are filmed crossing increasingly steep and thick supports, and it
is predicted that primates will abandon headfirst walking in favor of
alternative behaviors, such as leaping, sliding, and rear-first descending in
response to the biomechanical challenges of these supports, while non-primate
mammals will continue to move headfirst with the aid of their claws. The
comparative sample features species from a wide range of body sizes (0.06 to 3.5
kg), limb proportions, and behavioral specializations. Within each species,
individuals of different ages are compared to assess how aging affects arboreal
locomotion, which would have been a key challenge incurred during the evolution
of increasingly long lifespans in the primate lineage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.