* 1751975
* CAREER: Improving Service Systems through Real-time and Delayed Information
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Jamol Pender, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 05/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award supports
fundamental research intended to reduce congestion in critical services by
enabling service providers to effectively disseminate information about delays
to their customers. This research will advance the national health and
prosperity by enabling better access to healthcare and emergency resources and
reducing congestion in urban mobility. The availability of real time information
through smartphone apps and display message technology has revolutionized the
way many service systems interact with their customers. This project will
advance the understanding of how such information can be used to improve the
availability and accessibility of these services. The educational plan includes
targeted outreach efforts to broaden participation of underrepresented groups in
engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study queueing
networks in which delayed information on system state is offered to potential
customers. The research objective is to provide rigorous approximations of the
performance of such systems. The research will incorporate a multinomial logit
model choice model to emulate customer arrival behavior in exponential and
general queueing models. Fluid limit and diffusion approximations will be used
to model congested queues, where anticipated customer behavior will most heavily
influence queueing dynamics. Finite capacity queueing models will also be
studied in the context of delayed information. The approximations will be
assessed via simulation as well as comparisons with observational data from
real-world transportation systems and hospital emergency
departments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.