* 1751639
* CAREER:  Socialities of Care:  Informal Caregiving in Post-9/11 Veteran and Care Collective Worlds
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Zoe Wool, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 110,247.00

Post-9/11 wars in Iraq and Afghanistan have produced approximately 3 million
U.S. veterans, a population expected to nearly double in the next three years.
Between 780,000-900,000 of these veterans have sought medical care connected to
their military service, and roughly 25% have a documented service-connected
disability. Amid ongoing concerns about institutional inadequacies and the
relentless problem of veteran suicide, public policy and popular attention have
been turning to veteran's family members as a key resource to help those
encumbered by service-connected debility. Care for these veterans is generally
thought of as spread across two disparate yet occasionally overlapping spheres:
medical institutions, such as the VA, and veteran families. Policy, legislation,
and other efforts to support veterans are overwhelmingly targeted at these two
spheres, and while much of the help injured veterans need is indeed provided by
either clinicians or family members, among post-9/11 veterans 23% of those
providing informal everyday care are friends and neighbors, a uniquely high
percentage compared to previous generations of veterans and civilian populations
alike. Current research offers a partial picture of the effects of caregiving in
military and veteran families, and this has led to important policy initiatives
such as Joining Forces and the VA family caregiver support program. However,
virtually nothing is known about informal veteran caregiving beyond the family,
and non-family caregivers are not supported by VA or other programs.
Furthermore, the exclusive focus on family - particularly wives - as the source
of informal care can lead to negative social and health outcomes including
caregiver burnout for family caregivers and narrowed life options for veterans.
While roughly 20% of Americans are disabled, and many disability communities
have developed innovative models for sustaining long-term informal care outside
of the family, injured veterans are not usually considered part of broader
disability communities. As a CAREER project, the project implements a range of
educational activities aimed at improving the public's understanding of
disability and veterans issues. This includes a free public online course, and
resources that will be available on a public website.To help create
conversations and linkages between veteran and non-veteran disability
communities, the project includes the creation of a free online disability
studies course designed specifically for veterans, as well as a workshop that
will bring together members from both veteran and non-veteran communities to
discuss shared experiences and strategies and to create community caregiving
resources which will be made publically available through an accessible website.
The project also provides training for undergraduate and graduate students in
methods of rigorous, scientific data collection and analysis.

With the support of a Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Award, Dr. Zoe
Wool of Rice University will explore the ways in which socialities of care for
disabled veterans are improvised within, beyond, and against kinship and other
existent infrastructures of care. This project combines long term ethnographic
data collection, semi-structured interviews, and social network analysis to
understand and map the full range of caregiving relationships that emerge around
injured post-9/11 veterans. The research will be conducted in Houston, TX, and
at an innovative new intentional community for injured veterans in New Orleans,
LA. The project also aims to understand the way family and non-family caregiving
relationships may interact with each other and may be shaped by caregiving--and
expectations around family relationships, in similar or different ways. In
addition, the project looks to non-veteran disability communities in California
and New York, which each have a rich history of experiments in social
arrangements of informal caregiving, including the relatively recent model of
care collectives. In addition to understanding the kinds of relationships people
count on for care, the project investigates the duration and temporality of
these relationships, with a special focus on the ways various caregiving
relationships are shaped by the need for improvisation that often accompanies
life lived with chronic illness or impairment. The project will advance
anthropological and broader social scientific theories of sociality, care,
disability, and kinship. Bringing the worlds of injured veterans together with
the worlds of broader disability communities practiced in developing alternative
caregiving networks may lead to new ways of thinking about informal long-term
care and the policies that support it, both for veterans, and for the millions
of other disabled Americans.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.