* 1751040
* CAREER: Fundamental Algorithms for Data-Limited Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Eric Price, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 07/31/2024
* USD 499,575.00

From medical imaging to astronomy, scientific hypothesis testing to data
analysis, computers are used in a wide variety of areas where computation is
cheaper than data collection. Such situations call for algorithms that are not
only fast, but also data efficient. This project considers sub-linear algorithms
for fundamental computational problems of interest in both theory and practice.
It focuses on two basic questions: how many samples, or noisy observations from
a signal, does it take to accurately reconstruct the signal, and how many
samples from an object does it take to estimate a property of the
object?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will investigate ways to leverage knowledge
of signal structure into improved signal reconstruction. An example signal
structure is the property of having a sparse Fourier transform; this has been
well studied in the discrete setting, but is still poorly understood in the more
realistic continuous setting. Another signal structure is that given by
generative models built with deep convolutional neural networks; these have
produced remarkably accurate models of images in recent years. This project will
use such models to estimate images more accurately from fewer measurements. The
PI will also investigate problems in distribution testing and graph sampling,
with a goal of translating techniques from the distribution testing literature
into the statistical hypothesis testing framework. The PI will incorporate
research into teaching, and mentor students at levels ranging from high school
to graduate school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.