* 1751750
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Social organization and decision-making in fission-fusion primate societies
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2018,03/31/2021
* Margaret Crofoot, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2021
* USD 25,200.00

How do animals who live in social groups make decisions about what the group
should do? Does a dominant individual lead the group, or can multiple
individuals contribute to decision-making? This doctoral dissertation project
will investigate group decision-making in wild spider monkeys, who frequently
split into smaller groups and re-form the larger group (fission-fusion) when
feeding. The investigator hypothesizes that fission-fusion social grouping is
driven by the energetic needs of multiple individuals and promotes egalitarian
social organization (equal power among individuals). How groups decide when and
where to move in their habitat and who exerts the most influence is vital to
identifying the costs and benefits of group living, and this research will
provide insight into the emergence of egalitarian social dynamics in human
societies. This project will support academic training and mentorship for
students under-represented in STEM fields, thereby fostering interest in the
sciences at the K-12 level and providing field research opportunities for
undergraduate students. Additionally, this project will promote international
collaborations, hands-on workshops, and public science
seminars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key challenge to studying how group decisions
are made is determining the motivations driving individuals' decisions, and thus
the link between individual needs and collective action. Some evidence suggests
that fission-fusion social organization may promote egalitarian social norms by
allowing individuals to split away from despotic group members when decisions
about what to do or where to go do not align with their individual needs. Using
wild black-handed spider monkeys as a model system, this study combines well-
established observational field methods of behavior, foraging theory models, and
laboratory techniques for quantifying energy balance, to provide a deeper
mechanistic understanding of the collective decision-making process in fission-
fusion societies. The investigator will collect observational data on leadership
and decision-making and analytical data on individual energetic state as
indicated by C-peptide analysis of non-invasively collected urine samples. The
project will address three main hypotheses: 1) spider monkeys engage in shared
decision-making, 2) groups tend to fission when conflicts between individuals
are high, and 3) individuals lead according to their physiological need as
opposed to dominance or social power.