* 1751861
* CAREER:  Label-Free Cell Sorting Based on Single-Cell Metabolism
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Paul Abbyad, Santa Clara University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2024
* USD 504,973.00

The project will develop technology to selectively isolate cancer cells. This
will allow characterization at the single cell level to enable effective,
targeted cancer therapies. Laboratory modules that incorporate relevant
technologies will be designed to provide inspirational, discovery-based
experiences that have been shown to be critical for both directing and retaining
students in science and engineering fields. This work will be performed at a
primarily undergraduate institution, where exposure of undergraduates to
authentic research experiences will engage a diverse cross-section of students.
Experimental kits and teaching material will be developed and offered through
established programs and networks to hundreds of students per year at local
socioeconomically disadvantaged middle school and high schools. Wide
dissemination of these modules via source material, website, and videos will
encourage the development of a capable biotechnology
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High glucose metabolism is one hallmark of
cancer. Cancer cells are programmed to convert glucose to lactate. High levels
of lactate in tumors are associated with metastasis, recurrence, and poor
outcomes. Cells that exhibit high lactate secretion rates are therefore specific
targets for therapy. The study of these important and rare cells requires
efficient tools for their isolation. A novel label-free microfluidic platform
will be used for the fast and inexpensive isolation of single cells based on
cellular metabolism. Single-cell whole transcriptome analysis will connect gene
expression to cell phenotype in a quantitative fashion. It will reveal the cell-
to-cell heterogeneity in gene expression and clarify the determinants of highly
malignant cancer cells. As glycolysis is a clear indicator of cell vitality, the
platform will also be used to quickly and easily separate live and dead cells
for applications in pharmacology and toxicology. Ultimately, the technology
developed in this proposal can be applied to isolate cells or subpopulations
based on cellular metabolism for a broad range of applications in cell biology,
bioenergy, biotechnology and medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.