* 1751949
* CAREER:Two-Dimensional Materials with Addressable Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Xavier Roy, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 736,241.00

Non-Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;Two-dimensional (2D) materials are crystalline
materials which are only a single layer or a few layers of atoms thick. Such
materials have recently received widespread attention for the development of
novel technologies in nano(opto)electronics, catalysis, sensing, and energy
production. This NSF CAREER project, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, integrates research and
educational activities centered on the design and synthesis of a new family of
2D materials, and advances the understanding of the relation between their
surface functionalization and physical properties. Realizing the great
transformative promises of 2D materials hinges on the development of effective
methods to control the surface chemistry and thereby change the intrinsic
physical properties and materials chemistry of the thin layers. This remains a
major challenge for most known 2D materials. They are chemically non-reactive.
To overcome this hurdle, the project develops a series of cluster-based metal
chalcogenide 2D materials. The surfaces of the individual clusters can be
modified more easily while leaving the internal structure of the inorganic layer
intact. The overall goal is to develop chemical strategies to change the outside
of these 2D materials by attaching different molecules, and then study how these
modifications alter the optical and electronic properties of the layers. This
project advances the scientific understanding and potential technological
applications of 2D materials by providing a path towards creating
multifunctional 2D materials with tunable physical, chemical and surface
properties. Such 2D materials have never been synthesized and their novel
cluster-based structures produces unique physical properties. &lt;br/&gt;The
research effort is integrated with educational and outreach activities aimed at
increasing the participation of historically underrepresented groups in STEM,
and strengthening the scientific workforce. A coordinated effort spans high
school and middle school outreach, interdisciplinary research training for
undergraduate and graduate scientists, and curriculum
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;This NSF CAREER
project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the
Division of Materials Research, integrates research and educational activities
centered on the design and synthesis of a new family of 2D materials, and
furthers the understanding of the relation between their surface
functionalization and physical properties. The proposed materials are composed
of covalently-linked metal chalcogenide clusters capped by substitutionally
labile halogen atoms. These 2D materials are exfoliated from bulk layered van
der Waals cluster solids, Re6Se8Cl2 and Mo6S3Br6. The research tests the
hypothesis that the optical and electronic properties of these 2D materials are
strongly influenced by the nature of the ligands on the surface. The PI and his
students develop substitution reactions to functionalize the surface of the 2D
materials with a series of ligands with programmed characteristics (charge,
ligand field strength, dipole), and measure the resulting optical properties and
surface electronic states, before and after functionalization. The materials are
integrated into model electrical devices to probe the effect of ligand
substitution on the electronic properties. A critical factor for the development
of the field of 2D materials is the ability to control their properties. In this
context, the development of surface functionalization strategies is of great
scientific and technological interest as a path towards creating multifunctional
2D materials with tunable physical, chemical and surface properties. Current
methods are severely limited because they yield very low surface coverage, they
generate a vast number of defects and/or they rely on weak non-covalent
interactions. This research overcomes these hurdles and enable the covalent
functionalization of 2D materials with high coverage rates while preserving the
internal structure of the inorganic framework.&lt;br/&gt;The educational
component of this NSF CAREER project aims to inspire students (middle school,
high school, undergraduate, and graduate) to pursue careers in STEM, as well as
broaden the participation of historically underrepresented groups in STEM and
enhance the undergraduate chemistry curriculum. The focus on recruiting students
form historically underrepresented groups prevails in four approaches: (1)
Outreach activities to middle-school and high-school students from Central
Harlem and the Bronx in New York City; (2) Recruit undergraduate students to
work in the PI's laboratory for early research experiences; (3) Recruit and
mentor graduate students in multidisciplinary research combining chemistry and
materials science; (4) Integrate the research into the Chemistry undergraduate
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.