* 1751348
* CAREER: Making Tactile Waves: Somatosensation as Elastic Wave Propagation
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Yon Visell, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2023
* USD 539,284.00

Our sense of touch is far less understood than vision or hearing, and remains an
under-utilized modality in computing systems. This is partly due to our limited
understanding of the physical processes that relate the mechanics of touching an
object to perception and movement. Recent research has shown that even lightly
touching an object with a finger often excites elastic waves that travel
throughout the hand and elicit responses in the sensory nervous system that
evoke the conscious experience of touch contact in the brain, but the
biomechanics that mediate this process are as yet unclear. The goals of this
project are to elucidate aspects of the sense of touch that are affected by
mechanical waves propagating in the body, to investigate the range of tactile
sensations that accompany natural interactions with the hands, and to design new
hardware technologies and algorithms for providing touch feedback in virtual
reality. The work will quantitatively explore mechanisms of touch elicited wave
propagation in order to catalyze advances in technologies for haptic sensing and
feedback. Project outcomes will have broad impact by establishing a unique
approach to teaching concepts from engineering and neuroscience to students at
all levels, by using the sense of touch as a focal point and arena for creative
hands-on learning, by enabling science outreach to the public through a radio
show hosted by the PI, and by contributing to new technologies for aiding
individuals with complex sensory impairments affecting the sense of
touch.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project unites theoretical and empirical
studies of touch-related viscoelastic waves with the engineering of new
technologies for haptic sensing and display. To elucidate the mechanisms of
human touch sensing and to realize technologies that can accurately address the
haptic sense, a quantitative account of the mechanical signals involved is
needed. Building on recent findings about touch-related elastic wave propagation
in the hand, the viscoelastic waves produced during touch interactions with
objects and surfaces, and the information they carry, will be measured and
analyzed in order to: (1) Reveal the mechanics and information content of
contact-elicited waves; (2) Create sensing methods that will be used to
characterize tactile information in real world environments; and (3) Design
haptic display technologies and rendering techniques to provide evocative haptic
effects to the hand. The research will address a major gap in our understanding
of tactile function by clarifying the biomechanical processes that link remote
touch contact to neural processing and conscious perception. It will also aid
efforts to explain specializations in the peripheral nervous system, such as the
distribution, properties, and function of populations of vibration sensitive
tactile receptors. Furthermore, it will yield unique wearable technologies for
capturing and reproducing tactile sensations in the whole
hand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.