* 1751628
* CAREER: Towards A Paradigm of Sustainable Liquid Repellent Surfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Arun Kumar Kota, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 09/30/2019
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award supports research
that will contribute new fundamental knowledge in the field of surface science,
related to liquid-repellent surfaces (often called non-stick coatings).
Typically, liquid-repellent surfaces are made with long chain fluorocarbon
materials. However, long chain fluorocarbon materials are rapidly being phased
out because of the growing concerns regarding their negative environmental and
biological impacts. This research promotes national health by developing
alternative surface treatments to the currently used toxic bio-accumulating
materials. New hydro- and omniphobic materials are increasingly in demand for
defense and commercial applications in textiles, surface coatings in harsh or
"dirty" environments, among others. The work advances the science of surface
repellents by providing the basic knowledge needed to design novel liquid-
repellent surfaces with the more benign short chain fluorocarbon materials and
with performance (i.e., degree of liquid repellency) equivalent to the long
chain fluorocarbon materials. Such innovative liquid-repellent surfaces have the
potential to drastically alter the non-stick coatings technology landscape in
civilian, industrial and defense sectors. Therefore, the results and insights
from this research will be significantly beneficial to the U.S. economy and
society. The education activities are integrated with this research through the
generation of STEM education kits and do-it-yourself (DIY) videos on "Fun with
Surface" to be used in K-12 science classes in conjunction with teacher training
workshops.

Liquid-repellent surfaces consisting of long chain fluorocarbons (i.e., linear
molecules with 8 or more fully fluorinated carbons) decompose into
perfluorooctanoic acid, which is bio-accumulative and is considered an emerging
contaminant. So, it is essential to develop alternative sustainable materials
(e.g., short chain fluorocarbons) that can be as liquid-repellent as long chain
fluorocarbons. The research is based on the hypothesis that short chain
fluorocarbons with high surface crystallinity and re-entrant morphology will
offer liquid-repellency equivalent to long chain fluorocarbons. To test this
hypothesis, the research team will systematically investigate the influence of
molecular architecture of fluorocarbon surface ligands and surface modification
reaction coordinates on surface crystallinity and morphology. The resulting
liquid-repellency will be investigated experimentally and compared with
theoretical predictions. Overall, this research will provide a thorough
understanding of molecular architecture-processing-structure-property
relationships involved in design of liquid-repellent surfaces and pave the way
to a paradigm of sustainable liquid-repellent surfaces.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.