* 1751725
* CAREER: Ultrafast Imaging and Spectroscopy of Cooperative Phenomena in Photomagnetic Nanomaterials
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Joshua Vura-Weis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 02/28/2022
* USD 690,920.00

Improvements in digital technology rely heavily on reducing the size of
electronic components. Over the past three decades, the basic building blocks of
computer chips have shrunk to nanometer dimensions, or about 1000 times smaller
than a human hair. In this size range, nanostructures exhibit new properties and
behaviors that are not observed in their bulk counterparts. The appearance of
new nanomaterials that change their shape when exposed to light have the
potential to impact many different technologies. However, watching a single
particle change its shape in the laboratory presents unique challenges, since
the time needed to switch from one form to the other is exceedingly short and
cannot be captured by the fastest camera. In this project funded by the Chemical
Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division,
Professor Renske M. Van der Veen at the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign (UIUC) is building a microscope that uses very short bursts of
electrons (less than a millionth of a millionth of a second) to watch as a
single nanostructure change its shape in response to light. Professor Van der
Veen and her students are using this microscope to gain fundamental insight into
the cascade of switching events that occur in metal-organic nanomaterials after
light excitation. The results from this work could impact technologies ranging
from data storage to optical switches in telecommunication, and thus could have
significant benefit to society. As part of this CARRER project, Professor Van
der Veen is developing new educational activities that will train the next
generation of scientists in this emerging experimental
methodology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Room temperature photoswitching is highly
desired for realistic applications in functional devices. This project is
advancing our understanding of first-order thermal phase transitions with
cooperative hysteresis phenomena that occur around room temperature.
Photoexcitation inside the hysteresis region may lead to efficient, "complete"
switching of magnetic, dielectric and/or structural properties at the single-
nanoparticle level. The project's focus is on iron- and iron-cobalt spin-
crossover coordination polymers of different dimensionality, which undergo a
rearrangement of electrons in their lowest d-orbitals upon light excitation.
Transient absorption spectroscopy, ultrafast X-ray spectroscopy at synchrotron
facilities, and a newly developed ultrafast electron microscope are used to
investigate the interplay between structural and electronic degrees of freedom
after photoexcitation. The project is also studying the mechanisms, time scales
and efficiencies pertinent to cooperative photoswitching. The broader impacts of
this work include STEM workforce enhancement through the development of a "3-Day
Synchrotron Boot Camp" for undergraduate and graduate students, as well as
research-integrated lectures and demonstration modules for female and
underprivileged middle-school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.