* 1751610
* CAREER: Nanoscale Thermal Transport in Hydrogen-Bonded Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Ling Liu, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 10/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

The hydrogen bond (H-bond) is an essential element of many materials including
DNA, proteins, hydrogels and molecular self-assemblies. Despite existing
knowledge of energy transport in some large protein systems, a systematic
understanding of nanoscale thermal transport across H-bonded materials and, in
particular, the role of H-bonds is lacking. The knowledge gap has hindered the
understanding of heat transfer in living systems and development of novel
biomaterials, e.g. synthetic spider silk, with extraordinary thermal properties.
To address these critical challenges, this project investigates a suite of
H-bonded materials including protein secondary structures and organic-inorganic
interfaces, using state-of-the-art computational approaches combined with
experimental validations. The research outcomes will accelerate design,
development and deployment of novel H-bonded materials with tunable thermal
properties, to meet the increasing needs for biocompatible, multifunctional
materials in a wide range of areas including bio-implantation, tissue
regeneration, cancer treatment, and energy storage. This project also seeks to
achieve three societally relevant outcomes including (1) broadening
participation of Female Native American students in engineering through two
mentoring programs; (2) fostering skills of materials modeling among
undergraduate students using a 3D Printing Challenge and a Fellowship program;
and (3) conveying essential concepts of biomaterials and thermal management to
high school students and the general public through outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building upon recent progress in advanced
phonon transport theory and vibrational mode analysis, this project
systematically reveals the role of H-bonds in thermal transport across several
representative building blocks of H-bonded materials including nanocrystals
(e.g. protein beta-sheets), nanowires (e.g. protein alpha-helices and 3-10
helices) and interfaces. By using molecular dynamics simulations and functional
theory calculations, the investigations quantifies anisotropy of thermal
conduction in the H-bonded building blocks in association with several
structural and environmental factors including the H-bond connectivity (e.g.
alpha helices vs. 3-10 helices), the side chain chemistry and size, and the
solvation. Particular emphasis is given to understanding how different amino
acid sequences can affect thermal conductivities and transport characteristics
including phonon density of states, group velocities, and lifetimes. New
physical insights are generated regarding: (1) how H-bond networks of different
forms contribute to nanoscale thermal transport; and (2) how thermal transport
in H-bonded materials differs from that in other 1D (e.g. nanotubes), 2D (e.g.
graphene) and 3D materials that have no H-bonds. The achieved knowledge base
enables development of new synthetic silk with highly conductive building blocks
as well as novel H-bonded interfaces that are made, characterized and compared
with existing materials for validation of the theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.