* 1751553
* CAREER: Predicting battery lifetime from direct measurements of inter-electrode communication
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Maureen Tang, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 12/31/2023
* USD 524,146.00

Advanced lithium-ion batteries for vehicle transport and renewable electricity
grid storage applications could improve domestic energy security but performance
gaps in cost and battery lifetime limit use. The main cause of battery failure
is undesirable chemical side reactions within the device that are difficult to
quantify and to understand. Because of the lack of fundamental understanding,
engineers are less able to design materials and devices that can withstand side
reactions for longer times. As a result, to date, engineers mainly have to rely
on empirical failure tests that increase the time and cost of developing new
technology. This fundamental research project applies new methods to directly
measure side reaction rates that impact battery lifetime and performance.
Information about reaction rates will then be used to build system models that
predict battery lifetime. The results will allow researchers to design materials
that last longer and to predict device failure much more rapidly than
traditional methods. The educational benefits of the project include graduate
and undergraduate researcher training in battery science, reactor design, and
transport modeling. The PI has also partnered with local high schools and middle
schools in West Philadelphia to introduce principles of electricity and battery
design using hands-on, age appropriate projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Battery
electrode interfaces have been studied for a long time, but even their basic
workings have not been sufficiently explained. This project uses two critical
innovations. First, a novel microreactor controls chemical communication between
electrodes, resulting in well-defined transport of reactants and products while
maintaining an environment relevant to nonaqueous batteries. This feature
enables the second innovation: a focus on measuring the electrochemical rate
constants, diffusivities, and resistivities that impact battery performance.
These measurements are accomplished by amperometrically detecting reaction
products with electrochemical generator-collector experiments, analogous to the
rotating ring disk electrode in electrocatalysis. The four-electrode
measurements separate phenomena in order to determine how reactions depend on
factors like cell potential and electrolyte additives. The approach is broadly
applicable; the focus of this work is the high-voltage spinel LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4
(LNMO). Identifying the mechanisms of charge transfer will specify material
parameters for electrolyte solvents and additives, while measuring the reaction
rates of film dissolution and growth will enable physics-based battery models to
predict system lifetime. This project enables physics-based models to predict
battery lifetime from measured reaction parameters. Such models can identify
material- and system-level approaches to prevent battery failure and maximize
lifetime and performance without additional cost.