* 1751918
* CAREER: Control of Vortex Breakdown in High-Reynolds Number Rotor Flows with Secondary Vortex Structures
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Victor Maldonado, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 03/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

This project seeks to study and reduce the negative impact of blade tip vortices
on rotor-based systems such as wind turbines, gas turbines for energy production
or aircraft propulsion, and rotorcraft. Currently these systems suffer from
underperformance due to an inability to control or diffuse the high-energy
content of the blade tip vortex. A major aspect of the project is the large-
scale experiments in a unique high-wind hurricane simulator facility at Florida
International University that enables flow-similitude and realistic application
of the results to full-scale rotor-based systems. Such educational training is
vital to increase the pool of experimental thermal-fluids engineers that can
continue to improve the efficiency of energy systems for the benefit of society.

The proposed large-scale experiments will test new theories and create new
knowledge of high- Reynolds number blade tip vortex breakdown using secondary
vortex structures created by synthetic jets and chord-wise wall oscillations.
The intellectual significance is a semi-empirical model that describes the
characteristics of secondary vortices (e.g. length/ time scales, vorticity)
necessary for vortex breakdown to occur, as well as its impact on turbulent
kinetic energy, which is believed to induce blade structural vibration. The flow
will be measured using stereoscopic particle image velocimetry techniques and
analyzed using proper orthogonal decomposition (POD) as well as three-
dimensional flow reconstruction from an array of two-dimensional measurement
planes. These methods are unique for large-domain high Reynolds number flows.
They will be used to shed light on blade tip vortex energy content/ POD modes,
as well as to advance the field of experimental vortex dynamics particularly at
high Reynolds numbers.