* 1751926
* CAREER:Quantifying the response of rivers and floodplains to changes in climate and land use
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Enrica Viparelli, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2024
* USD 697,553.00

A thorough understanding of how rivers respond to changes in climate and land
use is fundamental to decrease impact from flooding, to design and maintain
structures such as water intakes and bridges, to protect and restore river
ecosystems, and to manage water resources in general. This research is
specifically designed to quantify how river channels and the adjoining
floodplains respond to natural and anthropogenic changes in climate and land
use. Educational aspects of this project are designed with formal learning
activities (field work at the Congaree National Park, design and construction of
experimental installations for education, and the introduction of a new
undergraduate level course on sustainable river engineering practices into the
curriculum) to build an educational environment using collaborative learning
pedagogy in which students learn how to work in a diverse, interdisciplinary,
and international group. These education aspects are targeted to prepare the
next generation of engineers to tackle scientific and professional problems
associated with water resources management. Informal learning activities, such
as the creation of an interactive digital platform for the Congaree National
Park and summer camps for high school students, will inform the general public
on the effects that humans and a changing climate can have on the environment in
which they live in. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main scientific objective of the
research is to advance knowledge on river morphodynamics, and enable
quantitative prediction of changes in channel geometry and pattern observed in
the field. It is hypothesized that the mode of bed material (sand or gravel)
transport and the exchange of sediment between the river and the floodplain are
key processes controlling river morphodynamics at spatial scales ranging from
tens to hundreds of kilometers and at temporal scales ranging from a few decades
to several centuries. This hypothesis will be tested with laboratory experiments
to gain insight into the role of sediment grain size on channel morphology,
mathematical modeling to provide physics-based quantitative tools on river
morphodynamics, and fieldwork to characterize the annual variability of channel
geometry on a reach of the Congaree River in the Congaree River National Park,
USA, that has been responding to changes in hydrology and land use since the
1700s. Additional field sites that are being affected by human-induced changes
in land use will also be considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.