* 1751693
* CAREER: Scalable Electrochemical Exfoliation and Functionalization of Two-Dimensional Atomic Layer Materials for Energy Storage
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Seung Woo Lee, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 02/28/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Two-dimensional atomic layer materials have the potential to revolutionize
energy storage devices, including rechargeable batteries, by improving energy
and power performances. Currently, available manufacturing processes for two-
dimensional materials require high temperatures or complex chemical treatment,
which limits their large-scale production. This Faculty Early Career Development
Program (CAREER) award investigates scalable electrochemical exfoliation and
functionalization of two-dimensional materials with the aim of controlling their
structures and properties for high-performance energy storage devices. Two-
dimensional materials come in many compositions and are increasingly utilized in
consumer electronics, electric vehicles, smart grids, and renewable energy
systems. The capability to produce high quality two-dimensional materials
contributes significantly to the nation's economy and advances prosperity and
welfare. The award aligns well with NSF's Quantum Leap effort because two-
dimensional materials with controlled film thickness and point defects are
candidate materials for quantum devices, including sensing, computing and
communicating. This research is multidisciplinary, including manufacturing,
electrochemistry and nanotechnology, and motivates students with diverse
backgrounds to consider future careers in science and engineering. The project
develops an energy education module in collaboration with high school teachers
to teach energy storage mechanisms and calculation of energy and power densities
tied with chemistry, physics, and math curricula. The energy education module
can be tested and expanded over a broad range of underrepresented students
through NSF INCLUDES program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The electrochemical
manufacturing process has many advantages over conventional manufacturing
techniques of fabricating two-dimensional (2D) atomic layer materials, including
low-cost, simple operation, rapid production rate, and in-situ
functionalization, by taking advantage of scalable and controllable nature of
the electrochemical process. However, some scientific barriers, such as
mechanistic understanding of electrochemical exfoliation and quantitative
methods for controlling the structure and properties, need to be overcome in
order to realize the full potential of electrochemical manufacturing of 2D
materials. This project investigates comprehensive and general expansion,
exfoliation and functionalization mechanisms during the manufacture of these
materials in electrochemical processing, specifically, structural changes and
gas formation as a function of applied potential. It evaluates properties of the
electrochemical processed materials, and establishes processing parameter-
structure-property relationships. The work can potentially transform the
manufacturing process of 2D materials into a highly scalable and controllable
process that can fabricate structure- and property-tuned 2D nanomaterials for
specific target applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.