* 1751554
* CAREER: Tomographic microendoscopy for characterization of epithelial tissue structure and function
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Timothy Muldoon, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2024
* USD 508,000.00

Early cancer within the colon typically arises in the outer layers of the
tissue. As cancer progresses and invades into the bowel wall beneath, a signals
between cells trigger the formation of new, abnormal blood vessels. These
vessels are twisted and have variations in their structure and components. There
are also significant differences when compared to normal blood vessels and
capillaries. Existing techniques to directly investigate the colon tissue's
structure and function in a living subject are limited due to technological
constraints. This project will develop a probe that can be used on an endoscope,
a standard piece of surgical equipment, that can image the tissue and
reconstruct a three-dimensional representation of the tissue properties. This
technology will be useful for anatomical "tubes" of many types and sizes -
including the digestive tract, pancreatic duct, and other structures. This novel
device will be used to test the hypothesis that an abnormal structure and
organization of blood vessels beneath the surface of the colon tissue is related
to colorectal tumor growth and development. Similarly, it is expected that
effective treatment of colorectal tumors will be accompanied by a return of
normal blood vessel structure and organization. Within this project, research
and educational components are integrated through undergraduate and graduate
student mentoring and training activities, course development, and a
Biophotonics-specific summer camp. In the summer camp, students will learn the
fundamentals of light and how light can be used to answer research questions in
the life sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on
developing a novel Tomographic Imaging MicroEndoscopy (TIME) platform, capable
of multimodal characterization of tissue structure and perfusion. The Research
Plan builds on an optical fiber bundle image guide-based microendoscopy
platform, previously developed by the PI, capable of imaging superficial tissues
at subcellular (&lt;3.5 micron) resolution. The proposed platform will be
capable of deployment via endoscope (for gastrointestinal applications) or
catheter (for intravascular applications) and be capable of multimodal real-time
in vivo tomographic imaging of microvasculature, spectroscopic quantification of
tissue perfusion (hemoglobin content and oxygen saturation) and high-resolution
imaging of superficial tissue microarchitecture. Specific design goals include:
1) Outer diameter of &lt;1mm; 2) No complex galvanometric or resonant scanning
systems; 3) Cost-effective hardware (&lt;$20,000 USD) to facilitate translation
to clinical applications and 4)Tomographic resolution capable of three
dimensional mapping of subsurface vessels of ~20 micron diameter, down to 500
micron depth. The Research Plan is organized around three objectives: 1)
Tomographic-image reconstruction using a fiber bundle image guide microendoscope
--requiring development of the prototype microendoscopy device and image
reconstruction methods and validation in PDMS phantoms; 2) Fluorescence-based
tomographic microendoscopy (F-TIME) for angiographic applications--requiring
development of image reconstruction methods and validation in optical phantoms
and 3) Application of TIME for characterization of tumor vasculature and
perfusion in an orthotopic mouse model of colorectal cancer--requiring mapping
the in vivo microenvironment during tumor development and characterizing the
tumor vasculature in response to a therapeutic
intervention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.