* 1751009
* CAREER: Data-Driven Network Resource Management Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2024
* Mohammad Alizadeh, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 04/30/2024
* USD 628,029.00

Modern networks require sophisticated systems and algorithms to manage resources
efficiently and deliver high quality of experience to users. These systems are
critical to services society has come to rely on, from video streaming to social
networks to AI applications. Video streaming, for example, involves numerous
systems that control everything from the resolution of the video to the network
path and the video download speed based on dynamic network conditions. As
networks and applications have become more complex, existing approaches have
become inadequate and designing algorithms that deliver high performance in all
conditions has become exceedingly difficult. The goal of this research is to
address this challenge by developing network systems that learn to manage
resources automatically through experience by applying new machine learning
techniques. This new paradigm, if successful, will make networks simpler to
design, more efficient and cost effective, and able to deliver better services
to businesses and consumers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's goal is to
develop the algorithmic and systems foundations for designing resource
management systems that use modern reinforcement learning and other predictive
control techniques to achieve strong performance across heterogeneous networks
and applications. To this end, the researchers plan to build a series of
practical systems for important applications, including schedulers for cluster
computing systems (e.g., for data-parallel analytics workloads), and context-
aware network control protocols (e.g., for adaptive streaming of 360 virtual
reality video). In building these systems, the researchers will tackle
fundamental challenges that confront data-driven network resource management,
including (i) techniques to represent workloads (e.g., graph-structured jobs)
and networks (e.g., topologies, queues, flows) to facilitate learning using
neural networks; (ii) techniques to handle challenging resource management
problems with large and deep action spaces; (iii) techniques to efficiently
collect data across a myriad of devices for learning control models; and (iv)
techniques to bootstrap learning models from data collected offline and
continually train models safely after deployment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.