* 1751174
* CAREER:  Structural biology in cellular environments using high-sensitivity NMR
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Kendra Frederick, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 04/30/2024
* USD 903,167.00

For an organism to survive, its proteins must adapt to respond to various
challenges it faces in a living cell. One of these challenges is macromolecular
crowding that can derail even robust biological pathways. This situation becomes
critical when considering proteins with energetic folding landscapes that permit
many conformational states. In these cases, the environment can clearly
influence the conformation by favoring one pathway over another. Such decisions
can have long-lasting biological consequences, as is the case for prions,
proteins with the ability to exist stably in distinct functional states with
divergent structures: one soluble, the other a highly ordered, self-templating
aggregate. Because the aggregating proteins have identical sequences,
differences in cellular environment are responsible for the conformational
switch. Despite the importance of the environment for protein folding,
structural investigations of biomolecules are typically confined to in vitro
systems, which cannot capture important structural features imposed by
biological environments. Solid-state NMR spectroscopy (ssNMR) is currently
undergoing a 'sensitivity renaissance' with the development of dynamic nuclear
polarization (DNP). This method has a theoretical maximum sensitivity
enhancement of 660-fold; thus an experiment that would require decades of
experimental time with traditional ssNMR methods can be collected in a day with
DNP NMR. This project will advance our knowledge about protein structure in
natural biological contexts. The PI will develop training videos for
undergraduate and high school students in collaboration with high school
teachers. These training videos will then be distributed nationally through the
American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Structural investigations of biomolecules are
typically confined to in vitro systems under extremely limited conditions. These
investigations yield invaluable insights, but such experiments cannot capture
important structural features imposed by cellular environments. Structural
studies of proteins in their native contexts are not only possible using state-
of-the-art sensitivity-enhanced (dynamic nuclear polarization or DNP) solid-
state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) techniques, but also that the native
context can have a dramatic influence on protein structure. This project will 1)
visualize such structural changes with atomic level resolution and 2) provide an
understanding of how genetic background can influence protein folding. To do so,
the PI will use novel sample preparation for NMR to investigate the structure of
a protein containing both an environmentally sensitive folding pathway and an
intrinsically disordered region. Using a self-polymerizing yeast prion protein,
Sup35, this project will investigate how native and mutant cellular environments
affect amyloid structure. While the methodology developed in this project can be
easily applied to systems of interest such as the protein mis-folding in
neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer's it can likewise be applied to
emerging basic problems such as the structural basis of phase separated
biological condensates. The work will build the foundation of a new field of in
vivo structural biology directly informed by genetic backgrounds, environmental
perturbation and cellular phenotypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.