* 1751763
* CAREER: Towards Dark Energy -- A High-precision Drone-based Calibrator for Next-Generation 21cm Cosmology Experiments
* MPS,AST
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Laura Newburgh, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 02/29/2024
* USD 460,949.00

Measurements of the Universe over the last two decades have shown that nearly
75% of the Universe is made of a mysterious component: Dark Energy. Unlike
"regular matter", Dark Energy seems to act against gravity and is causing the
expansion of the Universe to accelerate. This is very confusing, and to explain
it, we may have to re-write particle physics or perhaps even the laws of
gravity. The best way to answer the question "What is Dark Energy?" is to
measure the expansion of the Universe farther back in time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently astronomers realized that radio telescopes have
the potential to make this measurement better than any other type of telescope.
This has never been attempted before, and we are now building telescopes to
achieve this goal. However, to be successful we need to understand the telescope
"beam" (like a beam of light, a telescope points at one place and focuses there,
and we must know what that beam looks like on the sky). For this CAREER grant,
the PI is building radio sources to put on quadcopter drones to fly above the
telescope. Using the radio telescope data, the location of the drone (with
special position sensors), and some new analysis techniques, we will make a map
of our telescope beam. The end result will be an important measurement that
helps us understand Dark Energy better. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The accelerated
expansion of the Universe was discovered from supernova measurements in 1998 and
no fundamental theories for this acceleration have yet been experimentally
verified. As a result, cosmologists inserted a new component ("Dark Energy")
into our cosmological models, but the underlying theories to explain the
accelerated expansion involve either (i) a modification to General Relativity or
(ii) a new particle which would predict a unique time dependence of the
expansion rate. Either would revolutionize our current models of fundamental
theories of physics. To answer these questions we must measure the expansion
history of the Universe across the past 11 billion years and pin down the
influence of Dark Energy on the expansion. The most promising path for this
comes from measurements of galaxies (measuring &gt; 100, 000 galaxies across a
wide swath of the sky). Unfortunately, current and next-generation optical
galaxy surveys are restricted in how far back in time they can see due to
limitations in detector technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Radio telescopes do
not have these limitations, and offer a promising solution to make radio surveys
of galaxies across most of cosmic time. This measurement has never been
attempted before and we are now building radio telescopes designed to achieve
this goal. However, we already know that to be successful we must understand our
telescope characteristics extremely well, in particular the telescope "beam"
(like a beam of light, a telescope points at one place and focuses there, and we
must know what that beam looks like on the sky). For this CAREER grant, the PI
is developing a beam mapper using a quadcopter drone. The PI's team will fly a
radio source on the drone above the telescopes and use the radio data and drone
position to make a map of the beam. This requires developing a stabilized noise
source to be flown on the drone, improved sensors for better drone position
accuracy, and new analysis techniques - particularly a mathematical
transformation to use measurements made near the dish and infer what they look
like on the sky. The end result will be an important measurement for cosmology
radio telescopes and a beam mapping technique that is demonstrated to work at
the high precision required for Dark Energy science
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.