* 1751032
* CAREER: Parameter Obfuscation: A Novel Methodology for the Protection of Analog Intellectual Property
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2024
* Ioannis Savidis, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 03/31/2024
* USD 503,720.00

Hardware security, specifically the protection of integrated circuit
intellectual property (IP), has gained importance as adversaries have the
financial and experiential means to reverse engineer and replicate competitors'
IP. Significant research effort has been devoted to protecting digital circuits,
but the protection of analog circuits from an adversary has largely been
ignored. The focus of this work is to explore techniques to enhance the security
of analog circuits from attacks such as reverse engineering and cloning, both of
which can lead to IP theft. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analog parameter obfuscation
is proposed as a means to protect analog circuits from adversarial theft. The
large design space for analog parameter obfuscation, which includes biasing
conditions, gains, bandwidths, noise figure, quality factors, center frequency,
phase noise, and many more, provides a means to mask analog circuit
functionality beyond the simple binary functional logic locking that has been
developed for digital circuits. To enhance the security of analog circuits from
reverse engineering, the proposed research includes 1) the development of novel
parameter-based obfuscation techniques for analog circuits, 2) the development
of algorithms and methodologies to select and prune analog circuit parameters
(gain, biasing points, bandwidth, noise figure, quality factor, phase noise,
etc.) best suited for obfuscation, 3) the development of initial metrics for the
evaluation of parameter obfuscation techniques, and 4) the implementation of the
obfuscation technique on a superheterodyne receiver for experimental
verification and algorithm refinement.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The fundamental
outcome is to develop a systematic approach to analyze and obfuscate analog
circuit parameters that are multi-dimensional and continuous by nature. The
research results will be used to expose high school students to engineering
topics through presentations and hands-on workshops. In addition, high school
students will be mentored in research through an outreach program, initiated and
led by the investigator, which pairs students with faculty mentors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data generated from the project will be maintained
online on a server at Drexel University (http://ice.ece.drexel.edu) - with the
exception of publications, for which copyright is transferred to a professional
organization (such as IEEE or ACM) and which maintain their own repository. At
the completion of the project, all data and code will be released in the public
domain and maintained in the repository for at least the required period set by
agency and university guidelines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.