* 1751506
* CAREER: A Dual-Core Control Framework for the Next-Generation SiC Motor Drives
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Yue Zhao, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 03/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Title:&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: A Dual-Core Control Framework for the Next-Generation
SiC Motor Drives&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;High-power motor drives lie at
the heart of mobile electrified systems. Limitations imposed by silicon (Si)
power semiconductor devices make it challenging to achieve the desired power
density, efficiency, and reliability for future traction and propulsion drives.
Fortunately, emerging silicon carbide (SiC) power devices enable a pathway to
develop the next-generation motor drives. However, control practices must evolve
from the existing approaches for Si-based motor drives to take advantages of SiC
power devices. Innovations are also desired to address challenges related to the
electromagnetic interference (EMI) issues due to the inherently faster switching
of SiC devices, and the thermal management for higher heat fluxes. On the
practical side, the research and development of high-power propulsion drives is
hampered by the lack of testing facilities at a full power scale. This Faculty
Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project will develop and demonstrate a
novel dual-core control concept comprising an electro-magnetic-thermal co-
optimization framework for the next generation SiC motor drives. The proposed
research plan will lead to an innovative solution overcoming the limitations of
present control practices, and thus having the potential to transform the
existing ways to model, monitor, and control the SiC motor drives. The research
will be seamlessly integrated with several undergraduate and graduate courses as
well as K-12 outreach activities at National Center for Reliable Electric Power
Transmission (NCREPT) at the University of Arkansas. The main objective is to
utilize research as a driving force to build a thriving and diversified power
electronics program, and to inspire young individuals to pursue STEM careers.
Thus, there will be various opportunities for student involvement in the
research program, both in and out of the classroom, to develop a complete set of
skills required in the power electronic profession. &lt;br/&gt;The research goal
of this project is to develop a dual-core control framework to co-optimize the
electro-magnetic-thermal tradeoffs for the SiC motor drives. Control and
optimization functions related to the performance of the motor and inverter will
be implemented in two control cores. Critical information will be exchanged
between the control cores to achieve the co-optimization objectives. More
specifically, the research thrusts will include: 1) developing a novel model-
based current ripple prediction approach and investigate ripple-based switching
sequence optimization to mitigate EMI and reduce switching losses; 2) developing
a reliable real-time junction temperature monitoring approach for SiC power
modules and a new active thermal management method; 3) investigating a novel
mixed-timescale modeling for the proposed dual-core control that also enables a
new tool to study the stability of a power electronic system; and 4) revamping
the megawatt-class NCREPT testing facility to develop a unique testbed for
experimental studies at propulsion power levels. As an electro-magnetic-thermal
co-optimization framework, the proposed dual-core control will disrupt today's
model-based motor controller design practice. It will advance our understanding
on the integration of real-time multi-objective optimization into motor drive
controllers. It will also create a paradigm shift to address EMI mitigation and
thermal management from the root causes, which are significantly different from
the use of EMI filters and heat sinks that address only symptoms. In summary,
this project will contribute to the theories and applications of optimal
control, state estimation, variable switching frequency modulation, and thermal
management in several aspects. Very importantly, the outcome of this research
will benefit various sectors of the nation's economy because motor drive systems
lie at the heart of a wide variety of industrial
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.