* 1751268
* CAREER: Scalable Manufacturing of Two-dimensional Atomic Layer Materials for Energy-efficient Electronic Devices via Selective-area Atomic Layer Deposition
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Elton Graugnard, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 07/31/2024
* USD 562,355.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant supports research
in the scalable manufacturing of atomically-thin semiconducting materials for
high performance, energy-efficient electronic devices. The project studies
selective-area or seeded atomic layer deposition, a manufacturing technique used
to deposit materials with high precision and uniformity. This award establishes
a new mode of manufacturing for low temperature fabrication of high quality two-
dimensional nanomaterials, which allows early adoption of these new materials
into the semiconductor industry and supports continued improvements in
electronic device performance, including information storage capacity and
computational power, all while lowering the energy demands of these devices.
These materials are also promising components of quantum information processing
devices, thus aligning well with NSF's Quantum Leap effort. The results of this
research benefits society and the national economy through the advancement of
innovative solutions to the nation's increasing energy and computational
demands. Additionally, this research advances engineering knowledge and trains
the next generation of scientists and engineers in advanced manufacturing and
prepare them for careers in industry. Through partnership with Boise State's
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) Diversity and Inclusion
Initiative, the research and outreach activities of this award expands
participation for underrepresented groups, directly supporting the aims of the
NSF INCLUDES program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semiconducting two-dimensional (2D)
atomic layer materials, such as transition metal dichalcogenides, offer large
direct band gaps, high on-off ratios, and high room temperature mobilities. The
key challenge to deploying these materials in memory and logic devices is the
ability to synthesize them in their 2D form at device compatible temperatures
with minimal substrate interaction, control over the number of layers, and
control over the chemical composition for heterostructure formation and doping.
Selective-area atomic layer deposition (ALD), in a unique van der Waals growth
mode, can overcome the current limitations for synthesis of the 2D
nanomaterials. Typically, 2D materials are grown by chemical vapor deposition at
high temperatures, which is not suitable for high aspect-ratio structures. Low
temperature ALD produces amorphous films, which requires high temperature
annealing to generate the desired microstructure, which is not suitable for some
semiconductor devices. This research is to provide the knowledge necessary to
synthesize crystalline 2D atomic layer materials at backend-compatible low
temperatures through selective-area or seeded ALD with van der Waals bonding to
the underlying substrate. The research team employs in situ and ex situ
experimentation combined with first-principles computation to understand the
chemical reactions critical to both promoting and inhibiting the nucleation and
growth of 2D materials on engineered surfaces for high volume semiconductor
device manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.