* 1751120
* Collaborative Research:  From Adjoints for the Few to Adjoints for the Many: Integrating the Use of Adjoint Methods in Earth System Modeling
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Patrick Heimbach, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 08/31/2020
* USD 137,500.00

Adjoint models are useful mathematical tools for studies that require state
estimates (e.g. forecasts or projections), and sensitivities of model output
with respect to model input. Adjoint methods allow efficient and comprehensive
computation of model sensitivity to very high dimensional spaces of inputs. An
adjoint model can be used to efficiently quantify the effects of changes in the
spatio-temporal distribution of surface winds, buoyancy fluxes, or mixing
distribution in the ocean, on quantities such as carbon uptake in the Southern
Ocean. Developing adjoint models for given state-of-the-art geophysical models
can be as complex as developing the geophysical models themselves, which is one
reason why adjoints are not frequently used. This project will advance the tools
needed to implement adjoint models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will pursue
three inter-related work packages to overcome these limitations:&lt;br/&gt;(1)
bringing the open-source AD tool OpenAD to full maturity on four open-source
Earth system modeling frameworks used in climate research and
education&lt;br/&gt;(2) developing configurations around several science
applications where the sensitivity of quantities of interest (cost functions) to
inputs (control variables) can be configured for realistic
runtimes,&lt;br/&gt;(3) developing a generic Message Passing Interface
(MPI)-based framework to enable the coupling between high-resolution forward and
low-resolution adjoint models. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed geoscience studies will
be of interest to computational and climate scientists. A broader impact of this
research will be to enable adjoint methods to be more easily used across the
geosciences, with potential to be transformative for data assimilation and
sensitivity analysis in a wide range of geoscience and other disciplines.