* 1751238
* CAREER: Enabling Reproducibility of Interactive Visual Data Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Alexander Lex, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 03/31/2024
* USD 528,245.00

Reproducibility and justifiability are widely recognized as critical aspects of
data-driven decision making in fields as varied as scientific research,
business, healthcare, or intelligence analysis. This project is concerned with
enabling reproducibility and justifiability of decisions in the data analysis
process, specifically as it relates to visual data analysis. Visualization is an
important tool for discovery, yet decisions made by humans based on
visualizations of data are difficult to capture and to justify. This project
will develop methods to justify, communicate, and audit decisions made based on
visual analysis. This, in turn will lead to better outcomes, achieved with less
effort and cost. The increasing use of visual analysis tools for decision making
will make data analysis accessible to a broad variety of people, as visual
analysis tools are generally easier to use than scripting languages and do not
require extensive computational and statistical training. This research and its
related activities increase accessibility and enhance the data analysis
infrastructure for research and education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve
these goals, this research will develop a framework for making visual analysis
sessions not only reproducible but also reusable. The approach is based on
tracking semantically meaningful provenance data during an interactive visual
analysis session. Once a discovery is made, analysts can use this history to
curate a succinct analysis story, adding justifications and explanations to make
their analysis reproducible by others. Using a semi-automatic process, analysts
will be able to make their actions data-aware, so that their analysis processes
become robust to changes, such as updates in the data. A second contribution of
the proposed work is the integration of visual analysis into computational
analysis processes. While visualization is commonly used to present
computational analysis results, the results of a visual analysis session are
rarely used to feed into further computational processes. The techniques
developed in this project will allow analysts to feed analysis results
(selections, aggregations, filters, etc.) back into a computational environment.
This will make it possible to use interactive visualization at any point in the
data analysis process while maintaining reproducibility and enabling reuse. The
expected results include new methods to capture user intent, create data stories
from analysis processes, and to integrate computational and visual data
analysis, leveraging the strength of both, human abilities and computational
power. The results will be disseminated in publications and in the form of open
source software, and accessible via the project website
(http://vdl.sci.utah.edu/projects/2018-nsf-
reproducibility/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.