* 1751087
* CAREER: Signals for evaluating the credibility of web sources and advancing web literacy
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Eni Mustafaraj, Wellesley College
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2024
* USD 492,610.00

This project will experimentally test the hypothesis that when users are
presented with search results that are augmented with signals for evaluating the
credibility of web sources, they will strengthen their critical thinking skills
and become better consumers of online information. Evaluating the credibility of
web sources is a crucial critical thinking skill in our digitally mediated
world. We have learned to rely on search engine platforms to show us the right
results, while forgetting that algorithms are biased or that they can be
manipulated. This research aims to discover whether and how humans can reclaim
their agency when deciding what information sources to trust. Additionally, it
will: (1) identify a set of human-understandable signals that are deemed helpful
for evaluating the credibility of web sources and validate them through users
studies; (2) propose and implement algorithmic techniques for computing some of
these signals, providing a trail of transparency about how they work, and (3)
develop a novel web platform for the interactive exploration of signals, modeled
upon nutrition fact labels, that will contribute in advancing web literacy
skills in the broad public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental evidence on
whether labeling information sources with credibility signals affects the
critical thinking skills of young people will inform the emerging public debate
on how cyber-human systems such as search engines, which are shaping our minds
and societies, could support a basic consumer right, that of being informed
about the source of information that is being consumed. Other broad impacts are:
(1) advancing web literacy through an interactive web platform that explains and
gives information about signals to evaluate credibility; (2) monitoring search
engine result pages (SERP), by establishing a SERP Observatory on results about
vulnerable populations to discover attempts to manipulate the ranking, and (3)
educating the public through writings on algorithmic decision making on the web.
This research will also involve the entire community of the college in the
production of digital content through a yearly Wikipedia Edit-a-thon, which will
enrich and expand the results shown by search engines on topics about women,
gender, and vulnerable populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.