* 1751945
* CAREER: Mechanics-Driven Energy Dissipation in Soft Matter Lubrication
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Alison Dunn, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 04/30/2023
* USD 575,869.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award supports research
that will contribute to new knowledge for designing hydrated, soft material
surfaces based on how they should perform when another surface slides against
them. Hydrogel materials are already used for soft contact lenses and biomedical
coatings (for example for prosthetics) because they are water-permeable,
biocompatible, and compliant. However, their surface slip behavior does not yet
have clear design rules because of their hydrated nature and broad ability to
tune the composition. This award will allow for highly-qualified students to
examine the mechanisms of slip, and to combine their findings into more concrete
design rules for these hydrogel surfaces. This requires them to draw from
several disciplines including materials science, mechanical engineering, surface
science, and even biomechanics. This work will allow for the recruitment and
encouragement of underrepresented groups in engineering. The PI will participate
in two ongoing summer camps for underrepresented K-12 students and will enlarge
the curricula of these camps by bringing in women engineers from industry to
lead educational events based on the science of lubrication. Specific
interactions will be focused on highlighting the personal experiences of the
industry leaders to encourage the camp participants to pursue STEM careers. The
PI will also leverage large undergraduate course activities, in particular
design experiences, to expose students to successful undergraduate and graduate
research. The fundamental results are anticipated to promote scientific progress
and advance the national health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In humans, cartilage
layers provide both robust lubrication and mechanical damping, among chemical
and biological functions. The mechanics of energy dissipation in hydrated soft
surfaces, especially under contact and slip, have not been sorted out, and thus
there is no way to currently engineer the lubrication behavior required for
prosthetic devices which support load and control slip. This work examines
reigning theories as to their ability to account for energy dissipation under
slip, including fluid load support, viscoelastic relaxation, and fluid shear.
Experiments on mechanical deformation and contact will prove or disprove the
hallmarks of different mechanisms, such as the pressure-dependence on friction
coefficient. The material composition will also be varied, and the results will
be assembled into guiding design principles for soft hydrated surfaces.
Complementary to the research goal of this work is the educational goal of
increasing the diversity of STEM professionals in Illinois and the U.S by
collaborating with industry on high school outreach activities and leveraging
large undergraduate course activities for exposure to
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.