* 1751739
* CAREER: FRACTAL ELECTRONIC TEXTURES IN QUANTUM CRITICAL SOLIDS
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2018,10/31/2023
* Riccardo Comin, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 10/31/2023
* USD 740,337.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;For over a century, the understanding and
description of critical phenomena posed a significant challenge. More recently,
the hallmarks of criticality have been found in solids where quantum
fluctuations play a central role. In such solids, fractal organization was
proposed, with self-similar structures and patterns akin to those displayed by
snowflakes or rugged shorelines. Imaging these electronic fractals is
challenging because of the need to explore multiple length scales spanning the
nanometer to millimeter range. In this study we use a recently-developed X-ray
nanoscope of very high accuracy. The goal is to reveal the unifying traits of
quantum critical matter. In a broader context, the understanding and control of
quantum phases of matter, such as superconductivity, is a stepping stone toward
the development of future quantum technologies, quantum computing, efficient
energy transport, and powerful medical scanners. On the educational front, this
project aims to engage undergraduate and graduate students in basic and advanced
X-ray science. Activities include field trips to national facilities and the
development of new academic tools and modules. These initiatives serve a broad
base of participants, including college students and middle/high school
teachers, with a focus on underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Quantum solids
exhibit collective phases of matter that cannot be found in ordinary metals or
semiconductors, engendering technologically-relevant properties such as high-
temperature superconductivity, colossal magnetoresistance, and
magnetoelectricity. Some of these phenomena appear near a quantum critical
point, where electrons tend to organize into self-similar patterns that look the
same at all length scales. The resulting fractal geometries are a hallmark of
quantum criticality and unfold in the form of inhomogeneous electronic textures
with spatially-modulated spin and charge distributions. Imaging these textures
is a pressing experimental challenge, which requires probing a broad range of
length scales. While these electronic orders often escape detection by
conventional diffraction, they can be measured using resonant X-ray scattering.
The recent development of a resonant X-ray nanoprobe (with a spatial resolution
better than 100 nm) offers a unique tool to visualize the nanoscale texture of
electronic orders and reveal emergent charge/spin fractal patterns in quantum
critical solids. Three known quantum critical systems are investigated:
cuprates, nickelates, and chalcogenides, whose electronic phases can be tuned by
doping, pressure/strain, and composition, respectively. The primary goal of this
research is to disclose the fractal nature of the electronic fabric in systems
manifesting distinct forms of electronic orders in the quantum critical regime.
This project is executed in close collaboration with light source facilities,
and fulfils a crucial educational mission geared toward the training of students
and teachers in the field of X-ray science, using in-house and large-scale
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.