* 1751370
* CAREER: Computational Studies of Aromaticity-Modulated Interactions in Supramolecular Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Judy I-Chia Wu, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 02/28/2023
* USD 584,329.00

Hydrogen bonds are weak chemical interactions that, like the "glue" used to
stick items together, can hold many molecules together to create elaborate
chemical structures or to perform sophisticated functions. These interactions
underlie many biological processes (e.g., DNA replication and enzyme catalysis)
which, when artfully mimicked in man-made materials, can have important
applications for biomedical, environmental, and renewable energy fields.
However, factors that influence the strengths of hydrogen bonds (i.e., how
"sticky" they are) in these complex systems remain largely convoluted, making
"copying nature" in man-made materials difficult. In this project, Prof. Judy Wu
and her students at the University of Houston are applying computational tools
to study how hydrogen bonds work in concert in large complex organic molecules.
Her research aims to establish new and useful ways of controlling hydrogen
bonds, and to demonstrate their broader impacts for the discovery of advanced
materials (e.g., gels, plastics, and electronics with novel properties).
Integrated to this project are plans to develop a "Numbers to Insights" student
workshop and web application to help facilitate the exchange of scientific ideas
and findings across computational and experimental chemistry research groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to show that the marriage of two
fundamental chemical concepts, aromaticity and hydrogen bonding, gives rise to
surprising reciprocal effects with important consequences for supramolecular
chemistry. Despite the recognition of hydrogen bonding and aromaticity as
largely separate concepts in organic chemistry, research from the Wu group is
showing that aromaticity can be used to control the strengths of intermolecular
hydrogen bonding interactions through a phenomena called aromaticity-modulated
hydrogen bonding (AMHB). Computational quantum chemical tools are applied to
test the AMHB relationship at the 1) ground and 2) excited states of hydrogen-
bonded molecular recognition units, 3) to investigate how AMHB influences the
self-assembly modes of hydrogen-bonded molecular building blocks, and 4) to
elucidate the role of AMHB in some examples of enzyme catalysis. At the core of
this CAREER project is the vision to bridge discoveries of novel chemical
relationships to their probable impacts in supramolecular
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.