* 1751675
* CAREER: Development of High-Efficiency Ultraviolet Optoelectronics: Physics and Novel Device Concepts
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Jing Zhang, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 02/29/2024
* USD 529,678.00

The objective of this CAREER project is to understand fundamental physics of
semiconductor deep ultraviolet emitters through a comprehensive combined
experimental and theoretical study, and to identify and demonstrate solutions in
the form of novel nanostructures, materials and device concepts for ultraviolet
optoelectronics with significantly improved efficiency. To address the
fundamental issues from III-Nitride semiconductor ultraviolet light emitting
diodes, novel nanostructures, alternative material candidates, and
unconventional ultraviolet optoelectronics will be explored to develop next-
generation high-efficiency ultraviolet light sources that will have significant
impact on the society through applications such as curing of resins and polymers
in 3D printing; phototherapy for medical treatment; agricultural plant lighting;
water/air disinfection; and bio-agent sensing. This project offers educational
training in multidisciplinary areas such as Electrical Engineering, Material
Science, and Physics for both undergraduate and graduate students. The outreach
plan which will be integrated with the research includes involving students from
National Technical Institute for the Deaf, promoting connectivity and
representation of females in engineering, and developing training courses and
demonstrations for K-12 students and teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: This CAREER project aims to realize high-efficiency ultraviolet
photonic devices based on learning and exploiting the fundamentally new aspects
of the physics of photon emission from novel quantum well active region design,
alternative materials, and unconventional device concepts. This research will
focus on in-depth understanding of fundamental physics, a thorough exploration
of light emitting diode device realization, and comprehensive physics-driven
characterizations for designing high-efficiency polarization-dependent
ultraviolet optoelectronics emitting from 300 nm down to 220 nm. In particular,
nanostructured quantum well structures will be proposed and investigated to
address the fundamental issue from conventional III-Nitride ultraviolet
emitters. The novel physics in these extreme quantum structure active regions
will be investigated thoroughly, with the goal of realizing high-efficiency
ultraviolet optoelectronics which involves epitaxial growths, material
characterizations, device fabrications and measurements, coupled with rigorous
theoretical analysis. Alternative material candidates will be explored to serve
as active region for ultraviolet photon emitters as well. Unconventional
ultraviolet optoelectronic device concepts will be developed to shed light on
the pursuit of next-generation high-efficiency ultraviolet light
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.