* 1751568
* CAREER: Computational and Experimental Mechanistic Approach to Iron Catalyst and Reaction Design
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Osvaldo Gutierrez, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2022
* USD 658,873.00

In this CAREER project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp;
Mechanisms B Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Osvaldo Gutierrez of
the Department of Chemistry at the University of Maryland College Park is using
computational and experimental tools to elucidate the mechanisms of iron-
catalyzed carbon bond forming reactions. Carbon bond forming reactions are
important in pharmaceutical and other fine chemical products; However, such
reactions often require the use of rare and expensive metals. Replacement of the
expensive metals in these processes with earth-abundant and non-toxic iron is
the goal of this project. In addition to the research activities, Professor
Gutierrez is piloting a partnership between the University and the nearby Prince
George's Community College to encourage community college students to conduct
hands-on summer research at University of Maryland and to train community
college faculty to use and implement modern computational tools in undergraduate
education. These efforts are further enhanced with the Alliance for Diversity in
Science and Engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge of the mechanisms of
iron-catalyzed processes is rudimentary, thus hindering rational catalyst
design. This hypothesis-driven project focuses on performing mechanistic studies
designed to increase understanding of the factors that control reactivity and
selectivity. in carbon-bond forming reactions. By performing both calculations
and synthesis in one laboratory setting, Professor Osvaldo Gutierrez and his
research team are well positioned to address new developments from both the
computational or experimental sides of the research to gain a far-reaching
picture of the factors controlling product selectivity. Specific research goals
include the use quantum mechanical calculations and chemical synthesis of
mechanistic probes to elucidate the mechanisms of iron-catalyzed carbon-carbon
cross-coupling reactions. The team also seeks to develop predictive models,
based on transition state calculations, of reactivity and selectivity of iron-
catalyzed carbon-carbon double bond functionalization. The researchers also
establish guiding principles for predicting geometry and spin states of diamine
bispyridine iron(II) catalysts. This project may lead to foundational catalyst
design principles for broader applications in catalytic chemical
synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.