* 1751372
* CAREER:  Comparative genomics to reveal form, function and mechanism of splicing across eukaryotes
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2024
* Scott Roy, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 04/30/2024
* USD 868,322.00

The project will investigate a crucial and mysterious aspect of gene expression,
the process by which the information in genes is decoded to produce the
molecules and structures of life. In contrast to bacteria, which have a simple
one-to-one relationship between gene and product, in complex organisms, gene
expression requires large-scale rearrangements that add, remove and combine
information. Such "RNA splicing" is ubiquitous and remarkably diverse across all
complex life, yet it remains almost completely mysterious outside of very few
model organisms. The project will develop bioinformatic software to leverage
available biological sequence data from hundreds of diverse species to: discover
millions of cases of splicing; identify the general form and function of
splicing in each species; and illuminate the molecular processes by which
splicing occurs. By advancing understanding of the outputs and processes of gene
expression, this project will elucidate how organisms function, from ourselves
to countless crops, parasites, pests, and commensal organisms. In addition, the
project will advance training of a diverse and skilled workforce by training
graduate, undergraduate and community college students in biological and
computational sciences at one of our nation's most diverse comprehensive
universities. Finally, the proposed work will support curricular innovation by
integrating cutting-edge bioinformatics research into classroom teaching in
multiple undergraduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arguably the most striking
feature of eukaryotic nuclear gene expression is the ubiquity of RNA processing
by the spliceosome, with most protein-coding transcripts undergoing splicing in
the vast majority of characterized eukaryotic lineages. Spliceosomes remove
ubiquitous gene-interrupting sequences called introns, can facilitate the
production of multiple products from the same gene by alternative splicing, and
can produce novel products by splicing together of transcripts from different
regions of the genome. Despite the importance of splicing, almost nothing is
known about splicing outside of a small number of model organisms. This project
will develop bioinformatic pipelines to leverage available genomic and
transcriptomic data from 300 diverse eukaryotic species to advance knowledge of
splicing across the eukaryotic domain. Specifically, this project will advance
understanding of form, function, mechanism and evolution of splicing by
accomplishing three objectives: (i) the first domain-wide genome-wide
characterization of eukaryotic cis- and trans- splicing events; (ii) the first
domain-wide multi-level study of alternative splicing and trans-splicing; and
(iii) the first domain-wide characterization and comparison of cis- and trans-
factors involved in the mechanism of splicing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
was co-funded by the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences , the
Division of Evolutionary Biology, and the Rules of Life Venture
fund.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.