* 1751317
* CAREER:   Computational and statistical methods for allele-specific chromatin structure analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Wenxiu Ma, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 688,224.00

Three-dimensional (3D) genome organization plays an important role in gene
regulation. One level of this organization consists of DNA wrapped around
histone proteins, and is called the chromatin. High-throughput chromatin
conformation capture methods (one example is called the Hi-C assay) have been
developed, and yield an immense amount of information about 3D genome
organization. However, most current analysis tools cannot distinguish the Hi-C,
or equivalent, information that comes from the paired (homologous) maternal and
paternal chromosomes in diploid organisms (like humans and other mammals). This
means it is not possible to tell if there are different effects arising from the
maternal and paternal copies of genes (the alleles). This project will address
this problem and allow the development of fine-scale, allele-specific chromatin
structures and therefore shed light on the role(s) of chromatin interactions in
allelic gene regulation as well as larger principles of genome organization.
This research will result in novel computational and statistical methods that
combine the analysis of allele-specific chromatin structure with gene expression
regulation; the products will include open-source software tools for 3D genome
modeling, comparison, visualization, and exploration. These software tools will
be made publicly accessible to scientists worldwide. The integrated research and
educational activities include curriculum development for both undergraduate and
graduate courses in subjects including data science, and statistical and
computational genomics. Activities will allow undergraduate students to
participate in the research project, as well as training graduate student
researchers to acquire interdisciplinary expertise. The project will reach out
particularly to middle school students with the goal of engaging young women and
underrepresented minority groups in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to (i) establish a new computational and statistical
framework for modeling the 3D chromatin structures in an allele-specific manner;
(ii) identify structural differences between homologous chromosome pairs; (iii)
investigate the impact of chromatin organization on allelic gene regulation; and
(iv) understand the interplay between genome architecture and gene function. The
project will integrate fine-scale allele-specific chromatin structures with the
currently overwhelming amount of one-dimensional functional genomics data to
discover new allele-specific regulatory elements and features. The project will
elucidate gene regulation principles at an unprecedented resolution, and enhance
our understanding of the interplay between genome architecture and gene
expression. These findings will have fundamental significance in molecular cell
biology, personal genomics, and medicine. Updates and additional information
about this project will be made available at
http://faculty.ucr.edu/~wenxiu/nsf-1751317.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.