* 1751688
* CAREER: Chemical Theory for the Protein Crystal Folding Problem
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Michael Schnieders, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 03/31/2024
* USD 705,521.00

Professor Michael Schnieders of the University of Iowa is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models, and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop new theoretical approaches to predict crystal
structures. Organic molecular crystals play an important role in a range of
fields including chemistry, biochemistry, materials science, pharmacology, and
engineering. One everyday example of organic molecular crystals are
pharmaceutical tablets, which are typically formulated to optimize properties
such as shelf-life (i.e. thermal stability) and solubility (i.e. dissolution
upon ingestion). A perhaps less appreciated role of organic crystals has been
their pivotal impact in understanding the structure and function of biomolecules
(i.e. proteins) via X-ray crystallography experiments. Whereas drug molecules
typically consist of only a few dozen atoms, proteins generally consist of
thousands of atoms whose packing (i.e. 3-dimensional arrangement) is described
by a process called "protein folding". A driving force behind the folding of
proteins is the hydrophobic effect, which is also responsible for the commonly
observed tendency of oil and water to separate. The work in Dr. Schnieder's
group focuses on the rigorous incorporation of all forces that contribute to
protein folding into efficient algorithms for the computational prediction of
peptide and protein crystal structures (polymorphs). The approach combines
advanced models of molecular interactions commonly used to predict small
molecule crystal polymorphs with sophisticated molecular dynamics sampling
algorithms needed to describe protein folding. The impact of this project is to
expand the boundaries of the crystal structure prediction (CSP) field beyond
small organic molecules (i.e. dozens of atoms) to include peptides and proteins
(i.e. hundreds or thousands of atoms). Dr. Schnieder's research is fully
integrated with a three-pronged strategy for educational outreach that
strengthens and further diversifies training in Simulation Based Engineering
&amp; Science (SBE&amp;S). The project's educational plan includes: outreach to
underrepresented high school students to help make computational science fair
projects and creation of a modern Computational Biochemistry course to train
(under)graduates in applying SBE&amp;S methods to fundamental problems in
computational (bio)chemistry. The third aim is the continued dissemination of
open source Force Field X software (http://ffx.biochem.uiowa.edu). Leadership in
SBE&amp;S and high-performance computing (HPC) is of critical importance to the
global competitiveness of the United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Physics-based
protein folding via molecular dynamics (MD) inherently accounts for temperature,
pressure, solvent environment and entropic contributions such as the hydrophobic
effect. On the other hand, nearly all current crystal structure predication
(CSP) approaches perform either a systematic or stochastic search of a potential
energy surface, rather than a free energy surface, followed in limited cases by
approximate inclusion of entropic considerations. The premise of this project is
that a generally applicable solution to the "protein crystal folding problem"
requires efficient inclusion of temperature, pressure and solvent environment
(hydrophobic effect, pH, etc.) during polymorph discovery simulations. Due to
the slow nucleation kinetics of crystallization, ordinary unbiased MD is not
efficient for CSP. To overcome this, a novel family of algorithms are being
developed to help open the door to polymer crystal property prediction. The
first objective focuses on two novel alchemical thermodynamic paths, which do
not require a priori knowledge of the crystalline state and that dramatically
accelerate phase transitions 1) between vacuum and crystalline states (i.e.
sublimation/deposition) and 2) between solvated and crystalline states (i.e.
solubility). Both paths efficiently include the influence of temperature and
pressure, while the latter path additionally includes the influence of the
solvent environment. The second objective focuses on the first constant pH MD
(CpHMD) algorithms for a polarizable force field (e.g. AMOEBA) to account for
protonation changes as a polymer (e.g. a protein or nucleic acid) with numerous
titratable residues folds and/or undergoes a crystalline phase transition.
Beyond the focus of this project on protein crystals, the sampling algorithms
and CpHMD theories are broadly applicable to a range of simulation applications,
including protein-ligand binding, molecular design and refinement of structural
models against experiment (i.e. X-ray and neutron crystallography, CryoEM, NMR,
etc). The project's educational plan includes: 1) outreach to underrepresented
high school students to facilitate computational science fair projects, 2)
creation of a modern Computational Biochemistry course to train (under)graduates
in applying SBE&amp;S methods to fundamental problems in computational
(bio)chemistry, and 3) continued dissemination of the open source Force Field X
software (http://ffx.biochem.uiowa.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.