* 1751173
* CAREER: Probing Crystal Nucleation in Soft Confinement with Molecular Simulation
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Jeremy Palmer, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 03/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Controlling crystal nucleation in liquids is important in applications related
to pharmaceutical processing and designing materials. Crystal growth can be
controlled to desired size, shape, and structure by fine tuning of the local
environment in which nucleation takes place at the molecular level. The goal of
this project is to understand crystal nucleation in liquids confined by soft
hydrogel matrices. The confinement geometry and chemistry within the matrices
may alter nucleation pathways and resulting crystallization. Advanced molecular
simulation techniques will be used to discover the mechanisms by which soft
hydrogel matrices influence crystal nucleation. The educational part of this
project includes the development of a new short course and outreach activities
to K-12 students in the Houston area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
hypothesis will be tested by deploying rare-event molecular simulation
techniques to address three specific aims: (1) to elucidate the mechanisms by
which soft hydrogel matrices influence ice nucleation thermodynamics; (2) to
identify the effects of soft confinement on the crystallization kinetics of
water in hydrogels; (3) to probe the pathways for calcium carbonate
precipitation in polymer brushes with tunable architectures. Free energy methods
will be used to compute nucleation barriers and identify metastable
intermediates, while path sampling algorithms will be employed to characterize
crystallization kinetics and mechanisms. This combination of techniques will
reveal the effects of matrix properties (density, surface chemistry, and
morphology) on nucleation and thereby transform understanding of the physical
processes controlling crystallization in soft matrices. A course focusing on
reproducibility in science will be developed, The Art of Reproducible Science,
and will be taught to graduate and undergraduate students at the University of
Houston and broadly disseminated through online video tutorials. Outreach
activities will be developed to provide K-12 students with opportunities to
learn about research and STEM career paths through participation in the annual
Lemelson-MIT JV InvenTeams program, GRADE summer program for women and
underrepresented minorities, Texas Soft Matter Meeting, and Southwest Catalysis
Society Meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.