* 1751797
* CAREER: Development of a Tissue-Engineered Model of Ischemic Microstroke
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* John Slater, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 02/29/2024
* USD 530,000.00

The role that small volume regions of dead brain tissue (microinfarcts) play in
neurological dysfunction and cognitive impairment is not well understood.
Analysis of dementia patients' brains has linked the presence of numerous and
wide-spread microinfarcts, in some cases thousands in a single brain, to
increased cognitive impairment. Animal studies support this finding. While a
causal link has been established, the cellular, molecular, and physiological
events that occur during small blood vessel stroke and their role in
neurological impairment remain unknown. Performing high-resolution cellular
experiments in humans or animal brains is extremely challenging. To overcome
this limitation, this project focuses on the development and validation of a
tissue-engineered, microfluidic, in vitro, microstroke model that accurately
recapitulates the cascade of events that occur in vivo. Development and
validation of this fluidized, in vitro, microstroke model has the potential to
provide significant insights into the fundamental biological changes induced by
microstrokes. It is envisioned that the biological discoveries achieved with
this model could significantly impact human health and potentially lead to the
development of intelligently designed therapies to treat microstroke and
dementia in future applications. To increase exposure across a broad range of
students, from elementary to undergraduate, an educational plan has been
developed that aims to spark interest in students to pursue science, technology,
engineering and math education through Art in Science Exhibits, hands-on Art in
Science Modules, laboratory research experiences, as well as to incorporating
research in microphysiological systems into existing undergraduate
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on developing and validating a
tissue-engineered, microfluidic, in vitro, microstroke model that can be used to
study the cellular, molecular and physiological events that occur during
microstroke-induced neurological impairment occlusion- and reperfusion-induced
changes. The model overcomes challenges in performing high-resolution,
spatiotemporal cellular/molecular experiments in animal brains. The Research
Plan is organized under 3 specific aims: 1) Quantify the influence of capillary
occlusion and reperfusion on cerebrovascular flow in a 3D synthetic, biomimetic,
vascular network based on a 3D image stack of the vascular system of an entire
mouse brain that was generated by high-resolution imaging, via knife edge
scanning microscopy, of perfused india ink; 2) Quantify the influence of
capillary occlusion and reperfusion on human stem cell derived brain
microvascular endothelial cells (BMECs) and 3) Quantify the influence of
capillary occlusion and reperfusion on microinfarct progression by
spatiotemparally monitoring the progression of a capillary occlusion- and
reperfusion induced microinfarct in hydrogel encapsulated human astrocytes and
neurons. Fulfillment of these aims requires further development and
implementation of advanced biofabrication techniques (two-photon hydrogel
degradation and polymerization), advanced biomaterials (enzymatically-degradable
constructs and semi-synthetic blood clots), and incorporation of differentiated
human neural stem cells (BMECs, astrocytes, and neurons) to create a
microphysiological Ã¬stroke model using all human
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.