* 1751885
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An analysis of the evolution of shape change trajectories using 3D geometric morphometrics
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2019
* Evan Simons, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2019
* USD 9,543.00

In closely related animal species, differences in patterns of growth and
development are often responsible for differences in adult anatomy. This
doctoral dissertation project will study cranial anatomy in a number of primate
species, taking into account trajectories of growth and development, and use
those data to reconstruct the growth and development trajectories of ancestral
species. The project will advance knowledge about primate adaptation and life
history, and will also generate novel shape measurement tools for studying
growth, development and anatomy that will be useful across a number of
biological disciplines. Undergraduate students will participate in the
processing and analysis of shape measurements, thereby teaching them technical
skills in geometric morphometrics, mathematics, and statistical analysis. The
project will also support public science outreach activities to share these
biological concepts and methodological advances with a broader audience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this investigation is to examine how
evolution has shaped craniofacial growth and development to produce the
morphological diversity observed in catarrhines. Geometric morphometric methods
will be used to measure an ontogenetic cranial series of 26 extant catarrhine
species, from which trajectories of ontogenetic shape change will be calculated.
To address ancestral morphologies, this project will reconstruct the cranial
ontogenetic trajectory of the last common ancestor (LCA) of all extant
catarrhines, as well as those of the LCA of cercopithecoids, hominoids, and
hominins, allowing for a comparison of ancestral trajectories with those of
extant taxa. As adult morphologies are largely the product of patterns of growth
and development, these ancestral ontogenetic trajectories will be used to make
determinations about the cranial shapes of adult catarrhine ancestors. This
project will also address the role of cranial size in the production of adult
morphologies through an evaluation of the hypothesis of size as a 'line of least
evolutionary resistance,' whereby size changes may be a first step in adaptation
and diversification, with size responding more quickly than shape to
environmental change. Using the latest advances in phylogenetic comparative
methods, this hypothesis will be tested through direct comparisons of vectors of
ontogenetic shape change in the catarrhine skull, and by examining the
catarrhine phylogeny for rate shifts in the evolution of cranial size and in
cranial size-shape relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.