* 1751664
* CAREER: Experimental Constraints on Carbon-iron Redox Interaction in Earth's Deep Lower Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Susannah Dorfman, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/29/2024
* USD 623,093.00

Earth's deep carbon cycle affects the past, present and future of life on our
planet. Carbon chemistry at depth is responsible for carbon sequestration and
volcanism. The growth of diamonds at depth not only drives an industry, but also
traps and preserves our only samples of Earth's deep interior. Earth's lower
mantle, the Earth's biggest layer, has great capacity for carbon even at very
low concentrations and is thus important to the global carbon budget. The
project will integrate research in the role of the mantle in Earth's deep carbon
cycle with an education plan that includes recruitment of diverse students to
laboratory geoscience and improves teaching of spatial reasoning, a critical
skill for Earth scientists, at Michigan State University (MSU) and beyond. The
whole-Earth carbon cycle is a timely subject well-suited to outreach to attract
students with interest in environmental problems to careers in geosciences.
Short modules on carbon mineralogy and geochemistry will be developed for
gateway courses in geology and global change at MSU. The effectiveness of these
exercises will be assessed in terms of recruitment of undergraduate majors and
developing spatial reasoning skills for geoscience careers. Undergraduate and
graduate research assistants will participate both in the lab and in geoscience
teaching evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary research goal is to
determine the stability of carbon-bearing phases in petrologic context at
conditions of the lower mantle. Depth- and region-dependent differences in
mantle mineralogy and oxygen fugacity (fO2) will result in changes in the
speciation and host phases of carbon within the mantle phase assemblage.
Quantifying the relationship between stability of carbon-bearing phases and
pressure, temperature, redox conditions, and major mineralogy is critical to
understanding the fate of carbon in Earth's interior. Experiments performed in
laser-heated diamond anvil cells will provide some of the first experimental
constraints on carbonate and carbide stability and physical properties in
petrologic context of mantle phase assemblages at pressure-temperature
conditions reaching the Core-Mantle Boundary (CMB). The results of the proposed
experiments will be necessary to an integrated understanding of the origin,
storage, and flux of carbon among a community including geochemists,
cosmochemists, volcanologists, petrologists, mineralogists, and geophysicists.
Earth's carbon cycle and popular interest in diamonds offer an opportunity to
teach and recruit students through coursework and research assistantships. The
education component of this project is a collaboration between the PI and
geocognition expert Dr. Julie Libarkin to develop and evaluate educational
modules incorporating deep carbon context and developing 3D reasoning skills.
Modules will be evaluated by in-class observations, surveys and interviews and
disseminated openly online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.