* 1751608
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Weaned Age Variation and Trace Element Distributions in Primate Teeth
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2018,01/31/2022
* Shannon McFarlin, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 01/31/2022
* USD 20,444.00

For our human ancestors, a shift toward earlier age at weaning may have
contributed to higher reproductive success and population growth. However, the
evolutionary context of this adaptive shift is not fully understood, in part
because of methodological constraints in obtaining evidence of weaning from the
fossil record. This doctoral dissertation project will analyze chemical
signatures preserved in the teeth of wild mountain gorillas to determine how
those signatures may be related to weaning and socioecological factors. Findings
from this project could then serve as a foundation for applying this approach to
the human fossil record. This project will include scientific training and
mentorship of students, including individuals from groups underrepresented in
STEM fields. It will also bolster research collaborations, support public
science outreach and education, and inform ongoing primate conservation efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will test a developing method for
reconstructing the timing of early-life dietary transitions from the
distribution of calcium-normalized strontium and barium intensities in teeth,
and to investigate weaning age variation within a single well-documented wild
population of Virunga mountain gorillas from Volcanoes National Park in Rwanda.
The chemical signature of mountain gorilla food resources will be characterized
in order to provide a context for interpreting variation in enamel and dentine
barium and strontium intensities. Estimated weaned age from trace element
analysis will then be compared to longitudinal records on wild mountain gorilla
diet and suckling. The following questions will be addressed: 1) How well do
trace element distributions in teeth correspond to behavioral observations of
suckling and other metrics for determining weaning age (e.g., interbirth
interval)? and 2) How does the weaning chemical signature vary within a wild
mountain gorilla population? The ability to partner behavioral and chemical data
from individuals in this population represents a unique opportunity to test an
emerging methodology for recovering relatively high resolution evidence of
weaning in the human fossil record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.