* 1751522
* CAREER: Technical &amp; Theoretical Foundations for Photoacoustic-Guided Surgery
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2024
* Muyinatu Bell, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 01/31/2024
* USD 540,000.00

Surgeries of the heart, spine, and brain are currently performed with some
degree of uncertainty about patient-specific subsurface anatomy. For example,
the surgeon must rely on knowledge and experience to avoid critical nerves and
blood vessels that, if injured, will cause patient death or lifelong paralysis.
The proposed work will set the technical and theoretical foundations for rapid
development and deployment of a new class of photoacoustic imaging systems that
overcome this existing limitation of modern surgeries. Specifically, we will
address challenges with defining three fundamental limits to photoacoustic-
guided surgery: (1) laser safety limits for light delivery as close to the
surgical site as possible, (2) image quality limits derived from coherence-based
beamforming theory, and (3) resolution limits when integrating photoacoustic
imaging systems with robots for minimally invasive surgical access. Three core
pillars of the associated education plan (videos, live demonstrations, and
mentorship) synergistically fuse the proposed research with educational goals.
Outreach to K-12 classroom-based and home-schooled children includes hands-on
research demonstrations, online course videos, and the development of a
neighbor-like video series entitled "The Scholar Next Door'', featuring the
Principal Investigator (PI) and her research team to inspire young women and
other underrepresented minorities like the PI. In partnership with the Johns
Hopkins University (JHU) Center for Educational Outreach (CEO), new biomedical
engineering course material will be developed in an online video format to
enhance the CEO's existing Engineering FUNdamentals Program. For advanced
students and trainees, new course material and classroom demonstrations will be
developed to build upon the foundations established by this research. The PI has
a strong history of commitment to one-on-one mentoring of women and
underrepresented minority scholars, and she will continue to maintain this
commitment throughout her career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of
this CAREER proposal is to apply optical analyses, spatial coherence theory, and
independent resolution models to describe fundamental performance limits of
photoacoustic-based navigation during surgery. This objective will be achieved
with three research aims. First (Aim 1), the currently nonexistent limits of
light delivery to bone, heart, and brain tissues will be defined, based on the
combined results of theoretical analyses and experimentation. Second (Aim 2),
novel acoustic beamformers and signal processing methods will be refined and
validated to describe the image quality limits of photoacoustic-based spatial
coherence beamforming theory. Third (Aim 3), a new combined resolution model
will be explored to predict the accuracy limits of integrated robotic-
photoacoustic imaging systems using the da Vinci robot as an initial testbed.
The new knowledge generated by this research will support research in other
areas of optical, acoustic, and robot-assisted medical imaging. Results will be
shared with the general public through "The Scholar Next Door" video series and
with the scientific community through conference presentations and journal
publications. As an African American female professor, the PI has benefited from
outreach programs throughout her career, and she is devoted to diversity efforts
at the K-12, collegiate, and graduate levels. She will assist with the diversity
efforts of the Johns Hopkins University (JHU) Whiting School of Engineering
(WSE), such as recruitment of graduate students at the National Society of Black
Engineers (NSBE) national convention and serving as faculty advisor to the
Graduate Association [of women] in CS &amp; ECE (GRACE). She will partner with
the JHU Center for Educational Outreach (CEO) to create the first video in "The
Scholar Next Door" series and to contribute new biomedical engineering course
material in an online video format to their existing Engineering FUNdamentals
Program. She will also mentor a laboratory team that enhances diversity in her
department and throughout the entire WSE.