* 1751783
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Using natural hybridization to investigate patterns of primate gene regulation
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Jenny Tung, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/29/2020
* USD 31,793.00

Gene regulation affects when, where, and how much a gene is expressed in an
organism. This doctoral dissertation project will study changes in DNA
methylation (a chemical mark on DNA that influences gene expression levels) in
different baboon species, to better understand how changes in DNA methylation
affect gene expression, how DNA methylation has diverged between species, and
the role of natural selection in this process. Differences in how particular
genes are expressed are thought to be important in explaining many differences
among primate species, including some traits that are unique to the human
lineage. Novel data on gene regulation and expression can therefore help to
advance knowledge about the development of our own species. The project will
support student training and mentoring at the K-12, undergraduate, and graduate
levels, and the development and dissemination of interdisciplinary approaches
using genomic methods that can be applied to a number of other fields of
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the effects of genetic
ancestry on DNA methylation by leveraging genetic admixture in 150 adult baboons
from a wild baboon population in Kenya. Admixed individuals (baboons with
ancestry from two distinct but closely related taxa) provide the opportunity to
test how genetic variation from different ancestries influences DNA methylation
when placed in a common environment. Furthermore, because the study population
has been affected by both recent and historical admixture events, it can be used
to test hypotheses about the legacy of archaic hominin admixture with modern
humans. Finally, this project will ask whether between-species differences in
DNA methylation translate to changes in gene expression, testing an important
assumption of models that link DNA methylation to trait
variation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.