* 1751211
* CAREER: Incorporating Geometric Rules and Cost in Topology  Optimization for Efficient Design of Manufacturable and Economically-Viable Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* JULIAN NORATO, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2024
* USD 520,608.00

Topology optimization is a powerful computational aid for exploring novel
structural design concepts without requiring a preconceived shape of the
structure. The resulting designs are highly optimized for their application,
enabling lightweight high-performance structures. However, the designs tend to
have an intricate organic-looking structure making them challenging to
manufacture reliably and economically. Prior attempts to impose manufacturing
constraints during the topology optimization process have had limited success.
Furthermore, current methods cannot directly consider manufacturing costs,
making it difficult for designers to factor in economic objectives or
constraints. This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award
supports fundamental research to formulate the first framework to systematically
incorporate geometric design rules and manufacturing cost in topology
optimization, and to integrate this framework with educational activities that
improve the attitudes of underrepresented minorities towards STEM fields. This
research will enable the conceptual design and optimization of lightweight,
high-performance, and economically-viable structures with applications across a
wide range of engineering industries. The new design capabilities will have the
potential to significantly reduce manufacturing and R&amp;D costs and thereby
increase the economic competitiveness of American manufacturers. This award will
also positively impact underrepresented minorities through an integrated
education plan aimed at increasing student self-efficacy and stimulating their
participation in STEM. The educational program includes an engaging, virtual-
reality based after-school program for middle school students. This program will
also engage and impact K-12 teachers and undergraduate and graduate students,
and it will be a conduit to communicate research outcomes to the wider public
and the research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although topology optimization
is a successful technique for structural design, its impact is limited by
challenges in incorporating manufacturing constrains and economic considerations
into the optimization process. These gaps are rooted in the difficulty to
express many manufacturing-driven geometric requirements in terms of the design
representations used by existing techniques, the discrete nature of some
geometric features, and the fact that manufacturing cost can be a non-smooth
function of the design. This CAREER project will make three major intellectual
contributions to the computational design of structures, namely the coupling of
feature-based design representations with 1) global optimization methods to
escape entrapment in undesired local minima in the presence of many geometric
design rules; 2) discrete optimization methods to accommodate discrete geometric
features; and 3) parametric cost models and non-smooth optimization methods to
incorporate cost in the topology optimization problem. The new techniques will
be validated against benchmarks and demonstrated on engineering problems in
collaboration with industry partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.