* 1751903
* CAREER: Accessory Minerals as Monitors of the Oxidation State of Magmas and Fluids and Enhancing Scientific Literacy Through Active Education
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Dustin Trail, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 04/30/2024
* USD 511,525.00

In almost all cases, we cannot directly measure key variables that control the
properties of magmas and fluids inside the Earth. They are not directly
accessible due to their depth of formation, or because these magmas have long
since solidified, leaving behind minerals. Thus, the chemistry of the resulting
minerals need to be used as proxies, to determine the physical and chemical
characteristics of these magmas and fluids. One key variable that remains poorly
explored in the accessory group of minerals (e.g., zircon, monazite, and
apatite) is the oxygen "pressure" of the magma or fluid from which they
crystallized. The goal of this research is to calibrate and understand how the
chemistry of these minerals changes in response to changes in the oxygen
pressures. These calibrations will take place in a laboratory setting enabling
the synthesis of minerals under precision-controlled conditions. Such
experiments will serve as stepping stones to explore the formation environment
of natural minerals. The accessory minerals zircon, monazite, and apatite are
specifically targeted because they are excellent recorders of absolute time.
This is so because they structurally accommodate radioactive elements such as
uranium and thorium. Thus, changes in the oxygen pressure of a magma can, for
example, be explored as a function of time. Oxygen pressure is an important
variable in Earth studies because it influences mineral saturation and stability
(including economically important minerals) and the viscosity of magmas. Because
of this, quantifying the oxygen pressure of past systems, including ancient
volcanic systems, will lead to new knowledge to that may help explain why
volcanoes erupt. Second, the types of volatiles present during an eruption
depends on oxygen pressure, and meaning that magmatic outgassing throughout
Earth history has partially influenced the composition of our atmosphere. Third,
this research will explore the stability of these minerals in the presence
oxidized fluids. Monazite, for instance, is a major host of light rare earth
elements, thorium, and uranium in the crust. Understanding the stability and
solubility of this mineral will also help researchers explore the mobility of
these key heat producing and economically important elements (rare earth
elements are found in almost all modern electronics manufactured today). And
finally, minerals (zircons) older than 4 billion years represent a key target
for application because rocks from this time period are either sparse or
altogether absent. This work will therefore result in new knowledge about the
environments and conditions that may have prevailed on the earliest Earth.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Oxygen fugacity buffered experiments will be conducted in
piston cylinder devices at the University of Rochester. In many cases,
experimental products will be analyzed by a Laser Ablation Inductively Couple
Plasma Mass Spectrometer (LA-ICP-MS; also at the University of Rochester) by the
PI, graduate, and undergraduate students. This will provide key training for
undergraduates and graduate students in techniques involved in mineral synthesis
and mass spectrometry, with applications that extend well beyond the
geology/mineralogy field. (LA)-IPC-MS instruments have been used in medical
research, biology, chemistry, and materials science, so students will come away
with a useful skill set applicable across the STEM fields. In addition, students
will receive training in X-ray Absorption Near Edge Structure (XANES)
techniques; this work will be undertaken at the Advanced Photon Source, Argonne
National Laboratory. The practical training will result in a broad skill set,
highly applicable to many areas within and outside the geosciences. The broader
impacts of this project come from several activities that implement active
learning. This award will enable a partnership with NSF-Funded Noyce program
awarded to the Warner School of Education at the University of Rochester. The PI
will work with selected K-12 math and science teacher fellows in high-need urban
districts in upstate New York - current graduate rates are below 50% - to
increase science literacy, to create a better understanding of the different
manners in which people learn, to expose teachers to new and evolving methods of
teaching, and to create learning experiences that are more interesting,
meaningful, and effective for their students. And finally, the PI will design a
new course to explore teaching strategies that have been demonstrated to be
effective when compared to a traditional lecture. The course will also be built
around a research problem identified in this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.