* 1751277
* CAREER: Building IO-Efficient Systems Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Vijaychidambara Pillai, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 08/31/2023
* USD 550,000.00

The amount of digital information being generated doubles every
two&lt;br/&gt;years. As a result, storage systems have to handle an ever
increasing&lt;br/&gt;amount of data each day. Data is often stored on solid
state&lt;br/&gt;drives(SSDs)for good performance. Unfortunately, SSDs have a
limited&lt;br/&gt;lifetime and will fail after a certain number of writes.
Anticipated future&lt;br/&gt;storage technologies such as Intel 3D XPoint also
have limited&lt;br/&gt;lifetime. Unfortunately, current storage systems have
high&lt;br/&gt;input/output (IO) amplification: 100 gigabytes written to
the&lt;br/&gt;widely-used RocksDB key-value store will result in 2.7 terabytes
(28x)&lt;br/&gt;written to storage. Solving the problem of storage failure due
to IO&lt;br/&gt;amplification is crucial to building storage systems of the
future&lt;br/&gt;that can handle the exponentially increasing amount of
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to build IO-Efficient
systems&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure that drastically reduces the amount of writes
to&lt;br/&gt;storage without compromising on performance. To achieve this
goal,&lt;br/&gt;this project contributes new data structures, techniques, and
designs&lt;br/&gt;of storage systems. Taking an end-to-end approach, this
project&lt;br/&gt;redesigns each layer of the storage stack, including key-value
stores,&lt;br/&gt;transactional stores, and file systems, while tuning the
underlying&lt;br/&gt;storage device to reduce IO
amplification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will significantly impact
academia by advancing the&lt;br/&gt;state-of-the-art, industry through
technology transfer, students via&lt;br/&gt;courses and projects, and the
general public by providing better&lt;br/&gt;open-source storage systems.
Undergraduate and graduate students will&lt;br/&gt;be trained in the careful
analysis and building of advanced storage&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure. This project
will encourage the participation of women&lt;br/&gt;and other under-represented
minorities in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All software artifacts related to
this project will be maintained at&lt;br/&gt;the project
website&lt;br/&gt;(http://www.cs.utexas.edu/~vijay/io-efficient-infra.htm) for
the&lt;br/&gt;lifetime of this project. All storage systems developed as part
of&lt;br/&gt;this project will be open-sourced, with sufficient documentation
to&lt;br/&gt;enable ease-of-use. Other tools and benchmarks
developed&lt;br/&gt;during the course of this project will also be made publicly
available&lt;br/&gt;in text form for easy processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.