* 1751941
* CAREER: Optimal Engineering Decision-making Under Uncertainties for Enhanced Structural Life-cycle
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Konstantinos Papakonstantinou, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award is
to advance innovation in optimal engineering decision-making under uncertainty
and risks, with a focus on life-cycle analysis and structural applications, in
order to address ongoing and emerging scientific and societal challenges
relevant to the aging infrastructure environment. An integrated structural life-
cycle analysis, design, maintenance, retrofit and recovery framework is thus
suggested in this project with the aim to reduce infrastructure life-cycle
costs, optimize societal investments to infrastructure, lead to safer structures
and assist in improving national security and economic competitiveness. Apart
from structural engineering applications that is the main focus of the project,
the findings can be also used for a plethora of applications involving
intelligent, automated, autonomous decision support frameworks. This project
will also educate the next diverse generation of engineers and scientists, who,
in addition to other skills, need increased computational competence. The
planned activities impact a wide audience including school students and
teachers, undergraduate and graduate students, researchers, faculty and
practicing engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, engineering
decision-making is suggested to be approached from a stochastic optimal control
and reinforcement learning perspective, embracing and fully integrating
predictive physics-based stochastic models and uncertain life-cycle
observations. Owing to the vital role of decision-making in engineering
problems, this viewpoint leads to condition-based estimation rules for
structural systems and an enhanced new meaning of performance-based analysis.
The traditional approach to structural design, analysis, retrofit, recovery and
maintenance is also reconsidered, from a conventional static optimization
problem to an integrated lifelong controlling process of ever changing
structures. The central stochastic control component is based on fully and
Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes, asynchronous dynamic programming
and deep reinforcement learning techniques. Several theoretical pursuits and
advances are needed to enable such a decision-making approach to aging
structures and infrastructure systems in the presence of risks and
uncertainties. In this project, answers to main challenges will be investigated,
such as the curses of dimensionality and history, together with solutions for
multiple objectives and decision makers, incorporation of nonlinear filtering,
structural reliability updating, and generalized fragility functions, among
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.