* 1751765
* AF: EAGER: Homomorphism Problems in Digraphs (Dichotomies)
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2017,03/31/2022
* Geoffrey Exoo, Indiana State University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 03/31/2022
* USD 141,056.00

Graph coloring is one of the most important problems in theoretical computer
science. Many combinatorial optimization problems can be viewed as graph
coloring problems. For a given graph G and integer k, the question is whether
there exists a coloring of its vertices with k colors such that any two adjacent
vertices receive different colors. The Graph (or Directed Graph) Homomorphism
Problem is a generalization of graph coloring. In the Graph Homomorphism
Problem, the goal is to find a mapping from an input graph (or digraph) to a
fixed target graph (or digraph) H that preserves
adjacency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Homomorphism problems, and the equivalent
formulation as so-called constraint satisfaction problems (CSPs), enjoy a wide
variety of applications as optimization problems that must be solved in
practice. Such applications can be seen in scheduling, planning, databases,
artificial intelligence, and many other areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Digraph
Homomorphism Problem and CSPs have been two very active research areas in
Theoretical Computer Science over the last two decades. Several tools (mostly
algebraic) have been developed for solving CSPs, and very recently a number of
proposed solutions (including our solution) to the main conjecture in the area
(known as the CSP Conjecture) have arisen. The present project aims to verify in
detail each approach to distill the most elegant proof and most efficient
algorithms. The approach is purely combinatorial, using techniques from graph
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will also tackle problems closely
related to the newly proposed solutions to the CSP Conjecture. For example, the
PIs seek forbidden obstruction characterizations for the types of digraphs H
that make homomorphism problems feasible. This would help to improve the running
time of the current algorithm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims also to
have a high educational impact, through training graduate students in
theoretical computer science, producing &lt;br/&gt;freely available and high
quality lecture notes and survey material on the field, seeking connections
between the research and other important areas of research across computing, and
utilizing novel teaching and dissemination methods.