* 1751075
* CAREER: Towards a Marketplace of Networked Services for the Next Billion Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Carlee Joe-Wong, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 05/31/2024
* USD 596,656.00

Multitudes of devices like vehicles and sensors have recently acquired both
Internet connectivity and significant computing power. Much networking research
today aims to harness these devices to enable new, cross-device user
applications. For instance, external sensors may use cellular and Wi-Fi networks
to send measurements to a group of smartphones running augmented reality
applications; these smartphones can then work together to analyze the sensor
data and display the right information to their users. However, applications can
only make use of multiple devices if the device owners agree to cooperate with
each other. The goal of this work is to enable cross-device applications by
developing mechanisms that incentivize such cooperation. The findings from this
project will be integrated into an education plan that emphasizes the role of
user and application needs in shaping the evolution of Internet-based
technologies. This plan includes developing new undergraduate and graduate
courses and short workshop courses for middle and high school students that
encourage girls to enter engineering fields. The researcher will incorporate the
findings in online blog posts aimed at the general public, and will pursue
industry collaborations and outreach to interdisciplinary research
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work has two main objectives: (1)
to derive algorithms for devices to optimally buy and sell bandwidth and
computing resources, and (2) to analytically characterize the resulting
marketplace outcomes in terms of the benefit to participating devices. It will
be divided into three research thrusts that each address both objectives. First,
a simple type of marketplace is considered, in which devices can be either users
or providers. User devices decide whether to subscribe to bandwidth or computing
resources from one or more provider devices. Second, a more dynamic marketplace
is considered, in which users can dynamically negotiate for bandwidth and
computing resources from providers, depending on their specific needs over time.
The third research thrust builds on the user and provider strategies from the
first two thrusts, and considers devices that can dynamically decide whether to
act as users and providers, so as to maximize their benefits from participating
in bandwidth and computing resource marketplaces. Each research thrust will
result in new models, theorems, and decision algorithms that account for the
dynamics and inter-dependencies of users' bandwidth and computing resource
needs. Small-scale human subject experiments and large-scale virtual test-bed
experiments will be used to validate the theoretical
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.