* 1751591
* CAREER: Towards Fatigue Behavior Prediction of Structural Materials through Computationally-Informed Textural and Microstructural Characteristics
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Timothy Truster, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2024
* USD 595,365.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project will integrate
mechanics of deformations at multiple length scales to discover how the
microstructure of a metal influences the distribution of local stress (force
over nominal area) that drive failure under cyclic loading. Failure of
structural materials by fatigue -- the accumulation of damage under cyclic
loading -- remains one of the major challenges in mechanics and materials
science. Crucially, the mechanisms through which applied mechanical loading
distributes between regions called grains within the microstructure are not
fully understood. The novelty of the computational approach to be used in this
project is to explicitly target the grain boundaries, which will inherently
connect multiple scales relevant to fatigue crack nucleation and growth.
Knowledge of the correlations between the microstructure and fatigue crack
driving forces will enable tailored material design. Recent advances in additive
manufacturing technology have enabled control of microstructure during material
deposition. This research will yield a theoretical and computational framework
for designing structural components to capitalize on this flexible manufacturing
technology. Thus, the research will advance national health, prosperity,
welfare, and defense, while progressing science. The research outcomes of the
project will be integrated with specific K-12 and underrepresented minority
outreach activities as well as support foundational research in vectors
education. Making physics concepts easier will empower students to succeed and
bring new perspectives to their future STEM careers. Curriculum enhancements
will directly impact courses at the 11th grade up to graduate level; broader
impact is achieved through teaching new pedagogies to
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to advance the
understanding of microstructural and textural influences on fatigue behavior of
polycrystalline materials by understanding how stress applied at the bulk scale
is redistributed at the grain scale. The primary research objective is to
discover how grain interactions, called the neighborhood effect, influence the
distribution of local stresses that drive fatigue crack nucleation and growth.
The novel approach involves decomposing the balance of forces and displacement
jumps along grain boundaries into contributions from the granular uniform field
(mesoscale) and fluctuation field (microscale). A multi-resolution Discontinuous
Galerkin method is developed to measure the neighborhood effect that is ideally-
suited for capturing discontinuities along grain boundaries, allowing
contributions from mesoscale and microscale to be distinguished but not having
to be separated. Hypotheses are pursued to reveal the relative zone of influence
of mesoscale versus microscale stress components, thereby elevating the
empirical nature of fatigue threshold design to account for microstructural and
textural features that increase resistance to small crack growth. Insight as to
how these local effects propagate through the microstructure and affect material
fatigue would provide a better understanding of why some flaws nucleate cracks
while others do not. This project launches the PI towards becoming a national
leader in the prediction of engineering scale fatigue properties for
polycrystalline structural materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.