* 1751450
* CAREER: Dynamics in Nanostructured Polymer Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Daniel Hallinan, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/29/2024
* USD 572,754.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer membranes are
potential sustainable solutions for important societal needs, such as energy
storage and clean water. The materials studied in this project have complex
structure on small scales that result in unique properties on much larger scales
not seen in materials without such structure. The underlying cause is not well
understood. The most significant potential impact of the proposed work is
fundamental understanding of polymer physics related to the effect of molecular
tethering and interface softness on local dynamics, as well as the nature of
collective dynamics of interfaces and larger structures and how these processes
impact membrane properties. This understanding will be achieved by designing new
materials, conducting advanced experiments at national laboratories and in the
PI's lab, and using theory. Since nanostructures are pervasive in many advanced
functional soft materials, this understanding and the experimental techniques
being developed can be extended to a broad range of other materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This knowledge will help address limitations of existing
nanostructured polymeric materials and improve performance and durability in
many technological applications, such as membrane-based separations, food
packaging, battery electrolytes, and capacitor dielectrics. This project also
serves the nation by training a diverse team of graduate and undergraduate
students through their participation in the advanced research effort and
educational outreach to middle-school students. The project's educational goal
of increasing diversity in the polymer and engineering communities will begin at
a local level but be designed for implementation nationally. The knowledge
generated by the research will be incorporated into the curriculum taught by the
PI, and the outreach program will be documented for replication at other
universities and broadly disseminated through scientific journals and
conferences. The impact of the integrated research and educational efforts on
increasing diversity in long-term STEM careers will be evaluated with surveys
and tracking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main research objective of this CAREER project
is to develop a deeper understanding of the dynamics of strongly-segregated
block copolymers (BCPs) across a broad range of length and time scales.
Strongly-segregated block copolymers form predictable nanostructures with sharp
interfaces, and they decouple small molecule transport from mechanical
properties. The underlying causes of this decoupling are not well understood.
Interfacial effects associated with tethering and/or confinement could be
responsible for modifying the properties of each phase. On the other hand,
properties like low-frequency elasticity can emerge from the structure itself.
Only limited effort has been dedicated to understanding dynamics in strongly
segregated BCPs, especially on length scales comparable to the size of the
nanostructures. First, X-ray photon correlation spectroscopy (XPCS) will be used
to interrogate on such length scales across a wide range of time scales to
measure structural dynamics such as grain rotations and surface waves. Second,
the effect of tethering on local (segmental) dynamics will be achieved using
selective deuteration and neutron spin echo spectroscopy, complemented by
dielectric spectroscopy. Third, the connection among dynamics on local and
mesoscopic length scales with macroscopic properties will be investigated.
Mechanical, rheological, and small-molecule transport properties will be
evaluated. Experiments will be performed on a glass-rubber block copolymer with
mechanical contrast and on a rubber-rubber block copolymer without mechanical
contrast in order to differentiate BCP grain motion from surface waves. The
effect of interface softness on local segment dynamics will also be evaluated.
In addition to examining the effect of the mechanical contrast, composition and
processing will be used to examine the effect of morphology and grain size on
dynamics. Experimental measurements of structural dynamics will be analyzed in
the context of the Soft Glassy Rheology model, segmental dynamics in the context
of Rostiashvili's theory of polymer dynamics, and macroscopic properties in the
context of several theories including effective medium theory. Fundamental
understanding of how dynamics is transmitted across such a wide range of length
and time scales will enable intelligent design of nanostructured polymeric
materials with enhanced decoupling of important, application-specific
properties, such as permeability and toughness. The research effort is
integrated with an educational effort to impact diversity in STEM through
teaching, mentoring, and educational outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.