* 1751770
* CAREER: Robust Geometric Design of Mechanisms for Interaction with Uncertain Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Nina Robson, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Many tasks are difficult to automate due to high levels of uncertainty in key
task details, such as the shape or size of an object to be manipulated or the
operating environment. Even when it is possible to design a robotic system to
complete such a task, the resulting system can be too costly and/or lack the
robustness required for industrial use. For example, produce picking remains a
labor-intensive endeavor for the agriculture industry because variability in the
operating environment and fragility of the produce have thus far prevented the
design of an economical mechanized solution. Other examples can be found in
numerous industries, including semiconductor manufacturing, healthcare and
biomedical engineering. This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER)
award supports fundamental research to advance mechanical systems design in this
setting. The research will lead to a new geometric design methodology that
results in robust mechanical systems and motion paths for uncertain operating
environments and manipulating uncertain objects. Research outcomes will advance
national health and prosperity by impacting industries such as manufacturing,
agriculture and healthcare. An innovative educational program will create a
cross-disciplinary research-oriented course for lower division undergraduates at
a Minority Serving Institution, engage female high school students through a
robotics-themed summer program and develop activities to facilitate the transfer
of underrepresented community college students to four-year engineering
degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award applies robust geometric design
principals to mechanical systems to explain complex motion in mechanism-
object/environment interaction and uncertainty: two critical foci not explicitly
captured in existing design methodologies. In this context, uncertainty refers
to variations in the object/environment geometry and/or in the realizable
mechanism motion paths. The results will yield a novel framework for the design
of mechanisms for interaction with uncertain objects/environments. This will be
accomplished through a general mechanism-environment contact geometric model
formulation and its validation. The design framework will be assessed through
designing and experimentally testing industry-related showcase prototypes in the
areas of mechanical and biomedical engineering. The central hypothesis is that
incorporating mechanism-environment interaction and uncertainty conditions into
the design task formulation results in a robust design methodology that is
better than existing approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.