* 1751912
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Quantifying the Costs of Human Reproduction using the 'Epigenetic Clock'
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2018,10/31/2021
* Calen Ryan, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 10/31/2021
* USD 31,205.00

Research on non-human species suggests that female reproduction may come at a
cost to maintaining and repairing the body, affecting both health and lifespan.
Studies using historical records suggest a similar 'cost of reproduction' in
human females, but are often confounded by unmeasured social and environmental
factors that obscure causal relationships between reproduction and lifespan.
This doctoral dissertation project will use a new measure of 'epigenetic age' to
better understand these life history trade-offs in humans. By examining both
reproduction and epigenetic age at several time points in a woman's life, social
and environmental effects on aging can be accounted for, yielding a clearer
picture of the costs of reproduction. Uncovering the molecular pathways
responsible for costs of reproduction in women could inform new strategies for
diagnosing and treating age-related diseases. This project will also support
graduate student training and long-term research
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will analyze data for 195
women who are part of the Cebu Longitudinal Health and Nutrition Survey to test
whether those who have had more pregnancies show signs of more rapid biological
aging during a 13-year period. The number of children, their sex, size, and
birth spacing - as well as energy allocated to breastfeeding - will be
calculated over the women's peak reproductive lives, and compared to the pace
change in each woman's epigenetic age. Epigenetic age is calculated by counting
chemical modifications made to DNA, and is a strong predictor of negative health
outcomes and mortality across multiple populations. The researchers will also
examine the relationship between reproduction and epigenetic age among 155 older
women, for whom they will combine these data with a separate, comprehensive
survey of age-related decline. This will be the first study to examine the
effect of reproduction on epigenetic age in females, and will provide an
important foundation for future studies aimed at clarifying the links between
reproduction and late life outcomes in humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.