* 1751529
* CAREER: Characterizing Nanoparticle Surface Interactions using Dissolution Dynamic Nuclear Polarization-Enhanced Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Leah Casabianca, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 04/30/2024
* USD 575,000.00

This CAREER award, supported by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in
the Division of Chemistry with co-funding from the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), enables Professor Leah Casabianca and
her group at Clemson University to develop new methods (based on Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy) for determination of the structure of
biologically-relevant molecules interacting with the surface of nanoparticles.
NMR is a powerful technique for determining the structure of molecules,
including bond angles and distances not available through any other technique.
Dr. Casabianca's work is important for understanding how nanoparticles behave
when they enter the body, which is increasingly relevant as the use of
nanoparticles in medicine and consumer products increases. The Casabianca group
is using a combination of experimental solution-state NMR techniques, computer
modeling, and innovative methods to improve the sensitivity of NMR and Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (MRI) to determine the structure of peptides and proteins
interacting with nanoparticle surfaces. The integrated educational aims of this
work seek to increase the number of female and minority students in South
Carolina who are excited about using computer science to solve problems in
chemistry. This is being addressed by developing an undergraduate computational
chemistry course, introducing computer programming into the junior-level quantum
mechanics course, and creating fun and exciting lessons incorporating MRI and
computer science for summer camps for middle-school
girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NMR is not ideally suited for surface studies due to
its low sensitivity. To address this issue, the Casabianca lab is using Dynamic
Nuclear Polarization (DNP) to enhance the NMR signal of nuclei near the
nanoparticle surface. They are calibrating the distance dependence of
polarization transfer from a nanoparticle surface to nearby nuclei and creating
DNP-enhanced nanoparticle tracers for MRI. Broader impacts of this research will
derive from the development of NMR methods for understanding interactions at the
nanoparticle surface, which can be applied to nanoparticles used in applications
such as drug delivery, catalysis, contrast agents, and biosensors. Broader
impacts of the educational plan include increasing the number of female and
minority students in South Carolina who are interested in computational
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.