* 1751844
* CAREER: Resiliency of Electric Power Networks under Wind Loads and Aging Effects through Risk-Informed Design and Assessment Strategies
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Alice Alipour, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2024
* USD 798,416.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award is
to advance the scientific knowledge underlying the design and assessment of
transmission line systems, with the goal of increasing the resiliency of
electric power networks (EPNs) under windstorm and aging effects. The need for
improving EPN resiliency is underscored by the surge in the extent and number of
power outages due to the increasing frequency and intensity of extreme weather
events such as hurricanes and blizzards. The failure of aging EPN-supporting
infrastructures, particularly during these weather events, can lead to
widespread service disruptions, delays in emergency response, and significant
economic losses. This research will have significant broader impacts on national
prosperity and welfare, i.e., community and regional resiliency, as it will
address the growing national need for the resilient design of critical civil
infrastructures, such as EPNs, over their expected service life. The research
will investigate the key attributes contributing to the resiliency of a
transmission system within an EPN and will develop a robust, risk-informed
design methodology to increase this resiliency. This will be achieved through a
systematic incorporation of the physical performance assessment of individual
transmission line components into a network-level functionality analysis. The
project will include an integrated research and education plan, to train the
next generation of natural hazards engineers and researchers, consisting of the
following elements: (1) interactive educational components for high school
students to foster their interest in the field of natural hazard engineering,
(2) new curricula to prepare future engineers for the design and management of
resilient infrastructures, (3) activities, including a multi-tiered mentoring
program, to recruit and retain women and underrepresented minority students in
the field of natural hazard engineering, and (4) university-industry
partnerships to advise the research strategy and facilitate implementation of
the research findings. Data from this project will be archived and shared in the
NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) Data
Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
outcomes will foster a paradigm shift for the design of EPNs, which are
recognized as one of the most critical spatially distributed infrastructure
systems. With a multiple threat perspective (windstorm and aging effects), the
project will contribute to enhancing the resiliency of EPNs at both component
and system levels. This will be achieved by: (1) fundamental advances in high-
fidelity computational models supported by large-scale experimental testing, (2)
investigation of uncertainties associated with changes in loading demand (due to
extreme weather events) and structural capacity (due to aging mechanisms), (3)
characterization of cascading effects at multiple tiers from a component failure
to a network outage, (4) development of metamodels for EPNs under regional
natural hazards and environmental stressors, and (5) integration of a system
reliability analysis into an optimization platform to capture the consequences
of possible failures and adjust the design requirements accordingly. The project
will use the NSF-supported NHERI Wall of Wind facility at Florida International
University for the experimental work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.