* 1751296
* CAREER:   Uncovering mechanisms that shape variation in how males and females differ in their gene expression
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Rita Graze, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Paco Moore
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,092,468.00

Males and females often differ in appearance, as well as in less visible traits
like how they respond to stress or how they age. These differences are largely
explained by differences in how males and females express genes: how each sex
uses the information in the genome to produce RNA and proteins. This type of
difference in gene expression is thought to evolve as a result of genetic
conflict - expression of a gene in the same way in both males and females could
benefit one sex while having harmful effects in the other. Differences between
males and females in gene expression can resolve such conflicts by allowing each
to express a gene in a way that is beneficial for itself. In addition,
differences in expression could even be fine-tuned to maximize the benefit
according to the organism's environment. However, little is currently known
about the molecular causes of differential gene expression between males and
females, how it varies, and how it affects traits. This project focuses on
differential expression in hormone signaling and looks at its genetic and
environmental variation. It connects expression differences to reproductive
traits and survivorship in typical and stressful environments. It will also test
whether hormone signaling can resolve genetic conflict between the sexes. The
project includes outreach and educational programs that will increase student
awareness of and skills in research science in the areas of genomics, evolution
and computational biology. A free summer science educational enrichment program
for gifted students from underrepresented backgrounds in Alabama and Georgia
will be run, supporting opportunities for these students and their teachers to
engage in a summer research experiences at Auburn University. Also, work related
to the project will be integrated into course-based undergraduate research
experiences for Auburn University undergraduates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
work in the model organism Drosophila has shown that even under standardized
conditions, the number and identity of genes that differ in expression between
the sexes can vary substantially across genotypes. Similar changes are observed
in response to environmental perturbations. These sex differences may also be
modified by the nutrient and stress sensing insulin signaling pathway - one of
three major, interconnected, hormone signaling pathways that regulate many
fitness-related traits in adult insects. This project addresses challenges in
understanding sex-differential expression and its evolution by focusing on a
single type of conflict, intralocus conflict, and a single set of pathways that
regulate sexually dimorphic traits, the insulin and ecdysone hormone signaling
pathways. Genetic and environmental variability will be assessed and used to
relate sex-differences in expression to sex-differences in fitness-related
traits for individual alleles of sex-differentially expressed genes.
Transcriptomic analyses of expression variation among outbred genotypes will be
combined with molecular-genetic and environmental perturbations in a novel way.
Allele-specific expression studies will be connected to allele-specific assays
of fitness-related traits and combined with population genomic studies focused
on the cis regulatory regions responsible for hormone regulation, as well as
protein coding regions of hormone signaling regulated genes. While there is
considerable diversity in sex determination mechanisms across taxa, the insulin-
signaling pathway is widely conserved, as is steroid hormone signaling through
nuclear receptor superfamily members. The knowledge that will be gained as a
result of this project will therefore be broadly important for a mechanistic
understanding of sexual conflict and the origins of sexual dimorphism,
especially with respect to the role of environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.