* 1751064
* CAREER: Functionality-Enhanced Devices for Extending Moore's Law
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2023
* Pierre-Emmanuel Gaillardon, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2023
* USD 508,292.00

This CAREER project intends to develop high-energy-efficiency computing systems
by making a more "useful" elementary device rather than only focusing on its
performances. This enables addressing the critical scientific question of "How
can we keep pushing computing performance limits"?. For more than four decades,
the semi-conductor ecosystem answered the demand for higher levels of
performance by manufacturing devices with increasingly small dimensions.
Nevertheless, there is still the largely unexplored route of increasing the
basic switching primitive of the elementary transistors, i.e., enhancing their
functionality rather than focusing only on reducing their size and/or improving
their performances. This project is also relevant from an industrial
perspective, as it proposes novel solutions to push device and systems
performance without overextending investments to reach an ever-larger degree of
integration. More importantly, this CAREER project (i) will involve
graduate/undergraduate students tackling research on problems that are directly
relevant for industry, ultimately boosting their employability, and (ii) will
develop a scientific popularization YouTube channel as a mechanism to increase
interest and broaden the participation of K-12 students by capitalizing on their
online curiosity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to developing
novel computing systems exploiting Three-Independent-Gate Field Effect
Transistors (TIGFETs), a novel device technology capable of device-level
functionalities typically not achievable by standard CMOS and leading to major
benefits at gate and circuit levels. A TIGFET can, depending on its usage,
achieve three totally unique modes of operations: (i) the dynamic
reconfiguration of the device polarity; (ii) the dynamic control of the
threshold voltage; and (iii) the dynamic control of the subthreshold slope
beyond the thermal limit. In order to fully assess the potential of this
technology, this CAREER project will (1) fabricate, characterize and model
TIGFETs using advanced semi-conductor materials, (2) develop a complete design
framework for TIGFETs, including a design kit, novel circuit primitives and
dedicated design tools, and (3) evaluate TIGFET-enabled low-energy high-
precision neural network computing kernels.