* 1751841
* CAREER: Biophysical Mechanisms Underlying the Generation of Tissue Structure and Mechanics
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Karen Kasza, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) research will develop new
knowledge related to the structure and mechanics of living tissues and will
train engineers to participate in bioengineering using targeted educational
activities. The activities of genes direct the formation of tissues and organs
but the proper shape, structure, and mechanical properties of the tissues are
also guided by internal and external loading during development. It is known
that abnormal tissue properties occur along with birth defects and cancer, but
the extent that the abnormalities are genetic or occur from aberrant mechanical
loads isn't known. It remains poorly understood how the mechanical and genetic
factors work together to build normal tissues. The research will build an
improved understanding of the underlying causes of birth defects and cancer by
separating genetic from mechanical effects in tissue development. The work is an
essential step toward the development of therapies to prevent or treat these
diseases. The novel tools to control genetic expression and internal cell
loading may also enable new strategies for tissue engineering and regenerative
medicine, contributing to the progress of science and to the advancement of
national health. The educational goal is to engage students from a variety of
backgrounds in research. Ihe research will be integrated into: (1)opportunities
for underrepresented minority high school students through the Columbia
Engineering E.N.G. program; (2) career development and summer research mentoring
for undergraduate women through the Columbia Engineering Summer@SEAS Program;
and (3)a new course on Morphogenesis: shape and structure in biological
materials aimed at introducing upper level undergraduate and graduate
engineering students to research at the interface between mechanics and
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will study several mechanics-based
questions about the construction of tissues and organs, specifically how
actomyosin-based tension is transduced through cadherin-based cell-cell contacts
to regulate epithelial tissue morphogenesis. Three objectives are planned and
include: (1) testing how tissue structure is controlled by forces, (2)
determining the cellular rearrangements that drive cell shape changes, and (3)
studying how these changes affect tissue mechanics. The research will advance
fundamental understanding of how mechanical factors couple with biological
factors to build and shape living tissues, filling a gap in our understanding of
the role that mechanics plays in translating genotype to phenotype during
development. The research will utilize the model organism Drosophila
melanogaster and combine biomechanical and confocal imaging studies with
systematic optogenetic manipulation of cellular force generation and mechanics
in order to determine how tension generated by cellular actomyosin contractility
and adhesion mediated by E-cadherin at cell-cell contacts control epithelial
tissue shape, structure, and mechanics during embryonic
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.