* 1751385
* CAREER: Linking Lateral Cell Polarity with Tissue Patterning in Plant Development
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2023
* Jaimie Van Norman, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 03/31/2023
* USD 1,166,734.00

Cell division and specialization are essential processes in the growth and
development of multicellular organisms. In comparison to animal systems, there
is limited mechanistic insight into how plants modulate cell division and
specialization with respect to cell polarity. Cell polarity is defined as
asymmetry in any aspect of development or physiology along a single axis and
asymmetric protein localization is a frequent attribute of polarized cells.
Previously a set of receptor kinases was identified that display polar
localization in various cell types and have roles in development. These proteins
provide a novel set of conceptual and molecular tools to investigate cell
polarity in plants. The goals of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
project is to study the links between cell polarity and development and to
integrate active research modules designed to improve engagement and retention
of undergraduate students in biology. These modules will be conducted in a
laboratory course in which students will engage in authentic research and
generate materials that will be directly integrated into the research project.
This highly interactive course will establish a scientific community that
includes peers, graduate students, and faculty. Building a sense of community
and contribution to something larger are essential elements in the cultivation
of scientific passion and expertise in today's
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond those proteins involved in transport, very
few plant proteins with polar localization have been characterized. A group of
transmembrane receptor kinases, POLARLY LOCALIZED KINASEs (PLKs), are localized
to the lateral (inner/outer) plasma membrane domains of various root cell types
and have roles in organ patterning. It is hypothesized that PLKs directly
influence cell division and differentiation in root development through their
function in directional signaling. To identify mechanistic links between lateral
cell polarity and tissue patterning this CAREER project aims to: 1) characterize
the developmental roles of PLKs, 2) elucidate the cellular mechanics of PLK
polar localization, and 3) dissect PLK functional and localization domains to
identify polarity motifs. This project is poised to address how plant cell
polarity is established and maintained from a perspective distinct from
directional transport, and which, supports the long standing hypothesis that
directional signaling and positional information are key drivers of plant
development. The short-term broader impacts of this project will be the
acquisition and dissemination of basic information and the recruitment and
training of STEM students. Students will receive training in genetic and
molecular approaches and cutting-edge microscopy techniques; planning and
execution of projects; and, effective scientific communication to establish
themselves as scholars and mentors. In the long term, the acquired knowledge can
serve as a foundation to selectively exploit existing or generate improved root
traits that maximize root function and support plant productivity. In addition,
this study may reveal parallels to cell polarity mechanisms in animal systems,
providing a framework to identify a common logic to polarity and development
across multicellular eukaryotes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.