* 1751863
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Mitochondrial DNA lineages and host-pathogen dynamics
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2018,12/31/2022
* Volney Friedrich, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 12/31/2022
* USD 32,199.00

Mitochondria are the parts of cells that help the body produce energy. They have
their own genetic information, which varies within and across human populations
and has been used to reconstruct human population history. This doctoral
dissertation project will investigate fundamental questions about the role of
human mitochondrial (mtDNA) variation in human evolution by focusing on
mitochondrial metabolism and its association with infection risk. Different
mtDNA lineages vary in the extent of their energy production and corresponding
amounts of damaging reaction oxygen species (ROS) created by this process. The
levels of ROS may create different thresholds for the development of health
problems associated with mitochondrial damage. The results of this study will
provide insights into the role of adaptation in human energy metabolism and the
biological trade-offs involved with human-pathogen evolution. This project will
support graduate and undergraduate training in molecular anthropological
methods, and the findings of this project may inform public health research
focused on disease risk in modern human populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers will assess whether mtDNA lineages are associated with increased or
decreased cancer risk in women infected with human papilloma virus. Samples for
genetic analysis of mtDNA lineage and viral typing will be obtained from women
in the Philadelphia area. Demographic and health variables will be incorporated
into a logistic regression model to assess the effect of mtDNA lineage. The
relationships among geographic variants of the two most common high-risk types
of human papilloma virus, cervical cancer precursors, and mtDNA lineage status
will be further examined to explore possible host-virus co-evolution.