* 1751204
* CAREER:   Asymmetry of microtubule dynamics in plant cytokinesis: the role of microtubule-nucleating protein MACET1
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Andrei Smertenko, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 01/31/2024
* USD 969,479.00

The ability of plants to transition successfully from a marine to land
environment required evolutionary advances in cellular activity, including a
novel mechanism of cell division. The ability to understand, predict, and
regulate this mechanism could have broad scientific and economic impacts. For
example, the vascular cambium influences overall plant growth and is produced
through the division of unusually large precursor cells. These divisions are
known to rely on the expansion of a plant-specific structure termed the
phragmoplast; however, a detailed understanding of phragmoplast expansion is
lacking. This CAREER project will fill this knowledge gap using a combination of
laboratory experiments and mathematical modeling and will provide foundational
knowledge for increasing the rate of cell division, and subsequently wood yield,
in trees that are grown for industrial biomass. Although the need for timber has
grown by 36% over the past 25 years, forestland continues to shrink and
developed countries depend heavily on imports from tropical zones. Bio-
engineered trees with faster growth rates has the potential to increase
production of timber as a renewable material in the US with additional benefits
coming through increased sequestration of carbon dioxide. Cutting-edge concepts
of this research will be integrated into an educational program for students
that attend regional Native American high schools and nearby Lewis Clark State
College (ID) and Walla Walla Community College (WA). The program will introduce
the importance of plants as a natural resource; promote STEM education; and
encourage careers in STEM-related professions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
expansion of the phragmoplast centrifugally is critically dependent on the
dynamic and asymmetrical behavior of microtubules. The PI has identified the
protein MACET, which is specific to embryophytes, promotes microtubule
nucleation, exhibits asymmetrical localization in the phragmoplast, and
facilitates phragmoplast expansion. This discovery provides an exciting entry
point for further studies to unravel the regulation of phragmoplast asymmetry.
In this CAREER project, the PI will use a combination of approaches in genetics,
biochemistry, and cell biology to characterize MACET function(s) in cytokinesis.
In addition, the role of MACET in asymmetrical microtubule dynamics in the
phragmoplast will be determined using quantitative live cell imaging and
mathematical modeling. These approaches will advance our understanding of the
basic rules that govern the construction of highly complex, but transient
intracellular structures. As organisms rely on mechanisms that facilitate the
irregular distribution of matter and energy to meet biological needs,
understanding phragmoplast asymmetry would unravel another facet of the
governing principles of life.