* 1751161
* CAREER: Building an Advanced Cyberinfrastructure for the Data-Driven Design of Chemical Systems and the Exploration of Chemical Space
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Johannes Hachmann, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 02/29/2024
* USD 561,685.00

Innovation in chemistry and materials is a key driver of economic development,
prosperity, and a rising standard of living. It also offers solutions to
pressing problems on energy, environmental sustainability, and resources that
shape our society. This research program is designed to boost the chemistry
community's capacity to address these challenges by transforming the process
that creates underlying innovation. The research promotes a shift away from
trial-and-error searches and towards rational design. These combine traditional
chemical research with modern data science by introducing tools such as machine
learning into the chemical context. This project enables and advances this
emerging field by building a cyberinfrastructure that makes data-driven research
a viable and widely accessible proposition for the chemistry community, and
thereby an integral part of the chemical enterprise. Tools and methods developed
in this research provide the means for the large-scale exploration of chemical
space and for a better understanding of the hidden mechanisms that determine the
behavior of complex chemical systems. These insights can potentially accelerate,
streamline, and ultimately transform the chemical development process. The
project also tackles the concomitant need to adapt education to this new
research landscape in order to adequately equip the next generation of
scientists and engineers, to build a competent and skilled workforce for the
cutting-edge R&amp;D of the future, and to ensure the competitiveness of US
students in the international job market. By promoting minority participation in
this promising field, it contributes to a sustained push towards equal
opportunity in our society. This project thus promotes the progress of science
and advances prosperity and welfare as stated by NSF's
mission.Â &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While there is growing agreement on the value of
data-driven discovery and rational design, this approach is still far from being
a mainstay of everyday research in the chemistry community. This work addresses
three key obstacles: (i) data-driven research is beyond the scope and reach of
most chemists due to a lack of available and accessible tools, (ii) many
fundamental and practical questions on how to make data science work for
chemical research remain unresolved, and (iii) data science is not part of the
formal training of chemists, and much of the community thus lacks the necessary
experience and expertise to utilize it. This research centers around the
creation of an open, general-purpose software ecosystem that fuses in silico
modeling, virtual high-throughput screening, and big data analytics (i.e., the
use of machine learning, informatics, and database technology for the
validation, mining, and modeling of resulting data sets) into an integrated
research infrastructure. A key consideration is to make this ecosystem as
comprehensive, robust, and user-friendly as possible, so that it can readily be
employed by interested researchers without the need for extensive expert
knowledge. It also serves as a development platform and testbed for innovation
in the underlying methods, algorithms, and protocols, i.e., it allows the
community to systematically and efficiently evaluate the utility and performance
of different techniques, including new ones that are being introduced as part of
this project. A meta machine learning approach is being developed to establish
guidelines and best practices that provide added value to the
cyberinfrastructure. The work is driven by concrete molecular design problems,
which serve to demonstrate the efficacy of the overall approach. The educational
challenges that arise from the qualitative novelty of data-driven research and
its inherent interdisciplinarity are addressesed by leveraging a new graduate
program in Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering for cross-
cutting course and curricular developments, the creation of interactive teaching
materials, and a skill-building hackathon initiative. This award is jointly made
with the Division of Chemistry's, Chemical Theory, Models and Computational
Methods Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.