* 1751479
* CAREER: Nanostructured Particle Stabilized Bicontinuous Emulsions: Formation Principles, Structure-Function Relationships and Biphasic Transport
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2020
* Martin Haase, Rowan University
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 04/30/2020
* USD 209,666.00

Multiphase systems such as emulsions or foams are important for many industrial
processes and products. Dissolved or suspended materials can meet at interfaces
between phases, react, accumulate, and undergo phase transfer. Bijels are a
relatively new class of materials in which the two distinct phases are both
continuously connected through interpenetrating networks (rather than having
islands of one phase within another phase). In bijels, the two phases are
stabilized by forming a densely packed layer of particles at the interface
between phases. The principle investigator has recently discovered a new process
for making bijels. This process expands dramatically the range of liquid pairs
that can be used and allows the bijel structure to be tailored. The present work
is a detailed study of how to control and tune bijel structure and properties.
In addition, fluid flow and mass transfer within these materials will be
measured to assess their potential use in applications. A third study will
involve a demonstration of bijel use in a two-phase chemical reaction with
continuous flow. This project will uncover the principles that determine the
structure of bijels and will lead to new and well-designed multiphase materials
for industrial applications. Potential applications range from enhanced product
purification in chemical plants to industrial synthesis of high-value added
chemicals in bijels. A broad range of educational and outreach activities aimed
at middle school, high school, undergraduate and graduate students are also
integrated into the research plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
work is to determine whether bicontinuous interfacially jammed emulsion gels
(bijels) formed by Solvent Transfer Induced Phase Separation (STRIPS) can be
employed for continuously operated and efficient phase transfer processes.
Initial work will focus on control over bijel structure and properties. Bijels
will be formed with a selection of functional inorganic colloidal particles with
surface modifications that will be developed and characterized. The
hydrophilic/hydrophobic nature and the repulsive/attractive character of surface
functional groups are expected to govern bijel architecture and stability; this
will be tested through surface modification of nanoparticles, characterization
of surfaces, bijel formation, and characterization of bijel structure and
mechanical properties. A second thrust of the work will determine how the
mechanical properties of bijels can be tailored to withstand the pressures
needed to drive flow. A scheme for reinforcing the interfacially jammed layer of
nanoparticles has been developed and a tool has been constructed to characterize
pressure-driven flow in bijels and assess their structural integrity under flow
conditions. The third aspect of the study involves phase transfer processes
under continuous flow in bijels. Continuous extraction in bijels will be
demonstrated, followed by study of phase transfer catalysis of a model reaction
in a bijel. Educational and outreach activities include the development of a
"droplet engineering" course for high school students, a course on colloidal and
interfacial engineering for undergraduates, a course on soft matter
nanotechnology for graduate students, and expansion of instructional videos on
the principle investigator's YouTube channel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.