* 1751057
* CAREER: Determining the structure and properties of cell re-engineered microenvironments using rheology in synthetic wound healing scaffolds
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Kelly Schultz, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 02/29/2024
* USD 513,000.00

Human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) play a critical role in wound healing by
regulating inflammation after migrating to the wound site. One strategy to help
wound healing is to implant a hydrogel containing isolated hMSCs directly into
the wound site. The hydrogel provides structural integrity to the surrounding
tissue. However, during wound healing, hMSCs remodel and degrade the hydrogel
over time. These processes must be better understood to design hydrogels with
the optimal properties for wound healing. This CAREER project will apply a
combination of new and existing methods to characterize the region around cells
during cell remodeling and degradation of the synthetic hydrogel material. The
goal of the combined research and education effort is to: (1) use a novel
interdisciplinary approach to provide new techniques to answer a critical
problem in biomaterials and cell biology, (2) recruit and train a diverse work
force and (3) educate a broad audience in biomaterials, materials
characterization, and wound healing. The research will have a major impact on
biomaterials design. These new materials have the potential to increase the rate
of wound healing and prevent development of chronic wounds. In addition, the
principle investigator will recruit, train and educate a broad audience. This
will be done by: (i) outreach to the public at the Da Vinci Science Center in
Allentown, PA, (ii) mentoring of middle and high school students and (iii)
mentoring and training of undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this work is to characterize
the spatial and temporal rheological evolution of a synthetic hydrogel during
cell-mediated degradation to determine viability as an implantable wound healing
scaffold. The physical microenvironment is hypothesized to control hMSC
degradation strategies during cell migration to efficiently deliver hMSCs to the
wound and control material degradation. To test this, the research includes a)
characterizing hMSC degradation strategies in homogenous hydrogels that mimic
the stiffness of native tissues, b) determining the change in response to an
interface in stiffness, and c) determining how gradients in scaffold stiffness
change hMSC-mediated degradation and direct motility to increase cell delivery
and material integrity. hMSCs will be encapsulated in 3D in a well-established
photopolymerizable poly(ethylene glycol)-peptide hydrogel. The peptide cross-
linker in this material is degraded by cell-secreted enzymes. Dynamic scaffold
properties will be measured with bulk rheology and microrheology. Multiple
particle tracking microrheology (MPT) will measure the spatio-temporal
degradation profile created in the scaffold by encapsulated hMSCs. These
measurements will determine the unique degradation strategies hMSCs use in
response to changes in their microenvironment. Bulk rheology will quantify the
change in material integrity as hMSCs permanently degrade the synthetic
scaffold. Using this knowledge, the viability of these materials as implantable
wound healing scaffolds and the microenvironments that most efficiently deliver
hMSCs to an injury while providing structure to the surrounding tissue will be
determined. The research outcomes will be: i) identification of the
microenvironment cells engineer during motility in response to homogeneous and
heterogeneous environments in the scaffold and ii) determination of
microenvironments that increase cell delivery and material
integrity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.