* 1751454
* CAREER: System-on-Cloth: A Cloud Manufacturing Framework for Embroidered Wearable Electronics
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Ye (Sarah) Sun, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 04/30/2022
* USD 549,986.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award will contribute to
the advancement of national prosperity and economic welfare by researching
systems that improve access to manufacturing services. Wearable electronics are
widely used in health monitoring and wearable computing and there is a
compelling need for comfort, biocompatibility, and easy operation. Recent
progress in smart fabrics, textiles, and garments and the associated
manufacturing technologies provides opportunities for next-generation wearable
electronic devices that are fabricated on cloth. Automatic embroidery
manufacturing is now an accessible tool for individuals and entrepreneurs.
Embroidery offers great potential for electronic design due to its flexibility
in transferring a desired pattern to fabric substrates. This project aims to
establish a cloud manufacturing framework that integrates electronics and
design-to-manufacturing translation in a system that can be used by customers,
manufacturers, design experts, and developers to design and produce embroidered
wearable electronics. In addition, this project also aims to broaden
participation from K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students, to provide rich
multidisciplinary classroom and non-classroom experiences for all levels of
students, and to inspire student interest in STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this CAREER project is to
establish a cloud-based manufacturing framework for embroidered wearable
electronics as an accessible platform technology towards System-on-Cloth. Three
tasks are planned to achieve the goal: 1) to understand physical variations of
conductive threads and flexible electronics by physical modeling and
experimental testing for embroidered electronics; 2) to create Electronic Design
Automation (EDA) software that will realize design-to-manufacturing translation
from schematics by integrating new Electrical Rule Checking (ERC) and Design
Rule Checking (DRC) criteria, optimal stitch generation, and an open library of
wearable electronics; and 3) to explore a cloud manufacturing framework with
open architecture, open source code, and friendly user-interfaces that is
accessible to customers, manufacturers, software developers, as well as
electronic design experts. The cloud manufacturing framework will incorporate
EDA features, high tractability, reliability, and compatibility for use by a
diverse spectrum of individuals and entrepreneurs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.