* 1751448
* CAREER: Probabilistic Network Flow Theory: Embracing Emerging Big Data for Efficient, Reliable and Sustainable Multi-modal Transportation Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Sean Qian, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 03/31/2024
* USD 532,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project will establish a
mathematical framework based on transportation system modeling and fusion of
large-scale multi-source data across different systems including roadway, public
transit and parking. The goal is to exploit the spatio-temporal characteristics
of travel demand at different scales, understand how network disruption
probabilistically affects the transportation systems, and help facilitate
decision making regarding planning and real-time operations. The project will
lay the foundation for data-driven transportation science that is to have an
impact at all scales from individuals' quality of life to the nation's economy.
This project will involve collaboration with several public agencies and private
firms to develop, deploy and test real-world systems in the Pittsburgh
metropolitan area based on large-scale data analytics. All models, algorithms,
and examples will be implemented and open sourced in the public domain to
promote access to applications and spark discussions from users all over the
world. The results will be used to develop a new undergraduate course on data
analytics for infrastructure management. Additionally, a virtual laboratory will
be developed in conjunction with Carnegie Museum of Natural History for
educating students in grades 7-12, college students, and the general public.
Students from both Carnegie Mellon University and University of Pittsburgh will
be engaged through learning sessions, data analytics competitions, and hands-on
activities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER project is to develop
theories and algorithms that utilize large-scale data to infer characteristics
of probabilistic network flow and optimally manage transportation networks under
uncertainty. High-dimensional joint probability distributions are used to
explicitly model probabilistic network flow and system states in the context of
flow dynamics and user behavior. Those joint probability distributions are
learned, estimated, and predicted from fusing and mining fine-grained data
collected over many years. They reveal the second-order statistics of flow and
system states, namely variance-covariance, resulting in a better understanding
of the inter-relations among flow/system characteristics, at high temporal and
spatial granularity. This project will also develop rigorous statistical
theories to identify recurrent and non-recurrent flow patterns in subnetworks
through dynamic network partition. The science of network optimization will be
advanced by integrating probabilistic network flow into decision making theories
for both planning and operation. If successful, this research creates a new
paradigm for sensing, modeling, designing, planning and operating complex
infrastructure networks in an efficient, holistic, timely and reliable
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.