* 1751988
* CAREER: Designing Colloidal Materials By Tilting the Free Energy Surface
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Jonathan Whitmer, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/29/2024
* USD 491,836.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical and
computational research and education to advance fundamental understanding of
self-assembly and investigate how to control the process to achieve desired
materials and molecular structures. Self-assembly, where an apparently
disordered array of existing components results over time in highly organized
structures, is everywhere in the world around us. Many natural systems utilize a
small palette of interactions as rules to coax the limitless range of molecular
components into well-defined structures. These are most evident in biological
systems, where intricate yet robust assemblies permit the delicate dance of
life. Researchers have long sought to replicate these behaviors in laboratory
syntheses, creating designer molecules and particles which self-assemble into
materials with advantageous mechanical, optical, or electrical properties. These
efforts have met varying degrees of success. Though working with a similar
palette to biology, designed systems often fall short of biological precision,
resulting in disordered aggregates of material rather than the desired
arrangements.&lt;br/&gt;Colloidal materials, created by the dispersion of small
pieces of one phase of matter into another, are ideal places to study the
processes and mechanisms of self-assembly. Particularly, this is true for solid
colloidal particles which may be designed to mimic the interactions of
molecules. As the Brownian motion and rearrangements are readily observable
under a microscope, the evolution of ordered structures during assembly may be
easily tracked experimentally and potentially controlled. This CAREER award
supports the use of powerful computational modeling to develop a comprehensive
picture of the clusters colloidal materials are likely to assemble into, and how
specific aggregates may be achieved by modifying the structure and composition
of colloidal particles. The work will be used to directly inform the synthesis
of new colloids with specific interactions, targeting robust cluster assemblies
and staged assembly processes to create complex ordered
structures.&lt;br/&gt;Integrated outreach and education components within this
program follow a threefold approach of classroom engagement, public outreach,
and research mentoring. The primary effort is the expansion of a classroom
outreach program the PI has initiated with South Bend, Indiana public schools to
examine the science of cooking, and in particular how the texture, composition,
flavor and visual appeal of everyday foods derive from skillful manipulation of
molecular-level interactions. Initial classroom demonstrations are to be
expanded into a set of edible laboratory activities targeting Indiana high
school physical science and scientific literacy standards. Also, this work will
support the involvement of talented young undergraduates in computational
materials research and the incorporation of molecular assembly and related
concepts into the undergraduate thermodynamics
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award
supports theoretical and computational research and education to advance
fundamental understanding of self-assembly and investigate how to control the
process to achieve desired materials and molecular structures. Self-assembly is
ubiquitous in biological systems, and the intricate yet robustly forming
structures there inspire scientists and engineers to mimic the natural world
within the laboratory. Many successful approaches have derived directly from
biology, by simulating the underlying chemistry or directly utilizing
biomolecules to promote specific interactions. Though the rules of assembly in
the biological and synthetic worlds may be similar, the mere decades of research
into designed self-assembly have yet to optimize synthetic processes to the
degree observed in the biological realm. Thus, many attempts result in partially
ordered systems full of unintended assemblies rather than strict selective
formation of the desired structures.&lt;br/&gt;Colloidal materials are ideal
places to study the processes and mechanisms of self-assembly, due to highly
tunable particle-particle interactions. Additionally, the Brownian motion and
structural rearrangements of colloidal aggregates are readily observed under a
microscope. Therefore, clusters which quickly form can be followed through their
nucleation, growth, and rearrangement from locally preferred configurations
toward a global thermodynamic minimum. Over the past few decades, there has been
a great increase in colloidal research focusing on synthesis of novel particles
which can self-assemble into defined structures, and in particular open
crystalline structures which have desirable photonic properties. Even so, many
of these new assembly methods have seen little success in creating truly tunable
open structures as they focus largely on minimizing inter-particle energies and
can contain many features leading to mis-assembly. This CAREER award supports
work utilizing powerful flat histogram and reactive pathway sampling algorithms
to obtain stable and metastable basins of the free energy surface controlling
colloidal assembly, as well as transition pathways between these states. This
information forms a comprehensive picture of the self-assembly of colloidal
cluster, and directly informs the experimental syntheses of new colloids which
tilt the free energy surface through specific interactions, targeting robust
cluster assemblies and staged assembly processes to create bespoke open
colloidal lattices.&lt;br/&gt;Integrated research and education plans within
this proposal follow a threefold approach of classroom engagement, public
outreach, and research mentoring. The primary effort concerns the expansion of a
classroom outreach program the PI has initiated with South Bend, Indiana public
schools to examine the science of cooking. These activities demonstrate how the
texture, composition, flavor and visual appeal of everyday foods derive from
skillful manipulation of molecular-level interactions. The PI will extend
initial classroom demonstrations into interactive and edible lab investigations
targeting Indiana high school physical science and scientific literacy
standards. This work will also support the involvement of talented
undergraduates in computational materials research and the incorporation of
molecular assembly and related concepts into the undergraduate thermodynamics
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.