* 1751925
* CAREER: Holistic Assessment of the Potential of Byproduct-Derived Alkali-Activated Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Elsa Olivetti, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 01/31/2024
* USD 508,890.00

This research targets to build an integrated framework to evaluate the
environmental impact of using industrial byproducts as precursors in alkali-
activated binders. Alkali-activated binders have been explored as a potential
replacement for cement, which is a material with significant (and growing)
contribution to global carbon dioxide emissions. The existence of significant
amounts of industrial byproducts generated from energy production, mining and
materials production, and solid waste management motivates development of
strategies for economically-feasible beneficial use, so called industrial
symbiosis. Repurposing these byproducts could not only reduce the impact
associated with their disposal, but also potentially lower the environmental
impact of construction materials if used as a cement replacement. However,
knowing whether or not byproduct reuse is beneficial must be determined via
detailed consideration of the context of the proposed symbiotic exchange.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is designed to: a) develop a framework to
assess environment, technical, and economic potential of beneficial use across
broad range of industrial byproducts, 2) demonstrate the framework in an
analysis of specific byproducts and 3) imbed key research findings in open data
platforms as well as educational programs. By understanding the techno-
environmental impacts of byproduct use in context, this project aims to provide
quantitative tools to move towards a more circular economy, along a trajectory
expected to be environmentally beneficial. The intellectual merit of this work
derives from the integrated assessment of industrial symbiosis coupled with
advanced material flow modeling and data mining methods. Analytical work will be
performed to quantify the environmental impact of potential industrial byproduct
reuse by combining existing and newly developed life cycle inventory (LCI) data
with physical flow estimates. The approach will include integration of these
environmental and resource use analyses with investigations to establish a
processing-microstructure-property relationship for alkali-activated
aluminosilicate binders. The physicochemical characteristics of the byproduct
materials will be aggregated in a database along with physical flow and LCI
information to establish a set of markers such as degree of crystallinity,
solubility limits of aluminosilicate phase, carbon content and specific surface
area. These characteristics influence aspects of an LCI such as the energy used
to process precursors into final products, thereby influencing the resulting
environmental impact. Exploring these technical relationships will be coupled
with the systems analysis to evaluate the economic and environmental impact of
proposed byproduct reuse strategies. To be relevant, the tools following from
this research will provide results that: 1) are transferable to local context,
2) are on an open platform, and 3) measure performance relative to an
appropriate incumbent technology. Incorporating environmental impact estimates
into materials science will enable multi-objective design approaches, improving
the selection criteria for those materials that are tested experimentally or in
the field. As the work products and tools of the research mature, they will be
directly integrated into open platforms to broaden the research impact so that
the wider community can use, improve, and leverage ongoing data collection
efforts to drive sustainable innovation. The PI aims to raise the awareness
about the influence that the design and manufacture of materials have on our
society. This will be done through 1) co-creation of sustainable materials
curriculum with local teachers of 6-12th grade students, 2) incorporation into
the PI's undergraduate and graduate courses at MIT and 3) online modules that
can be disseminated broadly. This work will enable more capable environmental
assessment tools, usable at earlier stages of the development process.