* 1751621
* CAREER: Fabrication of Composite Material Structures using Light-Induced Self Writing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Ian Hosein, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2024
* USD 705,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant will promote the
progress of science by contributing new knowledge related to a novel
manufacturing process for fabricating composite materials for a variety of
applications in the energy, infrastructure, aerospace, chemical and automotive
industries. Composite materials are made by combining two or more materials, the
combination of which provides enhanced electrical, mechanical, chemical, and/or
surface properties. Understanding how to control the processing of composite
materials enables customized performance for a broad range of critical
applications. There are many manufacturing processes to make composite
materials. However, most require multiple process steps and require the use of
significant energy and chemicals, both of which are costly and wasteful. This
grant supports fundamental research to provide new knowledge about a novel light
irradiation process that will enable rapid, scalable, and controllable
manufacturing of composite materials made from polymers and ceramics with lower
cost and energy usage. This multidisciplinary research integrates manufacturing,
chemistry, and materials science and will help broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in research and positively impact engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The light-induced self-writing of composite
material architectures can overcome several limitations of existing
manufacturing techniques, such as high cost, high energy usage, multiple steps,
and lack of microscale control over morphology. However, some scientific
barriers prevent the realization of the full application potential of light-
induced self-writing for additive manufacturing of composite material
architectures. This research aims to fill the knowledge gap on the processing-
structure-property relationship and the microstructure formation mechanisms for
self-writing polymer-inorganic composite material architectures. Experiments
will be performed to establish relationships between process parameters and
composite morphology to test the hypothesis that self-writing can regulate
morphology evolution in terms of reaction and diffusion kinetics. A multi-
physics model will be developed to simulate morphology formation and predict
final structure as a function of process parameters. Application demonstrations
will include materials for superhydrophobic surfaces, lithium-ion batteries, and
ultra-light mechanical structures. The educational program will focus on
secondary education by providing workshops for high school teachers and research
experiences for high school students as well as Masters of Education graduate
students, with a focus on recruiting from groups underrepresented in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.