* 1751482
* CAREER: Exploiting the Dynamic Dielectric Behavior of Water to Understand and Predict Polymer Composite Damage Progression
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Landon Grace, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 04/30/2024
* USD 606,962.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project will focus on
improving the safety and performance of polymer composites by discovering the
fundamental mechanisms governing the evolution of damage in these next-
generation materials. Polymer composite usage is growing rapidly; driven by
increasing demand for high-strength, lightweight materials in the automotive,
aerospace, and civil infrastructure industries. In these primarily outdoor
applications, loss of load-bearing ability over time is driven by material
property changes in response to the complex and combined effects of mechanical
and environmental stresses. A fundamental understanding of these changes is
crucial to safe operation throughout the life cycle of the structure. To derive
this understanding, the experimental approach in this research project takes
advantage of changes in dielectric behavior of absorbed atmospheric water
molecules in response to damage initiation and progression. By tracking the
ability of water molecules to rotate in response to an oscillating
electromagnetic field, early and non-visible changes in the chemical and
physical characteristics of the material can be measured. The new and valuable
insight into the mechanisms responsible for the progression of damage derived
from these measurements will improve our ability to design more robust materials
and better predict impending failure, thus advancing national health,
prosperity, welfare, and national defense. The research will be complemented by
an effort to provide access to K-12 summer engineering camp activities at North
Carolina State University for students from rural and isolated urban
communities. A sustainable process for packaging and disseminating these high-
value educational resources will be developed and implemented, expanding their
impact beyond the students attending the on-site camps and increasing visibility
and knowledge of engineering among students who may not otherwise consider or
pursue STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the research
is to derive the mechanistic underpinnings of polymer composite damage
progression across spatial scales in response to coupled thermal, hygroscopic,
and mechanical loading. The specific objectives in support of this goal are to:
(i) describe the link between water-polymer interaction and topology, nanovoid
content, polarity, and hygrothermal aging of fiber-reinforced epoxies; (ii)
connect the response of absorbed molecular water to multiscale damage induced by
dynamic, fatigue, and impact loading; (iii) use a neural-network technique to
extract the salient variables that govern damage progression for use in deriving
a mechanistic understanding of the molecular precursors to damage; and (iv)
reconcile the experimental and neural-network derived insights with the physical
basis of state-of-the-art multiscale, multiphysics simulation techniques. This
project will allow the PI to expand the knowledge base in mechanics and
materials science, enabling safer and more efficient use of polymer composites
across multiple industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.