* 1751736
* CAREER: Fundamentals of Complex Chalcogenide Electronic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Rafael Jaramillo, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2023
* USD 510,411.00

Non-technical description: New and improved materials are essential for
development of new technologies. This project focuses on the development of
semiconductors containing the elements barium, zirconium, sulfur, and selenium.
The research team is motivated by theoretical predictions that certain
combinations of these elements will produce semiconductors with properties that
are useful for applications including energy conversion, lighting, and chemical
manufacturing. The team tests these predictions by producing thin films of these
materials and measuring the properties of the resulting materials. Reflecting
the importance of new generation workforce to the economy, this project also
includes the launch of a new internship program - the Guided Academic Industry
Network (GAIN) - that introduces students at local community colleges to
opportunities in materials science. The goals of GAIN are to create
opportunities for students, and to enhance the workforce pipeline for materials-
focused industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: This project
focuses on fundamental studies of chalcogenide perovskites in the Ba-Zr-S-Se
system, which are predicted by theory to be mixed-anion semiconductors with band
gap in the range 1.3 - 1.8 eV. The research is enabled by the development of
techniques for the epitaxial growth of complex chalcogenide thin films, using
hydride gas precursors and a molecular beam deposition system that was custom-
designed for this purpose. Detailed structural and optoelectronic
characterization is used to address issues such as the effect of tuning the
ionic-to-covalent balance of chemical bonds on the optoelectronic properties of
a semiconductor, and the ability of the perovskite structure to accommodate
anion alloying. The potential for this semiconducting alloy to be used in
minority-carrier devices is assessed by measuring recombination rates, and by
evaluating the performance of thin films in two energy-conversion technologies:
solar cells and photo-electrochemical hydrogen
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.