* 1751946
* CAREER: Toward Twenty Year Lifetime:Hermetic Sealing for Perovskite Solar Cells
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2023
* Tara Dhakal, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 01/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical description: While the vast majority of
current solar cells are based on silicon technology, the cost of production and
inability to achieve fabrication in a roll-to-roll platform overshadow its high
efficiency and long-term reliability. A potentially superior solar technology is
based on perovskites, which are crystalline minerals found in nature. Perovskite
solar cells have already achieved efficiencies close to that of silicon cells.
However, current perovskite solar cells are not usable due to toxicity concerns
(lead is generally used to fabricate perovskites) and short lifetimes. The goal
of this research project is to synthesize an efficient, affordable, and
environmentally safe germanium perovskite solar cell. In addition to replacing
lead by chemically similar but non-toxic germanium, inorganic layers, such as
nickel oxide and tin oxide, will be explored as interfacial layers to improve
stability. The devices will also be hermetically sealed with thin-film
encapsulants, and characterized through accelerated testing to determine device
lifetime. Lead perovskites have only lasted several months under ideal
laboratory conditions. The proposed sealing techniques will enable module
lifetimes to be greater than 20 years. The ability of these cells to be
fabricated on a flexible substrate will further drive down the price of solar
energy, helping solar energy to become less costly than fossil fuel derived
energy. This project will provide multiple opportunities for graduate,
undergraduate, K-12, and under-represented groups to engage in the next
generation of renewable energy research. A new course on future energy materials
will benefit a broad range of students with interest in material science and
thin film devices. The findings of this work will provide the research community
with a greater understanding of the fundamental properties of this new
perovskite material, and provide industry with the information needed for
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: In this work,
germanium perovskite will be synthesized to build highly efficient, stable, and
environmentally benign solar cells. The proposed germanium perovskites will
overcome the deficiencies of lead-based perovskites including toxicity,
interfacial layer instability, and limited lifetime. The project is two-fold:
high quality germanium perovskite will be synthesized and characterized and then
stabilized through thin-film encapsulants and inorganic interfacial layer
selection. Germanium perovskites display excellent photovoltaic properties such
as high optical absorption, high carrier mobility, and direct band gap. However,
previous attempts were unsuccessful due to poor film morphology. A solvent-
engineering approach will be used to achieve high-quality germanium-based
perovskite. The perovskite's interfacial charge transport layers will be
inorganic in nature to allow for greater device stability than can be achieved
with organic layers. A solid-state reducing atmosphere will be used to prevent
oxidative damage to the perovskite due to slow ingression of moisture and water
over time. In addition, atomic layer deposition (ALD) grown metal-oxide barriers
will cap the finished device, followed by a final epoxy sealing. The resulting
hermetic seal will be characterized through helium and calcium leak tests, from
which the expected module lifetime can be extrapolated. This sealing technique
is anticipated to enable device lifetimes in excess of 20 years. The proposed
work will provide a fundamental understanding of germanium perovskite synthesis,
model the lifetime of encapsulated solar device, and play a critical role in
achieving stable, low-cost, and environmentally safe solar cells.