* 1751205
* CAREER: Situational Awareness Strategies for Autonomous Systems in Dynamic Uncertain Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Zak Kassas, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 05/31/2019
* USD 96,183.00

The potential economic and societal impacts of realizing fully autonomous cyber-
physical systems (CPS) are astounding. If the Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) allows integration of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) into the national
civilian airspace, the private-sector drone industry is estimated to generate
more than 100K high-paying technical jobs over a ten-year span and contribute
$82B to the U.S. economy. Self-driving cars are predicted to annually prevent 5M
accidents and 2M injuries, conserve 7B liters of fuel, and save 30K lives and
$190B in healthcare costs associated with accidents in the U.S. Successful
mission pursuit of such fully autonomous CPS hinges on possessing full
situational awareness including precise knowledge of its own location. Current
CPS are far from possessing this capability, particularly in dynamic, uncertain,
poorly modeled environments where GPS coverage may be spotty, obscured, or
otherwise impaired. This necessitates developing a coherent analytical
foundation to deal with this emerging class of CPS, in which situational
awareness and mission planning and execution are intertwined and must be
considered simultaneously to address uncertainty, model mismatch, and compensate
for potential GPS coverage gaps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is has four
main objectives: (1) Analyze the observability of unknown dynamic, stochastic
environments comprising multiple agents. This analysis will establish the
minimum a priori knowledge needed about the environment and/or agents for
stochastic observability. (2) Develop adaptation strategies to refine the agents
models of the environment, on-the-fly, as the agents build spatiotemporal maps.
Adaptation is crucial, since it is impractical to assume that agents have high-
fidelity models describing the environment. (3) Design optimal, computationally
efficient information fusion algorithms with performance guarantees. These
algorithms will consider physically realistic nonlinear dynamics and
observations with colored, non-Gaussian noise, commonly encountered in CPS. (4)
Synthesize optimal, real-time decision making strategies to balance the
potentially conflicting objectives of information gathering and mission
fulfillment. This investigation will enable autonomous CPS to navigate complex
tradeoffs, leading to autonomous identification and adoption of the optimal
strategy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has far-reaching impact- it will
evolve autonomous CPS from merely sensing the environment to making sense of the
environment, bringing new capabilities in environments where direct human
control is not physically or economically possible. The project has a
vertically-integrated education plan spanning K-12, undergraduate, and graduate
students. The project will engage economically disadvantaged middle and high
school students in the same UAV testbed used for research verification. Also,
research outcomes will be infused into new and existing undergraduate and
graduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.