* 1751388
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Evolutionary Perspectives on Microchimerism
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2019
* Daniel Eisenberg, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2019
* USD 30,988.00

Beyond conventional genetic inheritance, mothers can impact their offspring's
biology through the transfer of immune factors, epigenetic markers, and
beneficial microbes. Another lesser-known, non-conventional mode of inheritance
is called microchimerism, whereby cells travel between mother and baby during
pregnancy, and some colonize and persist for decades after birth. This doctoral
dissertation project leverages data from a multigenerational, longitudinal
health and nutrition study to investigate microchimerism as a mediating factor
in immune tradeoffs throughout the life course. The research aims to better
understand how microchimerism may be associated with fetal growth during
pregnancy, infant feeding practices, early childhood infectious disease, and
pregnancy outcomes in adults. The publicly available data from this longitudinal
study and the newly-generated microchimerism data will provide opportunities for
student-driven research for undergraduates, including individuals from
underrepresented groups.

Microchimerism is thought to influence host immune function by directly
contributing stem cells that differentiate and develop into functional immune
cells and expressing foreign antigens that trigger host immune responses. Most
microchimerism research has focused on relationships with autoimmune disorders,
cancer, transplant biology, and adverse pregnancy outcomes, leaving considerable
gaps in understanding why some individuals are colonized by microchimeric cells
more than others, and how these differences might impact evolutionary fitness.
To clarify these issues, population-based data from the Cebu Longitudinal Health
and Nutrition Survey spanning three generations of participants will be used to
investigate the following specific aims: 1) evaluate whether having been
breastfed in infancy predicts microchimerism in adulthood, 2) assess whether
microchimerism is associated with lower risk of early life infection, and 3)
determine whether adult women with microchimerism from their mothers have lower
risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes as they have offspring of their own.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.