* 1751483
* CAREER: Energy Transition on Rural America:  Studying Cultural, Technological, and Economic Change
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Justin Farrell, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

Rural communities have long been the nation's cornerstone for energy production.
But many of these communities are undergoing immense change, led by market
forces, environmental changes, and the improvement of solar and wind technology.
This project contributes new knowledge by examining the rapidly changing
relationship between rural areas and energy. These changes are felt in sharpest
relief in the Rocky Mountain West, in places that have depended heavily on
fossil-fuel energy production. How are rural communities affected by large-scale
economic, technological, and cultural shifts away from fossil-fuels toward
renewable energy? What do these changes mean for the loss of rural culture and
community, and how can these areas best adapt? The findings will expand our
understanding of rural, low capital, and underserved areas, especially in the
Western U.S., to inform policy in a rapidly changing cultural, political,
technological, and economic environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
advances scientific knowledge in three ways, First, it develops, implements, and
disseminates an innovative mixed-methods approach that blends computational
social science with long-term ethnographic fieldwork in rural communities. This
approach is especially suited to the research questions above, and will help
other social scientists to blend large-scale data science with on-the-ground
fieldwork. Second, it advances rural and environmental research beyond its
historical foci (e.g., on the Rust Belt and Appalachia), to account for
different dynamics in the under-researched Western U.S. Third, it takes up the
call from leading scholars for deeper and more empirically grounded study of
rural relationships to energy. In doing so, this study constructs a new
theoretical framework that synthesizes research from sociology, energy studies,
science and technology studies, religion, economics, and
law.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.