* 1751293
* CAREER: Leveraging the Dielectric Waveguide Properties of the Human Body for Ultra-Efficient "Unawearables"
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2023
* Patrick Mercier, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 12/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

The primary objective of this research is to dramatically reduce the power
needed to communicate information around the body in order to help enable the
next generation of wearable medical and wellness devices. Current wearables tend
to utilize Bluetooth for communication around the body, which despite operating
fairly reliably, is extremely energy inefficient, resulting in poor device
battery life. A conventional Bluetooth device found on a wearable medical patch,
for example, will broadcast radio waves in all directions, with as little as
0.000001% of the transmitted energy received by the radio on your smartwatch or
smartphone, in part due to large absorption of electromagnetic energy by the
human body at 2.4GHz. To improve the efficiency of wireless communication, the
proposed research endeavors to leverage the human body itself as a communication
channel. Specifically, rather than broadcasting information in all directions,
which has severe energy inefficiencies and privacy/security concerns, the
proposed approach utilizes wired coils placed within the band of a smartwatch,
in a wearable patch, or on a smartphone, to generate small magnetic fields that
safely and efficiently pass through the body. The electromagnetic properties of
the human body at the much lower targeted frequencies (10-50MHz) are more
favorable than at 2.4GHz, enabling efficiencies as high as 10%, with rapid fall-
off away from the body, for inherently more efficient, secure, and private
communications. The generated magnetic fields are of lower strength than Earth's
natural magnetic field, and orders of magnitude less than Bluetooth or mobile
phones, and are thus considered to be safe. To demonstrate the effectiveness of
this technique, several coil, circuit, and system prototypes will be developed
and tested for a variety of healthcare-related applications such as in hearing
aids and wearable glucose monitors. The program also includes an education plan
that is synergistic with the research goals, including outreach to K-12 and
underrepresented students in engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
communication system specifically leverages the high dielectric constant of
biological tissue to attain high efficiency. Despite being largely magnetically-
inert, magnetic energy delivered to the body at 10-50MHz has, due to the high
dielectric constant of tissue, enhanced near- and mid-field components, while
also generating far-field components that totally-internally reflect to create a
human-body-based dielectric waveguide-like structure. The objectives of this
CAREER proposal are to develop physical models that describe this behavior,
optimize coils for low trans-body path loss, and design, fabricate, and test
integrated circuits to communicate across the body at high efficiency.
Successful development will enable body-area networking transceivers that
operate at much higher efficiency than conventional techniques, enabling
wearable devices that are smaller and have longer battery life than before,
thereby opening up new avenues and applications in healthcare, wellness, and
personal infotainment systems. To help broaden participation of members of
underrepresented groups in STEM fields, related research results will be
discussed at K-12 outreach events, including, for example, the creation of
interactive body-area network communication experiences at summer technology
camps.