* 1751377
* CAREER: Research and education on landscape, climate, and biophysical controls of the urban water cycle amid urban warming and global change
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Kevan Moffett, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 690,534.00

A majority of Earth's population now lives in urban areas. In cities, humans
have intensively reconfigured the landscape and extensively concentrated
resources. These urban environs are expected to host almost all future global
population growth. If and how cities will remain livable in the future, however,
is a critical question. Key factors of livability include a comfortable
environment, access to and efficient use of water, and resilience to extremes of
drought, flood, cold, and heat. Natural science suggests that these factors are
strongly related to the vegetation cover, soils, and heat and water balances of
a place, but it is an open question how precisely lessons from natural science
conducted in rural, natural areas might apply to cities. Among the most
prominent, unique characteristics of cities are their extreme spatial variations
in land cover (e.g., grass, pavement, trees, gardens, and bare ground juxtaposed
over short distances) and the phenomenon called the urban heat island (UHI). An
UHI occurs where an urban area is substantially warmer than nearby rural areas
due to factors such as greater absorption of solar energy by paved surfaces and
less evaporative cooling from dry urban surfaces than rural fields or forests.
This project will determine (1) how urban landscape variations, heat, and water
balances interact as cause and consequence of local hot or cool microclimates
within the city, (2) how microclimates and their vegetative and hydrologic
influences relate to urban human health and comfort, and (3) how the overall UHI
climate and hydrologic regime of cities may be made more resilient to weather
extremes for the benefit of urban infrastructure, urban environmental quality,
and urban human safety. To the extent that the linked surface water and energy
balances of a city might be controlled by is landscape composition and
configuration, with sufficient knowledge of urban heterogeneity-heat-water
relations, cities could be engineered for greater health and sustainability,
even in the face of global change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dual goals of this
project are to (1) quantify the links and feedbacks between urban landscape
heterogeneity, urban heat, and the urban water cycle and (2) to forge a strong
pipeline between science, education, and management to help empower people of
all abilities and positions to develop practices to enhance the comfort and
resilience of urban landscapes in the face of global change. The research will
address how the distributed surface water and energy balances of the urban
environment function, whether they function differently in urban heat or cool
islands, how they are governed by various types of land cover, and how they in
turn affect water resource demands and human comfort. Research approaches will
include in situ quantitative monitoring of the heat and water balances of the
most common urban land covers subject to the same microclimate island and
compared among different microclimates; field, remote sensing, and modeling
investigation of urban soil moisture's controls on urban warming; physics-based
numerical modeling of urban landscape composition and configuration controls on
microclimate, surface energy balance, and surface water balance; and remote
sensing and modelling assessments of how progressive urbanization and warming
and the scale of data considered may influence the quantifications of urban heat
and water cycles. This project will also foster research-education-management
synergy with multiple open-access innovations. Urban environmental science field
course modules will be developed for a variety of age levels (pre-school to
graduate) to foster place-based, experiential, and life-long STEM learning. The
modules will also be explicitly designed to make field science accessible to
students with mobility needs. Research-management collaboration will occur among
a consortium of western US cities and universities and public outreach on "urban
backyard science" will freely distribute educational urban-environment
activities for all ages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.