* 1751018
* CAREER: Remote Sensing for Enhanced Understanding of Tornado Actions and Broadened STEM Education in Rural West Texas
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2018,02/29/2020
* James Womble, West Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 02/29/2020
* USD 500,000.00

The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award is to
advance understanding of the impacts of tornadoes on structures through the use
of remote sensing technologies at both small and large scales. Although
tornadoes are known to produce some of the strongest winds on earth, sufficient
understanding of the magnitude, frequency, and structure of these violent winds
remains elusive. To effectively design structures that provide protection for
life and property against tornadoes, it is necessary to better understand the
wind speeds in tornadoes, the interaction of tornado winds with structures, and
the likelihood of tornado occurrences. At the small scale, this research will
employ cutting-edge technologies, such as laser scanning and digital imaging, to
create highly detailed, 3D digital models of tornado-damaged structures. The
research will also examine large-scale tornado phenomena by using earth-
observing satellite images to help detect "missing" (unobserved) tornadoes.
Improved characterization of regional tornado climates, wind structures, and
wind speeds will improve tornado forecast models and risk-based design
methodologies. Heightened understanding of tornado hazard will advance society's
ability to plan for, and rapidly respond and recover from, disasters, thus
promoting national welfare and prosperity. This project also will provide a
platform to enhance STEM education in a large rural portion of West Texas by
encouraging the pursuit of graduate education through engaging undergraduate
students in research collaborations with U.S. and international research
institutions and an expansive Natural Hazards Workshop/Symposium series that
will bring researchers from academia, government, and industry to campus to
inspire students to pursue research and innovation for challenging natural
hazard mitigation problems. Data from this project will be archived and shared
in the NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI)
DesignSafe Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org).

The objectives of this CAREER award are the achievement of rapid and
comprehensive multi-scale wind damage assessments through remote sensing,
advancement of understanding of tornado-structure interaction, and inspiration
and training of students for vital roles in securing national welfare and
prosperity through minimizing life and property losses from wind hazards.
Through strategic research collaborations, the Principal Investigator and
undergraduate student researchers will explore tornado actions via remote
sensing technologies at multiple scales. At small scales, reality-capture-
enhanced modeling of tornado-induced failures of engineered steel structures
will utilize 3D reality-capture platforms (photogrammetry and lidar) and
optimization of these platforms to balance the breadth and depth of detailed
forensic analyses of damaged structures (in collaboration with the Texas Tech
University National Wind Institute). This modeling will then be used to
investigate tornado impacts on structures through the measurement of deflections
and study of failure patterns. At the large scale, the project will investigate
a methodology to detect "missing" tornadoes via multi-spectral image analysis to
enhance tornado climatology in sparsely populated and forested areas (in
collaboration with Western University in Canada). The research will advance the
knowledge of complex tornado-structure interactions, estimation of tornado
intensity, and detection of tornado occurrences via safe, reliable, efficient,
and cutting-edge remote sensing technologies at spatial scales ranging from
minute structural deformations to the overall tornado-path level. The research
will provide validation methods for physical and numerical tornado load
simulations, facilitate necessary adjustments to wind speed estimates in the
Enhanced Fujita Scale, and explore optimization of high-resolution imaging
platforms to most effectively advance the understanding of tornado effects on
the built environment. Detection of "missing" tornadoes will enhance climatology
studies, providing a basis to improve forecasts, warnings, and risk models.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.