* 1751287
* Doctoral Dissertation: Maternal Stress and Early Childhood Wellbeing: Exploring Risk and Protective Factors
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2019
* David Tracer, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2019
* USD 19,903.00

Stress experienced by a mother during early, critical periods of her child's
development can have negative impacts on the child's physiology. However, the
factors that mediate these negative impacts are not fully understood. This
doctoral dissertation project will use well-characterized samples of mothers and
offspring to investigate relationships among external stressors, maternal
responses to stress, sociocultural factors that impact the perception of stress,
and offspring high body mass index in early childhood. This project will advance
our knowledge about the complex interplay among human biological adaptation,
culture, and environment, and will potentially inform public health strategies
regarding early life obesity. The project will also support graduate student
training and international research collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary objective of this study is to analyze the risks and protective factors
that may mediate or moderate the development of early childhood obesity and to
explore the lived experience of stress in a sample of New Zealand mothers. The
research uses a biocultural mixed-methods approach. First, the researchers will
use structural equation modeling to examine pathways among stress, potential
risk and protective factors, and early childhood body mass index using a large
(n=5,839) representative data set from New Zealand. The researchers will then
employ qualitative methods with an ethnically-diverse sample of New Zealand
mothers (n=70) to explore the lived experience of stress in this population. The
findings from this project will contribute to our growing understanding of the
biological consequences of stress in all human
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.