* 1751974
* CAREER: Along-Strike Variation: A Comparative Study of Subduction Zones at Multiple Scales Using Joint Receiver Function and Tomographic Inversion
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Haiying Gao, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 05/31/2024
* USD 613,001.00

Subduction zones are where two tectonic plates converge, and one plate is
thrusting beneath the other. Subduction zones play a major role in driving plate
tectonics and host great earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, tsunamis, and
landslides, many of which have significant impacts on natural systems and
society. A recent study showed that most subduction zones can generate
earthquakes with magnitude equal to or greater than 8.5 over a 250-year
interval. The location and magnitude of subduction earthquakes are strongly
influenced by many factors, which vary significantly within a single subduction
zone and among global subduction systems. However, the causes, effects, and
relationships among the widely observed variations are not well understood. The
objective of the CAREER project is to develop a new understanding of the
characteristics at five representative subduction zones with advanced methods of
seismic modeling. A large collection of geophysical datasets now provides us
with an excellent opportunity to construct comparative models of the subduction
system. By creating high-quality models of subduction systems, the project will
provide new insights into understanding of fundamental subduction processes.
This project will involve the development of young scientists at different early
career stages, including an early-career female geoscientist, undergraduate and
graduate students. More broadly, this project aims to develop teaching tools for
undergraduate students, to provide opportunities for K-12 education, and to
increase public knowledge of the importance of subduction research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three fundamental questions are at the core of this
research: What are the scales of along-strike variations (segmentation) of
subduction properties and to what degree are they correlated from one subduction
zone to another? How do various scales of mantle flow interact with each other
and control along-strike variation in, e.g., melt productivity and magmatism?
And how do properties of the downgoing and overriding plates contribute to
along-strike variation within the upper mantle? To fully understand
segmentation, high-resolution tomographic models of multiple subduction zones
are critically necessary in order to compare the characteristics and scales of
segmentation. This project will investigate the structure of five subduction
environments, using a joint receiver function (RF) and full-wave tomography
(FWT). RFs will identify and delineate sharp velocity discontinuities. An
advanced FWT will provide a powerful way to image the structure of the crust and
upper mantle. Combination of RFs and FWT will detect a variety of seismic
features. The outcomes of this project will help answer questions in the two
following areas: 1) A new understanding of the types and scales of along-strike
variations in subduction system. What structural correlations from crust to
upper mantle can be imaged that may give insight to along-strike variations?
What are the dimensions of segmentation? What are the relationships of
subduction parameters with along-strike variations? What are the influences of
segmentation on surface tectonomagmatism? 2) A key understanding of multi-scale
mantle flow and the influences on along-strike variations. What seismic features
are related to large-scale subduction-driven processes? What are the roles of
regional geology and tectonic processes? How do interactions between plate-
driven flow and regional convection relate to segmentation? Does small-scale
convection control the spacing of segmented features? The research component
will be complemented by an education and outreach effort, which will focus on
developing a summer seismology education workshop for the Five-College
undergraduate students. The PI will also introduce Earth science to underserved
8th-12th grade girls through the Girls Inc. Eureka! Program. Furthermore, the PI
will establish a mechanism for public outreach using the adopted Transportable
Array seismic station. Through the integrated work, the PI aims to devote to
research, teaching, and outreach activities that will positively impact the
subduction community and general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.