* 1751503
* CAREER: Modeling and Control of Cellular Response to Dynamic Mechanical Manipulation Using a Dual-Input Platform
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Juan Ren, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project will create new
models of the way that cells change their shape in response to external forces.
The project will include the design of a dual-direction instrument for applying
forces to cells -- one that combines a supporting surface that can expand and
contract, together with a movable probe that can contact exposed portions of the
cell surface. A control algorithm based on the new models will allow scientists
and engineers to achieve precise stress and strain trajectories across the cell,
and on specific organelles in the cell interior. This award will advance the
national health, and promote the progress of the biological sciences. It will
provide cell biologists with a new tool for studying the biochemical and
mechanical changes that cells undergo in response to external forces, as well as
a potential tool for inducing desired cell behaviors, for example, for the
synthesis of biomaterials. Integrated educational and outreach activities
include the development of new courses in nano-positioning and nano-
biomechanics, and an outreach program on the use of nano-biomechanical methods
in agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanotransduction is the process of
sensing, transmission and response to external mechanical stimuli of living
cells. It is essential for maintenance of normal cell, tissue, and organ
functioning. This project will build a suite of tools to sense and model
cellular mechanotransduction dynamics and 3D dynamic structure, in order to
achieve cellular behavior manipulation. The specific objectives of this project
are to: (1) build a dual-direction mechanotransduction characterization scheme,
which for the first time, uses both scanning probe microscopy and dynamic
substrate stimuli and synchronizes optical and biomechanical quantification in
biomechanical quantification; (2) create a new optimal excitation force design
technique to incorporate and allow linear poroelasticity and nonlinear time-
varying viscoelasticity models to be utilized in identification of
mechanotransduction dynamics; and (3) formulate a near real-time precision
tracking control algorithm to achieve high-efficiency tracking of the varying
manipulation force to minimize the initial tracking error and tracking
iterations by combining both iterative learning-based control and model
predictive control approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.