* 1751093
* CAREER: Automating the Construction and Analysis of Models of Motion for Prehabilitative Care
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Ramanarayan Vasudevan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project will investigate
new non-invasive methods to automate the identification of individuals at
elevated risk for Anterior Crucial Ligament (ACL) injuries. Though directed care
by trained physical therapists has been shown to effectively prevent such
injuries, the resources available for such re-training are limited.
Unfortunately, the diagnosis of those at greatest risk for such ligament tears
depends upon expensive, time-consuming observations by trained clinicians using
qualitative metrics that have been shown to be challenging to consistently
apply. This project will develop automated prehabilitative techniques to
diagnose those at increased risk for ACL injury by constructing and
quantitatively analyzing an individual-specific musculoskeletal model of motion.
This will ensure the reliable behavior of the diagnostic technique created in
this project. Importantly, this broadly deployable approach will add a
preventive component for the treatment of ACL injuries that afflict more than
200,000 people annually and drastically affect a patient's quality of life
thereafter. More broadly, these models of motion will fundamentally change how
human assistive devices are controlled. The ability to leverage systems-based
techniques during control will enable the wide distribution of such assistive
devices, which currently require careful physician and engineer-guided tuning.
This project promotes the progress of science and contributes significantly to
advance the national health. The integrated education plan not only has direct
impact on undergraduate education but also provides great opportunities for K-12
students to explore STEM careers by exposing them to robotic control via hands-
on examples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports the development of
numerical techniques to diagnose an increased risk for ACL injury given
articulated pose observations from a set of cameras of an individual performing
a functional motion screen. To construct and verify the reliable behavior of
these methods, this project will explore the following three research
objectives: First, a new convex optimization tool to identify all
parameterizations and associated control inputs of a hybrid dynamical model that
explain a given set of observations. Second, a novel diagnostic tool that
tractably evaluates injury risk metrics across all identified model
parameterizations to ensure that misdiagnosis does not occur. Finally, a real-
world, two yearlong longitudinal evaluation on 25 healthy subjects and 125
patients who are undergoing rehabilitation after an ACL reconstructive surgery.
These innovations in dynamics, controls, and optimization will enable the
development of a completely automated, robust, individual, and motion specific
technique to identify those at increased risk for ACL injuries that cannot be
currently achieved with the existing human-guided
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.