* 1751050
* CAREER: Determining the Dynamic Role of Elastic Fibers in Cervovaginal Adaptations
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Kristin Miller, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project will support an
integrated research and education program to determine the role of elastic
fibers in the soft tissues of the female reproductive system. Elastic fibers are
present in most soft biological tissues and are critical to tissue function.
Loss of elastic fibers may contribute to significant health problems of the
female pelvic floor and lead to preterm birth and pelvic organ prolapse. This
project will develop a computer model that can predict how elastic fibers in the
soft tissues of the female reproductive system change in response to mechanical
pressure. This will help to advance health by determining causes for changes in
the tissue properties during pregnancy and during other normal events that
change tissue mechanical pressure. The knowledge and new computer modeling tools
could also be used to understand how other soft tissues containing elastic
fibers such as the lungs, blood vessels, skin, and the digestive system change
as the result of applied mechanical pressure. Research findings from this
project will be incorporated into a mobile telephone game, teaching modules for
K-12 education and into undergraduate and graduate biomedical engineering
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An experimentally-validated computational model
will be used to determine why and how elastic fibers influence mechanobiological
adaptations in biological tissues. This will be accomplished by: 1) Determining
the role of elastic fibers in evolving biaxial mechanical properties and
contractility in cervovaginal tissue in response to altered loads in situ using
a mechanical loading tissue culture system; 2) Formulating a biomechanical
growth and remodeling model that describes cervovaginal mechanical properties,
contractility, and extracellular matrix composition with and without compromised
elastic fibers; and 3) Validating the model by predicting the key features of
cervovaginal adaptations in response to altered mechanical
loading.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.