* 1751655
* CAREER: Exploring Dynamic Antenna Arrays for New Radar Sensing Modalities
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Jeffrey Nanzer, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Continual improvement of microwave wireless systems is critical to sustaining
new developments in many applications like radar, remote sensing and
communications, as well as advancements in broader science and society. However,
the ability to improve radio frequency and microwave wireless functionality is
inhibited by the platform-centric model in place today, where capability
improvements must be achieved by developing new individual systems. Such
improvements must often occur without increasing the size, weight, and power of
the system, since increasing transmit energy, signal gain, or spatial diversity
will result in larger size, aperture, or power, if not all three. This research
seeks to break the platform-centric paradigm by investigating new techniques in
dynamic distributed antenna arrays, where individual elements in a distributed
antenna array use dynamics in time and space to significantly enhance the system
functionality. Such dynamic arrays will lead to improvements of radar systems,
enabling greater capabilities for sensing the earth and its atmosphere from
satellites, improving target discrimination in military radar, and enabling
greater safety on autonomous vehicles. In addition, the project will implement
an educational plan for teaching new perspectives of antenna array theory and
new antenna array design concepts. The outreach plan will educate under-
represented student groups in engineering, both at the college and secondary
levels, to help expand STEM education in central
Michigan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to explore the use
of spatial and temporal dynamics of distributed antenna arrays to create new
modalities for radar and remote sensing. In particular, this research will
advance knowledge by exploring theoretical methods of formulating array concepts
in terms of a physical antenna array dynamics with waveform dynamics, and will
investigate new sensing modalities leveraging dynamic antenna arrays. Recent
developments by the PI's group and others have led to dramatically increased
connectivity between sensors on mobile platforms such as UAVs and autonomous
vehicles. Such connectivity and mobility set the stage for truly distributed
sensing capabilities, where a new dimension of control and motion of the array
elements can be exploited in innovative ways. This research will explore how
spatio-temporal dynamics in such distributed arrays can be formulated, analyzed,
implemented, and utilized to create new remote sensing modalities. Specifically,
the project has the following objectives: 1) Obtain a systematic theory of
spatio-temporal modulation in antenna arrays whose elements are dynamic in space
and frequency. This will develop the foundations of a new antenna array theory
that incorporates spatial frequency domain antenna analysis and spatio-temporal
dynamics to open a new dimension of control enabled by dynamic movement of the
array elements. 2) Explore the capabilities enabled by dynamic antenna arrays
for new radar and remote sensing measurements. This will lead to orders-of-
magnitude improvements in the angular resolution of radar measurements, and will
enable the creation of new radar measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.