* 1751905
* CAREER:Developing a Consensual Validation and Benchmarking Procedure for Pyroclastic Density Current (PDC) Hazard Models
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Sylvain Charbonnier, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 04/30/2024
* USD 428,764.00

This proposal focuses on advancing the breadth and depth of understanding of the
hazards associated with pyroclastic density currents (PDCs). The proposed study
will focus on five overarching goals: 1) developing a general
physical/sedimentological model applicable to all types of PDCs; 2) evaluate the
accuracy of numerical models in representing PDC-related phenomena through
community-based validation and benchmarking exercises; 3) drive future research
on PDC hazard assessment (e.g., "validation" experiments, field measurements,
uncertainty analysis); 4) provide a community-wide interpretation framework for
volcanic flow hazard assessment studies; 5) developing quantitative skills in
geoscience education and increasing awareness of the community about the
potential and limits of numerical tools ("model literacy") and the
complementarity of experimental (both laboratory and field based) and numerical
studies. This framework will provide critical information about the
uncertainties in hazard assessments that depend on these models. The drive for
this knowledge stems from the limited success of current hazard assessment
studies to capture the real hazard potential of such volcanic flows. The broader
goals for the proposed work are: (1) bringing multi-disciplinary teams together
to discuss the relationship between field studies, computational modeling and
hazard assessment; (2) increasing familiarity with and limitations of
computational modeling tools to both geoscience students and the broader
community; and (3) tailoring the hazard assessment to the needs of the user
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general approach is based on an iterative
process of integrating data, theories and models. In this process, the data
collection (through field investigations, laboratory experiments, remote
sensing, monitoring and numerical modeling) allow investigators to revisit and
revise scientific theories and principles (for example, a general
physical/sedimentological PDC model), which then serve as a basis for
computational and experimental models (through calibration, validation,
benchmarking and prediction) that can then be applied to the collected data to
improve the understanding of the dynamics of PDCs, as well as their hazard
assessment studies. This integrative study will follow the methodology proposed
for the validation of computational fluid dynamics codes designed to simulate
complex industrial and technological systems, based on a hierarchical process of
comparing numerical models with experiments and observations. In addition, the
Spreadsheets across the Curriculum (SSAC) educational model
(https://serc.carleton.edu/sp/ssac/index.html) will be integrated into the VHub
cyberinfrastructure (www.vhub.org) to: (1) enhance computational literacy in the
geosciences by promoting problem-solving using a structured environment, (2)
develop, share and disseminate all activities and deliverables related to model
validation and benchmarking efforts that will serve as a basis to drive future
research on volcanic flow hazard assessment studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.