* 1751085
* CAREER:Probe-to-Learn Power Distribution Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Vassilis Kekatos, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

The goal of this CAREER proposal is to develop a comprehensive data analytics
framework for distribution grids, engage students in the exciting field of
energy engineering, and advance education on distribution systems. To accomplish
any meaningful grid-wide optimization task, the distribution system operator
will need to precisely know the power consumed or generated at every node, the
line and transformer parameters, and the topology of the grid. However
currently, limited instrumentation and their sheer size render power
distribution grids unobservable in general. To complement the smart metering and
grid sensing infrastructure, the novel technique of grid probing is introduced
here. Grid probing can be accomplished by commanding smart inverters residing at
a subset of nodes to intentionally yet instantaneously perturb their power
injections. Actuating the networked physical system and subsequently sensing the
incurred voltages at metered nodes can unveil non-metered loads and network
topologies. The original and potentially transformative idea of engaging smart
inverters outside their intended control functionality pioneers new grid data
analytics. This program goes beyond probing and maps the observability limits by
processing smart meter data too. Contemporary optimization schemes together with
their real-time and decentralized variants will deal with streaming and
spatially incomplete voltage and power injection data collected at large-scale
unbalanced distribution networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the broader impact,
this program lies at the nexus of power systems, nonlinear system
identification, and statistical learning; advances our understanding of unique
patterns in grid data; and discovers novel uses for inverters in grid monitoring
and control. Enhancing situational awareness in distribution grids benefits
society by enabling the efficient and reliable integration of distributed
renewable energy, electric vehicles, and customer participation. The expected
benefits to industry are cutting-edge grid analytics solutions, advanced asset
management, and value added for inverters and smart meters. The proposed
activities bring about a potentially transformative paradigm for grid data
processing, neatly integrated with educational and outreach objectives. The
program reaches pre-college female students through hands-on learning activities
and collaborative app-based games on electric grids. It also involves
undergraduate research and continues our outreach to undergraduate students
through visits to residential communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.