* 1751212
* CAREER: Modeling the Intervertebral Disc Using Quantitative MR Imaging
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Grace O'Connell, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 06/30/2023
* USD 516,000.00

The soft discs between the bones in the human spine fail from mechanical causes
often during life, causing a great deal of pain. How fibrous composites fail is
not understood either for engineering materials of this type or, of course, for
the more complex material in the human spine. This Faculty Early Career
Development Program (CAREER) project will contribute to our understanding of the
mechanical behavior of these complex material composites. Fiber-reinforced
composites provide materials with greater stiffness due to the fibers and large
deformations from the softer extrafibrillar matrix. Fiber composites are
important in commercial and military applications, but also to understanding the
mechanical properties of human bodies. Many body tissues are fibrillar
composites. Understanding the mechanical behavior of the material under its
working environment and how load is transferred between neighboring tissues is a
significant challenge to understanding multiple diseases. In particular,
"slipped disc" of the human spine is a failure of the fibrillar composite
structure that we don't understand. Traditional material testing techniques
require specimens to be removed from their working position, significantly
altering the loading environment and boundary conditions. High-resolution
magnetic resonance imaging provides a noninvasive approach for determining the
composition of a spinal disc in a live person without injury. This project will
support fundamental research on how biological tissues change their mechanical
properties as a result of changes in composition. The work will be based on
magnetic resonance imaging methods because, later, the results of the project
can be used in living people as a noninvasive, safe way to assess changes in
mechanical behavior of body tissues. The project will help to advance the field
of disc mechanics, and the research results should apply to other soft tissues
of the body. Outreach to the community includes a plan to enhance STEM
engagement for girls based on the Principal Investigator's ongoing efforts in
local Oakland, CA and Berkeley, CA K-12 schools. Involvement of undergraduate
and graduate students in the outreach activities substantially amplifies the
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Noninvasive magnetic resonance imaging in
combination with finite element modeling addresses many limitations with current
approaches for understanding the mechanical behavior of composite structures,
such as the intervertebral disc. The disc includes a soft gel-like material
surrounded by a fiber-reinforced material. Hydration and swelling are important
for the mechanical function of the disc and changes with degeneration are known
to alter disc composition and mechanics. Changes in tissue composition result in
altered residual stresses, tissue anisotropy, and failure mechanics. The disc
provides an excellent model for understanding changes in stress distribution
between two distinct materials. The research team will use quantitative magnetic
resonance imaging to directly measure special changes in water and proteoglycan
composition, which will be used to develop a subject-specific computational
model that will be validated through joint- and tissue-level experiments. The
knowledge gained will be important for 1) understanding changes in soft tissue
mechanics with injury and degeneration, 2) developing innovative tools for
studying soft material mechanics, and 3) understanding the underlying mechanisms
that govern load distributions in complex soft
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.