* 1751874
* CAREER: Understanding Novae as Shock-Powered Explosions
* MPS,AST
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Laura Chomiuk, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 03/31/2023
* USD 730,425.00

Novae explosions are responsible for the sudden appearance and gradual fading of
light from a previously unknown star. They are known to be produced by binary
systems (two stars orbiting each other) in which one of the stars is a "white
dwarf". These stars are extremely dense, with a mass similar to the Sun's
compressed into an object the size of the Earth. When material is stripped from
the companion star and transferred to the surface of the white dwarf, a powerful
explosion can occur. This team will use a modern survey to find novae and to
follow up with detailed measurements using radio, optical/IR, and space based
telescopes. This will result in a deeper understanding of novae and the
processes that cause them. An educational program will be developed for rural
5-19 year olds in astronomy and physical sciences working with the Michigan 4H.
The MSU Observatory will host an Astronomy Club with monthly meetings and
sponsor members to develop independent projects for the County Fair.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will review the present data and obtain a
complete and unbiased sample of nova using a modern sky survey. They will also
monitor this sample with gamma-ray through radio observations. High-resolution
radio measurements will trace the evolution of the ejecta, leading to further
insight about the conditions and phenomena that produce novae. This research
will 1) Establish the first comprehensive and well-defined sample of Galactic
novae, 2) Determine which novae are shock-powered by observing them with the
gamma-ray telescope Fermi/LAT and HWAC, 3) Image novae ejecta with high
resolution capable radio arrays to map distribution of thermal ejecta and
pinpoint the location of synchrotron-emitting shocks in order to determine if
nova morphology is set by a universal mechanism or if variations in ejecta
geometry are linked to variations in shock powering
shaping.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.