* 1751230
* CAREER: Spiking Neural Circuits and Networks with Temporally Dynamic Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Kurtis Cantley, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2024
* USD 548,882.00

The human brain is adept at processing vast amounts of real-world information,
learning new concepts, and adapting to changing environments. Emulating the
plasticity and cognitive abilities of the brain using electronics will enable
new paradigms in computing not currently accessible with any digital system.
Achieving this goal requires new, efficient approaches that mimic an array of
complex mechanisms observed in biology. Chief among these are the rules
governing changes in the strength of connections between neurons. Synaptic
connection strengths are believed to be ultimately responsible for memory,
reasoning, perception, and other higher-order functions. A combination of
established and emerging semiconductor device and circuit technologies will be
used in this project to investigate networks with biologically-realistic
learning. Integrated education and outreach activities will enhance
understanding and awareness of biological and electronic neural networks for
middle and high school students, regionally and nationally.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports the development of electronic
spiking neural networks (SNNs) that capture the dynamic synaptic learning
modalities found in the brain. Circuit blocks with short-term memory will be
used in conjunction with devices that change electrical resistance over longer
periods to achieve synaptic learning that depends on spiking frequency as well
as individual spike times. A primary objective is the design, fabrication, and
testing of a neuro-synaptic architecture with learning rates tunable over a
range of milliseconds to hours. The physical system will then be used to study
cognitive tasks that combine classical conditioning and spatio-temporal pattern
recognition. Sensitivity of the network to device variations and control
parameters will be examined in terms of pattern recognition accuracy, power
consumption, and stability. Benchmarks will also be applied to quantify system
performance relative to other techniques. Ideas and concepts generated by this
research will ultimately advance the capabilities of intelligent machines
employed for a wide variety of tasks such as sensory processing, inference and
outcome prediction, anomaly detection, pattern recognition and classification,
and big data analytics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.