* 1751314
* CAREER: Valuing the Social in Engineering and Computer Science
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Coleen Carrigan, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 05/31/2024
* USD 621,050.00

Engineering and Computer Science (ECS) shapes our social, political and economic
environments, yet struggles to attract and retain a diversity of practitioners.
Why does ECS remain stubbornly segregated when it comes to gender parity? The
goal of this CAREER project is to use ethnography to compare subfields of ECS in
which women have different levels of participation. It investigates the
relationship between cultural values, norms and practices that 1) presume
practitioners from dominant groups are more competent than practitioners from
underrepresented groups; and 2) privilege the technical dimensions of computing
over the social ones. The uneven participation of women across ECS subfields
suggests that subfield cultural values and norms vary. To examine this
variation, this project focuses primarily on the experiences of female faculty
members because they are a critical population that shape the next generation of
ECS practitioners, have a long-standing relationships with their disciplinary
subfields, and may have experiences that could lend critical insights into the
social/technical divide. The project's findings articulate and forge pathways
toward broadening participation in ECS because they inform learning modules and
course curricula to educate students, faculty, and leaders in academia about the
benefits of diversity and transformations required to foster welcoming
environments for women to participate in ECS with equal opportunities, resources
and regard. Due to the prominence and impact of ECS, identifying gender
inequities in the field and interrupting them will help welcome and retain more
talented women from a range of intersectional identities. Harnessing the power
of diversity in this way will positively contribute to all domains on which
computing impinges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project is a comparative
analysis of the impact of subfield culture on women's representation in ECS. It
deconstructs theoretical assumptions undergirding ECS practices to understand
how complex, intersectional biases disenfranchise women from the field. To yield
new knowledge useful in efforts to broaden participation, this CAREER project
systematically conceptualizes how labor segregation may relate to an ideological
hierarchy between the social and technical dimensions of computing and influence
cultural exclusions along intersecting vectors of gender and race. Using a
theory-driven, interdisciplinary research approach that integrates gender and
racial equity research, anthropology and science and technology studies, this
CAREER project works to: 1) Develop and refine a theoretical model of change in
ECS to combat the covert and overt mechanisms that marginalize women; 2)
Describe and analyze epistemic bias emerging from ideologies that consider
empirical data superior to qualitative data and trivialize socially applied
research in ECS; 3) Identify and assess elements of culture in ECS that
reproduce or challenge inequitable power relations; 4) Describe women's
differential experiences in ECS subfields along vectors of race, ethnicity, and
gender identity; 5) Develop and analyze educational interventions into ECS
culture that spring from an original method integrating ethnography and case
study methods to both interrupt the reproduction of dominant class rule and to
study the beliefs and power relations of computing communities. Not only does
this project contribute a novel qualitative theory of cultural change in ECS, it
also tests innovative methods to better elucidate who and what counts in the
field and why. Further, it creates highly adaptable and sustainable techniques
that provide opportunities for engineers to practice recognizing and responding
to bias in social dynamics and articulating means of institutional change in
communion with their peers. Finally, this project provides much needed
anthropological theory to the problem of women's underrepresentation in ECS to
advance inclusive educational practices that support and capitalize on the
aptitudes of underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.