* 1751683
* CAREER:Revolutionizing Propylene Production via Oxidative Dehydrogenation and CO2 Dissociation in Tandem
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* George Tsilomelekis, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The development of catalytic routes for converting lower alkanes to olefins is a
challenging problem with high potential payoff due to the vast shale gas
resources that have recently become available. The overarching goal of this
project is to revolutionize propylene production from alkanes through an
innovative tandem catalytic reaction scheme that improves overall conversion and
selectivity. The project is based on a potentially transformative approach where
new paradigms in reaction mechanisms guide catalyst synthesis. A hierarchical
framework will be developed for rational design and characterization of
catalysts with significant potential broader impact in the energy, petrochemical
and chemical sectors of the US industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective
of this project is to develop a new class of bifunctional catalysts based on
sub-stoichiometric nanophase metal oxides that will work in a tandem reaction
scheme, where oxidative dehydrogenation of alkanes and carbon dioxide reduction,
via dissociative adsorption, will occur simultaneously without producing syngas.
The proposed novel tandem reaction scheme has the potential to intensify on-
purpose propylene production by preventing side reactions, such as coke
formation, and further aromatization of propylene. A new facile synthesis method
for producing oxygen-deficient anatase nanosheet catalysts is proposed by
utilizing highly amorphous solubilized cellulose as a sacrificial template. The
proposed experimental framework is based on optical reactor prototyping and
Operando spectroscopy, where the molecular structure and reactivity of the metal
oxide catalysts are studied simultaneously in a single optical cell by time- and
spatially-resolved Raman spectroscopy under real working conditions. Integration
of research and education is focused towards modernizing the chemical reaction
engineering curriculum with teaching modules on Operando spectroscopy. Outreach
efforts are aimed at engaging K-12 students, including underrepresented
minorities, by developing a freeware computer game that teaches principles of
molecular symmetry and spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.