* 1751847
* NSF Student and Junior Researcher Travel Grant for 2018 Intensive Research Program on Discrete, Combinatorial, and Computational Geometry
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Joseph S. Mitchell, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 12/31/2018
* USD 12,000.00

This travel award can defray costs for selected US-based students to participate
in the Intensive Research Program on Discrete, Combinatorial and Computational
Geometry (IRP-DCCG), which will take place April 16 through June 8, 2018 at the
Centre de Recerca Matematica, Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain. This event is a
multi-week program of mini-courses and state-of-the-art lectures, in addition to
hands-on experience with software and problem-solving designed to stir interest
and deepen capability for research in discrete, combinatorial, and computational
geometry, which in turn expands the opportunities for cross-fertilization
between areas of research and application. Several European funding sources
support lecturers. This award can defray some of the travel costs for two of the
many US-based lecturers, in addition to allowing US-based students to take
advantage of the event. It particularly encourages and facilitates the
participation of under-represented groups, giving junior researchers an
opportunity to engage in the important technical, professional, and
international exchanges that are fostered at a multi-week intensive research
event. For information and selection criteria, see
http://dccg.upc.edu/events/intensive-research-program-on-
dccg.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.