* 1751805
* CAREER: An integrated molecular and physiological approach to examining the dynamics of upwelled phytoplankton in current and changing oceans
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Adrian Marchetti, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,078,222.00

Upwelling zones are hotspots of photosynthesis that are very dynamic in space
and time. Microsocopic algae, known as phytoplankton, bloom when deep, nutrient-
rich waters are upwelled into sunlit surface layers of the ocean, providing
nourishment that supports productive food webs and draws down carbon dioxide
(CO2) from the atmosphere to the deep ocean. Photosynthetic microbes in these
regions must constantly adapt to changes in their chemical and physical
environments. For example, subsurface populations respond to changes in light as
they approach the surface. When upwelled waters move offshore, cells sink out of
the illuminated zone, establishing seed populations that remain inactive until
the next upwelling event. This process is called the upwelling conveyor belt
cycle (UCBC). How phytoplankton respond to these changes in environmental
conditions and how they may influence their nutrient requirements remains
unknown. With future ocean changes predicted to alter seawater chemistry,
including ocean acidification and decreased iron availability, some
phytoplankton groups may be more vulnerable than others. Accompanying
educational activities provide learning experiences to enhance understanding and
awareness of marine microbes. The development of a research hub at UNC aims to
provide infrastructure and support for scientists and students conducting
research on environmental genomics. A laboratory component for an upper-level
undergraduate course focused on marine phytoplankton is being developed.
Educational outreach activities to broader communities include creation of a
lesson plan on phytoplankton in upwelling zones and a virtual research cruise
experience for middle-school students, as well as a hands-on lab activity for a
local museum focused on marine phytoplankton and the important roles they play
in shaping our planet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project examines how
phytoplankton respond at the molecular and physiological level to the different
UCBC stages, which seed populations (i.e., surface versus subsurface) contribute
most to phytoplankton blooms during upwelling events of varying intensity, how
phytoplankton elemental compositions are altered throughout UCBC stages, and how
future predicted ocean conditions will affect the phytoplankton responses to
UCBC conditions. This project contains both laboratory and fieldwork. In the
laboratory, phytoplankton isolates recently obtained from upwelling regions are
exposed to simulated UCBC conditions to examine changes in gene expression,
growth and photosynthetic characteristics and elemental composition. Cultures
are subjected to both current and future ocean conditions, including reduced
iron availability and higher CO2. In the field, research cruises within
upwelling regions study the dynamics of natural phytoplankton communities (both
surface and subsurface) experiencing upwelling and relaxation and within
simulated upwelling incubation experiments. Knowledge of how phytoplankton are
affected by UCBC conditions at an integrated molecular, physiological and
elemental level under both current and future scenarios is imperative for the
proper conservation and management of these critically important
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.