* 1751157
* CAREER:   Islands as Models to Study Effects of Multidimensional Selection
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2024
* Christine Parent, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,117,829.00

This project will study the question of what governs the diversity of species
using the Galapagos Islands, where factors influencing diversity range in their
complexity. The islands of the Galapagos vary in age from young (less than
50,000 years old) to old (more than 4 million years old). This range in age can
be used to study how biological diversity is shaped when communities are simple
with few interacting species (on young islands), and when communities are more
complex and characterized by numerous biological interactions (on older
islands). This project will measure the rate at which new species are formed and
diversity accumulates across a group of approximately 80 species of land snails
forming the Galapagos's largest proliferation of species diversity. A
combination of field and laboratory studies will be used to understand how the
rate of evolution is influenced by the complexity of natural selection. A course
for undergraduate students at the University of Idaho will introduce students to
biodiversity patterns and guide them through the underlying evolutionary core
principles generating these patterns using a series of field research excursions
in the Pacific Northwest that is analogous to the Galapagos research
expeditions. Students will also follow Galapagos research via Adventure Learning
capsules (videos and integrated teaching material) which will guide and inspire
them in the development of their own local research projects. Outreach
activities also include developing a bilingual English-Spanish guidebook of
Galapagos terrestrial snails, presentations and workshops for Galapagos park
rangers, staff scientists, and guides, and disseminating research results in
scientific publications, textbooks, magazines and the popular
press.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Islands are living laboratories where evolutionary
change is clear, tangible, and can be directly observed. On Galapagos, the
number of selection pressures increases from young to old islands as species
assemble in more diverse and complex communities. Although substantial research
efforts have been devoted to quantify selection in simple environments, there is
a need to characterize the effects and interactions of multiple selection
pressures in complex natural biological systems, and the proposed work will fill
this gap. The project will characterize variation in morphological and
physiological traits of snails and quantify variation in multiple environmental
factors for the approximately 80 Galapagos endemic land snail species of the
genus Naesiotus and their mainland relatives. Species-level phylogenetic history
of the lineage will be reconstructed to determine the number of independent
colonization events that led to the diversity of Galapagos Naesiotus snails, and
put the phenotype-environment association analyses in a phylogenetically-
informed framework. The data will then be used to address hypotheses related to
the effects of multiple selection pressures (i.e., increased complexity) on the
rate of phenotypic change and adaptation in this
lineage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.