* 1751309
* CAREER: Development of Pedagogical Content Knowledge in Mathematics Among Beginning Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Yasemin Copur-Gencturk, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 03/31/2024
* USD 629,864.00

Pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) plays a vital role in carrying out quality
instruction and improving students' learning. Despite the evidence reported in
expert-novice teacher literature suggesting that teachers become experts by
gaining PCK through on-the-job learning, little is known about what and how
teachers learn during their early career. This project addresses the fundamental
issue of how and under what conditions beginning Grades 3 to 7 teachers of
mathematics improve their PCK, what learning opportunities play a role in
beginning teachers' PCK growth, and what the learning trajectories look like for
beginning mathematics teachers. Although this project primarily focuses on
teachers' PCK development in the areas of fractions and proportional reasoning,
it has the potential to inform research on teachers' PCK development in other
topic areas or disciplines. The work will contribute significantly to advancing
our understanding of the learning opportunities that are key to beginning
teachers' learning and knowledge development, and the results of this research
will have the potential to guide the work of and interventions by researchers
and teacher educators. This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research
(ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research
that generates foundational knowledge in the field. The Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) program is a National Science Foundation (NSF)-wide
activity that offers awards in support of junior faculty who exemplify the role
of teacher-scholars through outstanding research, excellent education, and the
integration of education and research within the context of the mission of their
organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this longitudinal mixed-methods study
design, at least 200 Grades 3 to 7 elementary and middle school teachers of
mathematics will be followed from their first to third year of teaching to
explore their growth in PCK in mathematics, in particular, fractions and
proportional reasoning. A subsample of 12 teachers with varying initial levels
of PCK will be selected for the qualitative phase of the study, which involves
conducting a microgenetic analysis to investigate mechanisms of their PCK
development. Additionally, the generalizability of key professional learning
opportunities identified in the qualitative phase will be assessed using the
larger sample. Outcomes from this research will be translated into educational
activities and pedagogical resources that can be used by other researchers and
teacher educators as a means of enhancing the PCK of elementary and middle
school teachers of mathematics. The project results will include developing a
theory of beginning Grades 3-7 teachers' PCK growth and creating resources for
researchers and teacher educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.