* 1751965
* CAREER: Effects of thermal nonequilibrium on the acoustic noise radiated by a compressible turbulent boundary layer
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Stuart Laurence, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 03/31/2023
* USD 528,407.00

In gaseous flows over solid surfaces, the thin near-wall region can become
chaotic and turbulent; these turbulent motions can then cause the generation of
intense, outward-propagating sound waves, especially when the flow is
supersonic. This project seeks to understand such noise generation when the gas
in question (e.g., carbon dioxide, or high-temperature air) absorbs sound waves
at certain frequencies. In particular, it is thought that by introducing such a
gas into a near-surface flow of air, the noise generation can be reduced in
configurations such as high-speed wind tunnels, where this noise can severely
contaminate measurements. In conjunction, a variety of educational activities
will be undertaken to introduce students at all levels to high-speed flows,
including the creation of a YouTube channel where students can suggest objects
to be flown in a Mach-8 wind tunnel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A systematic
experimental study will be conducted to investigate turbulence-generated noise
in the presence of a vibrationally relaxing gas. Acoustic attenuation
measurements will be performed in quiescent pure gases (e.g., CO2, N2O) and gas
mixtures to identify strong acoustically absorbing combinations at pressures and
temperatures relevant to high-speed flows; results will be compared with
theoretical attenuation models. Experiments in supersonic and hypersonic wind
tunnels will examine the acoustic noise generated by a high-speed turbulent
boundary layer: first, with the species identified in the earlier quiescent
experiments as test gases; and subsequently with these species introduced
locally into the boundary layer of an air flow. Effects of nonequilibrium on
surface-pressure and turbulent velocity fluctuations will also be determined.
This work will ultimately provide a fundamental understanding of thermal
nonequilibrium effects on high-speed turbulence, as well as potentially provide
a control mechanism for the reduction of acoustic noise in hypersonic wind
tunnels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.