* 1751400
* CAREER:Enabling Scalable, Modular, and Efficient Architecture Specialization Fabrics
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Anthony Nowatzki, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 04/30/2023
* USD 483,606.00

Past exponential improvements to computer processor capabilities are now being
threatened by a long-term slowdown of the progress in physical device
technologies. An alternate approach is to specialize processor design for a
small set of tasks, sacrificing generality for improved performance and energy-
efficiency. However, if hardware specialization is relied on too much, the pace
of innovation for new and fast-moving applications will be stifled. Hence, new
techniques are required to balance the fundamental trade-offs between the
efficiency of specialized processors with the usefulness of general processors.
A promising way forward is the development of specialization fabrics, where the
software interface and hardware implementation are co-designed to enable
efficient execution of programs with broad application characteristics. This
CAREER award develops the principles behind building such fabrics, addressing
their two main challenges. The first is scalability: how to support vast amounts
of computational units without mitigating the benefits of specialization. The
second is modularity: how to enable simple tailoring of the fabric to a
particular design setting (e.g. for a datacenter machine, phone, or wearable)
through composable hardware. The broad potential of this work is to enable
principled specialized hardware which can continue to bring exponential
performance and energy improvements, both through dissemination of discovered
principles and through open source releases of hardware and software. For
industry, the developed frameworks can enable hardware companies to leverage
zero-design-effort hardware tailored for their use cases. For academia, these
can lower the cost of entry of hardware/software co-design research, and enable
researchers to make cross-domain innovations more easily. This framework is
being integrated into courses to teach the fundamental interactions between
hardware and software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall, the broad goal of this work
is to create a programmable accelerator fabric, scalable to high throughput, and
whose features can be modularly composed - ultimately enabling accelerator-like
performance and energy efficiency across many domains. Intellectually, it
furthers the unification of two disparate fields of computer architecture, the
study of on-chip memory systems and the study of architectural specialization.
The project develops the principles of scalable and modular specialization
fabrics through two thrusts. The first explores how to leverage high-level ISA
constructs to rethink the design of the cache hierarchy and on-chip
communication network for specialization fabrics, which are typically
constrained by communication bandwidth or access/storage energy. The key
innovation is to expose to the memory system a set of higher level abstractions
describing coarse-grain patterns of memory access. Leveraging this information
can reduce the inefficiencies of communication and tag/redundant cache access,
but requires a significant overhaul to existing protocols to maintain simple
memory semantics. The second thrust develops a framework for composing modular
architecture features to enable trivial hardware customization for vastly
different application domains. The key innovation is the development of high-
level ISA features which have a direct correspondence to composable hardware
structures. This thrust develops a template design and instruction-set
description for composing ISA-exposed microarchitecture features, explores a set
of ISA features for regular and irregular workloads, and develops a compiler to
hide ISA complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.