* 1751735
* CAREER: Molecular Characterization of Motions, Interactions, and Structure of the Lithium Salts in Organic Solvents via Non-Linear Infrared Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Daniel Kuroda, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2024
* USD 667,981.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A)
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Daniel Kuroda of Louisiana State
University and his undergraduate and graduate students are using advanced laser
methods and computer simulations to study the chemical structure of lithium
salts in different organic solvents. Organic solutions of lithium salts have
become ubiquitous to science and engineering, through their use in energy
storage, pharmaceutical formulations, and industrial chemical processes. Lithium
salts contain positively charged lithium ions ("cations") and negatively charged
ions ("anions"). How the molecules of the solvent are arranged around the
cations and anions of the salt determines the properties of the solution, for
instance its electrical conductivity. Observing such molecular arrangements is
difficult because the molecules and ions are always moving quickly throughout
the solution. Professor Kuroda's group uses advanced laser spectroscopies to
instantaneously probe the spatial arrangement of the lithium salt components in
the liquid. These studies are advancing scientists' general understanding of the
structure of ionic solutions, and may ultimately help engineers design lithium
salt solutions for different technological applications.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Daniel G. Kuroda and his research group utilizes an array of
infrared laser spectroscopies, including two dimensional infrared spectroscopy,
to obtain dynamics and structural information about lithium salts in the organic
solvents. The approach has shown substantial promise on its own, but when
combined with well-established theoretical methodologies provides direct
molecular insights. Thus, the experimental methodology allows one to obtain a
comprehensive molecular picture of lithium salts in different organic solutions,
including the formation and dissociation of ion pairs. The research products
also serve as guides for the rational design of the lithium salt solutions in
applications, such as electrochemical storage systems. All of the students
involved in the project receive training in modern ultrafast laser
spectroscopies, computer simulations, data analysis, and theoretical modeling.
In addition to the higher education component, the outreach part of the award
also focuses on helping and assisting high school teachers in preparing
curricular and extra-curricular activities, and on giving high school students
the opportunity of performing college level chemistry laboratory classes in the
university chemistry laboratory environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.