* 1751720
* CAREER: Predictive kinetic modeling of halogenated hydrocarbon combustion
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Richard West, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 06/30/2024
* USD 503,888.00

Halogenated hydrocarbons (HHCs) are widely used as both refrigerants and fire
suppressants. Driven by environmental and economic considerations, there is
rapid innovation in the industry, but the next generation of HHC compounds raise
fire safety concerns. Predicting the combustion behavior of these novel HHCs
earlier in the design process will save much time, effort, and expense. The
chemical kinetic models for describing HHC combustion are highly complex,
comprising thousands of elementary reactions involving hundreds of chemical
species. To effectively predict these combustion behaviors, we must automate the
construction of kinetic models. This project will use a computational approach
known as machine learning to help model these complex reacting systems. This
breakthrough will enable us to develop an automated reaction mechanism
generation tool to create detailed kinetic models for combustion of HHCs. The
methodology proposed in this work are not only novel and necessary, but will be
widely applicable in other aspects of automated mechanism generation. The
integrated educational objective of this CAREER project is to develop a series
of computational modules teaching students to solve problems throughout their
chemical engineering curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research approach is
to extend and apply automated Reaction Mechanism Generator (RMG) software to
create detailed kinetic models for combustion of any mix of hydrocarbons
containing any combination of halogen atoms. Optimized decision-tree and novel
convolutional neural network algorithms from the field of machine learning will
be extended to enable the necessary restructuring of parameter estimation codes.
Quantum chemistry calculations will be automated to supplement literature
searches to generate the necessary training data. The model-generating tool will
be validated against available experimental data from key example compounds, and
used to explain the remarkable combustion behavior of these compounds. The
educational program is aligned with the research, developing a series of
computational modules that will be integrated into existing classes. These
modules will teach students to use Python and SciPy to solve chemical
engineering problems. The integration of teaching modules for scientific
computing throughout the undergraduate chemical engineering curriculum will help
prepare a generation of graduate engineers for a workplace in which data
analysis, processing, and computation are increasingly
important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.