* 1751840
* CAREER: Closed-loop control of engineered metabolism using biosensors and optogenetics
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Jose Avalos, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 05/31/2023
* USD 524,786.00

Biotechnology can produce a vast number of valuable products from renewable
sources. One barrier to making these products economically is our inability to
easily redirect cellular metabolism to maximize production. New technologies to
significantly improve our ability to control engineered microorganisms, using
light and biological sensors, will be developed. This strategy will enable feed-
back controls, in which light signals used to fine-tune enzyme concentrations
are informed by fluorescence signals from biosensors in real time. The approach
will allow the development of entirely new technologies to control, optimize,
and operate fermentations, as well as improve our basic understanding of how
enzyme concentrations affect product formation. The results of this project will
be incorporated into several courses currently taught. Outreach activities to
two organizations with which the PI has been involved previously (Hispanics
Inspiring Student's Performance and Achievement, and Society for the Advancement
of Chicano/Hispanics and Native Americans in Science) will promote STEM-related
careers among under-represented groups and encourage their participation in
related research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
develop a closed-loop control system for metabolic engineering using biosensors
and optogenetics. Three components will be integrated in the same yeast strain:
(i) a metabolic pathway to produce a chemical of interest; (ii) a biosensor to
monitor the activity of said pathway; and (iii) optogenetic tools to control
enzyme expression levels. This will allow fine-tuning of enzyme concentrations
using light. These three components have been developed in separate yeast
strains in the PI's lab. The first objective is to integrate all three
components in a single yeast strain. Success will be demonstrated by the
production of branched chain alcohols. The second objective is to adapt an
existing optogenetic tool sensitive to red and infrared light to work
orthogonally with the existing blue light system. This technology will open the
door to new strategies to operate and optimize fermentations, such as by using
periodic light pulses with feedback controls, providing unprecedented
capabilities for operating, optimizing, and automating
fermentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.