* 1751898
* CAREER: Biomechanics of the Pericellular Matrix of Fibrous Tissues
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Lin Han, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 07/31/2024
* USD 516,000.00

The cells in cartilage and other soft tissues are surrounded by a soft matrix of
molecules that the cells produce. The response of a cell to mechanical loading
depends on the mechanical properties of this matrix. If it is soft or stiff will
change whether the cell is protected from mechanical loadings or whether it is
not. The mechanical loads on cells are known to modify the cell's production of
matrix molecules and also to change how fast the cell produces repair molecules
for cartilage. The matrix, therefore, helps to control how loads on cartilage
(or other soft tissues) change the cell activity. This effect of the matrix will
be analyzed in this Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) research
project. Education and outreach activities will be integrated with the research.
A new course will be developed to increase the learning of biomechanics and
nanotechnology for students at Drexel. The PI will give workshops on
biomechanics for Philadelphia inner city high school teachers and students, and
develop a science museum exhibition display with the structure-mechanics of
connective tissues as the focus. The research will add knowledge of how
mechanical loading effects cartilage metabolism, a key part of understanding and
preventing cartilage diseases such as osteoarthritis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will generate new knowledge on the biomechanics of the pericellular
matrix (PCM) of fibrous tissues, to advance the understanding of fibrous tissue
cell mechanotransduction. The fibrous tissue PCM is composed of porous collagen
fibril network and proteoglycans (PGs). We hypothesize that this specialized PCM
can attenuate cell strain under tension, and this function is mediated by its
glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) on the PGs and the collagen fibril network. Using
murine meniscus fibrous outer zone as the model tissue, we will test this
hypothesis in two specific aims. In aim 1, we will test if removal of GAGs of
the PCM reduces its compressive modulus, and thus, increases ECM-cell strain
transmission and alters cell calcium signaling and metabolism under tension. In
aim 2, we will alter the PCM collagen fibril structure by reducing the
expression of collagen V in mice. We will test if loss of collagen V increases
the PCM fibril alignment, and thus, cell strain transmission. These results will
reveal the contribution of GAGs and collagen fibrils to the function of PCM in
mediating cell mechanotransduction, achieving our overall
goal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.