* 1751399
* CAREER: Algorithms for Gene Family Evolution with Gene Duplication, Loss, and Coalescence
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2024
* Yi-Chieh Wu, Harvey Mudd College
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 04/30/2024
* USD 505,522.00

Evolution of genes and genomes is responsible for the immense biological
diversity on our planet.&lt;br/&gt;However, despite its central role as the most
fundamental property of life, the process of evolution&lt;br/&gt;remains poorly
understood, and current models have typically been unable to span the diversity
of&lt;br/&gt;scales at which evolution can act. This work addresses this
fundamental shortcoming by developing new&lt;br/&gt;models and algorithms that
simultaneously account for the most prevalent processes in eukaryotic
gene&lt;br/&gt;family evolution: gene duplication, loss, and coalescence. The
new computational framework and&lt;br/&gt;methods will enable researchers to
systematically interpret data sets, make substantially more
reliable&lt;br/&gt;and robust inferences, and improve our understanding of
genome evolution. Because these histories&lt;br/&gt;form the basis of many
genomic studies, these results will, in turn, benefit many areas of
biology.&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, the PI is committed to educating the next
generation of scientists. As part of this project,&lt;br/&gt;the PI will provide
compelling research experiences for a substantial number of undergraduates,
develop&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate courses in Data Science, and continue engaging
in several college-wide and external&lt;br/&gt;initiatives aimed at broadening
participation in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops models and
algorithms in the field of phylogenetic reconciliation, which&lt;br/&gt;compares
a gene tree with its species tree to infer the evolutionary events that link
them. For&lt;br/&gt;eukaryotic organisms, the most popular reconciliation
methods allow for gene duplications and gene&lt;br/&gt;losses, which is
appropriate only for species sampled at large evolutionary distances, or allow
for&lt;br/&gt;coalescences, which is appropriate only for species sampled at
close evolutionary distances. That is,&lt;br/&gt;each model provides only a
partial view of evolution, limiting their applicability and accuracy.
By&lt;br/&gt;bridging these two models, this research will impact how gene
family evolution is represented and how&lt;br/&gt;reconciliations are inferred
and analyzed. Specifically, this work addresses three key problems in
the&lt;br/&gt;field: algorithmic challenges of scaling to large datasets,
statistical challenges of distinguishing biological&lt;br/&gt;signal from noise,
and modeling challenges of generalizing across genomes. Expected
contributions&lt;br/&gt;include novel algorithms and heuristics for the
reconciliation problem, methods for resolving&lt;br/&gt;multifurcating trees,
and models that can account for multiple samples per species and for
species&lt;br/&gt;hybridization. In addition, the joint evolutionary models and
inference algorithms developed here may&lt;br/&gt;motivate further unified
approaches in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.