* 1751029
* CAREER: System Support for Capable, Reliable Intermittently-Powered Computer Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2023
* Brandon Lucia, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 12/31/2023
* USD 654,500.00

Energy-harvesting devices are an emerging class of tiny, embedded computing and
sensing systems that operate by collecting small amounts of energy extracted
from their environment, tapping into sources such as radio waves, solar energy,
and vibration. With system support to make batteryless devices operate reliably,
these devices will be a key enabler of future applications including the
Internet of things, disaster zone and conflict zone sensing and communication,
wearable and implantable medical devices, and aerospace applications including
chip-scale nano-satellites. Building reliable batteryless hardware and software
computer systems is a challenge because, unlike in a typical system, energy is
only intermittently available. When a batteryless device's intermittent energy
supply is interrupted, the system suddenly resets, erasing some of the
computer's memory, retaining some parts of the computers memory, and requiring
the system to collect more energy before it can continue operating. The
intermittent power interruptions that occur in a batteryless system lead to new
kinds of software errors are extremely difficult for a system designer to
understand and fix. &lt;br/&gt;The work in this project develops the tools and
techniques required for non-experts to build batteryless computer systems that
are highly reliable, efficient, and capable. Making these systems reliable
enables their use in societally important domains that demand dependable
operation including in medical devices, defense applications, and emerging
consumer space exploration systems. This project will make batteryless systems
accessible to even non-expert system builders, allowing entrepreneurs,
researchers, and hobbyists to leverage these crucially important future computer
sytems. Technology transfer of the ideas in the project will allow industry to
incorporate batteryless computer systems into products, contributing to existing
economic sectors such as the Internet of Things and Smart Cities devices. Future
industry adoption of the ideas in this proposal will contribute to the creation
of new economic sectors around reliable, batteryless medical devices, disaster
zone and war zone sensing and communication devices, and emerging small
satellite-based devices.&lt;br/&gt;The project serves the national interest with
a coherent, integrated research and education plan that will help to prepare the
next generation of STEM innovators, technology workers, makers, and
computational thinkers. The project's products incorporate into graduate and
undergraduate curricular development and research creating an immediate impact
and equipping undergraduate and graduate students to innovate using batteryless
computer systems. The project's high school intern program component and high
school outreach program enables early learners to understand and use batteryless
computer systems and develop an early interest in STEM. The work makes
batteryless computing devices broadly accessible facilitating outreach outside
of the STEM field, allowing even artists and designers to use products of this
project in creative applications. The purpose of outreach to high schoolers and
creative users is to encourage involvement of under-represented minorities in
computing and to build a more diverse and effective future STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;