* 1751971
* CAREER:   Computational Design and Optimization of Operationally Robust Crystal Nucleating Materials via Surface Nano-Patterning
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Amir Haji-Akbari, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 03/31/2024
* USD 521,000.00

Single crystalline materials are in high demand for a variety of applications in
the electronics, solar energy conversion and aerospace industries. Large-scale
growth of single crystals typically requires conducting crystallization under
conditions at which the nucleation rate is slow enough to prevent the formation
of polycrystalline particles. This process is time consuming and expensive. The
proposed research is aimed at using advanced computational techniques to study
the use of engineered surfaces, called crystal nucleating agents (CNAs), for
accelerating the nucleation and growth of single crystals. The proposed studies
aim to develop fundamental theories that can be used for optimizing crystal
growth of a variety of materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of
this project is to develop a fundamental understanding of the effects of
nanoscale patterning of a CNA surface on crystal nucleation and to identify
operating conditions leading to reduced sensitivity of the nucleation rate to
changes in process variables over a wide range of operating conditions within
the nucleation-limited regime. This previously unknown deviation from the
classical picture of heterogeneous nucleation is interesting to explore and
understand from a theoretical perspective. The proposed research will
computationally explore how different features of a nano-patterned CNA surface
affect the sensitivity of nucleation rate to temperature and concentration in
the nucleation-limited regime, and use that knowledge to design optimal CNA
surfaces that offer the smallest sensitivity of rate to operating conditions at
specific nucleation rates. The insights obtained from such theoretical and
computational investigations can result in design rules that can guide
experimental efforts to design operationally robust CNA materials. Integration
of research and education will be focused towards developing a new course on
Computational Materials Science for graduate and undergraduate students.
Outreach efforts will involve public presentations and programming workshops
targeting underrepresented minority students to motivate them to pursue career
paths in STEM fields. The proposed project also involves the development of an
advanced sampling software package that will be publicly shared with researchers
that study rare events in a wide variety of physical, chemical and biological
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.