* 1751601
* CAREER: A Modeling and Educational Framework to Support Air Quality Management in a Smoky Atmosphere
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2024
* Fernando Garcia Menendez, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 01/31/2024
* USD 525,956.00

Wildfires and prescribed fires are the largest source of fine particulate matter
emissions in the United States. Smoke from these fires exposes millions of
individuals to unhealthy air quality each year. In spite of this, fire is an
essential component of many natural ecosystems where fire suppression has proven
to be an unsustainable practice that harms the natural balance. The PI will
develop computational tools and innovative assessments to help US land managers
lessen the impact to human health of air pollution from smoke, while at the same
time restoring the natural fire cycle to improve ecosystem health. Concurrent
with this applied research initiative will be an educational program to train
specialized environmental engineers and inform different segments of the US
public about the benefits and challenges associated with wildland fire.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wildland managers routinely manipulate fire, through
prescribed burns and mechanical land treatments, to reduce the risk of hazardous
wildfire and achieve important ecological objectives; however, these fire
projects often fail to quantitatively account for the health impacts of smoke
exposure. In contrast, air quality regulations seek to mitigate the negative
effects of air pollution on public health but can overlook the value of active
land management. Through computational modeling, environmental engineering
education, and outreach the PI aims to align these air quality and land
management objectives. To pursue this aim, the project includes the following
goals: 1) enable fire management based on potential health impacts; 2)
incorporate air pollution externalities into prescribed fire planning; 3)
develop integrated land management and air quality scenarios; and 4) change
perceptions of fire and smoke through environmental engineering education. New
modeling tools that encompass aspects from emissions to air pollution exposure
will facilitate fire project management while minimizing potential health
impacts. High-performance computing and ensemble modeling will be used to
generate geographic assessments of the public health externalities of prescribed
fire, facilitating their inclusion in regional wildland fire planning. The PI
will also develop integrated land management and air quality scenarios that
jointly consider wildfire risk, land treatments, air quality, and public health
impacts. These scenarios will provide a basis for comprehensive integrated
assessment modeling of wildland fire beyond smoke impacts. The PI will seek to
change misguided perceptions of fire and smoke among scientific and broader
communities by establishing an educational partnership with the North Carolina
State Division of Parks and Recreation centered on wildland fire and smoke. A
key outcome of this work will be the formation of graduate and undergraduate
environmental engineers trained in simulation of complex environmental systems
and effective science communication. In addition, summer research experiences
will expose high school students to environmental research and encourage the
participation of students from underrepresented groups in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.