* 1751216
* CAREER: Decoding the Enigmas of U.S. Seismic Hazard Via Multi-Scale, Multi-Physics Approaches to Paleoliquefaction Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Brett Maurer, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 540,724.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project will contribute
knowledge that reduces the uncertainty of seismic hazards in the United States,
thereby promoting scientific progress and the nation's prosperity and welfare.
Nationally, there are many regions in which seismic hazards are especially
uncertain because the return periods of earthquakes are longer than the historic
record. In other words, it is known that earthquakes have and will continue to
occur, but because prior earthquakes predate human records and/or the advent of
seismic instruments, the expected characteristics of future earthquakes are
highly uncertain. In these locales, soil liquefaction caused by past
earthquakes, termed "paleoliquefaction," may provide the only evidence from
which information about the seismic-hazard can be determined, including
earthquake magnitudes, locations, and recurrence-rates. As a result, U.S.
building codes are heavily influenced by paleoliquefaction evidence, and in
turn, so too is public safety. This award supports fundamental research to
improve the analysis of paleoliquefaction, which at present suffers from
limitations that can lead to highly erroneous results. The findings will not
only advance paleoliquefaction analytics, but will also benefit the
understanding of liquefaction hazards in general, thus further reducing
earthquake impacts on the built and natural environments. In addition, an
educational research component will investigate links between seismic risk
perception and socio-psychological bias, leading to more effective educational
platforms in natural hazards engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
project aims to remove ubiquitous barriers to the accurate inverse-analysis of
paleoliquefaction, which will be achieved by bridging fundamental knowledge-gaps
at three distinct scales. The research includes: (1) micro-scale physical-
numerical investigation of the mechanics controlling the formation and
morphology of fluidized dikes and sand boils; (2) meso-scale formulation of a
coupled, mechanically-consistent liquefaction triggering and manifestation
model; and (3) a macro-scale approach to probabilistically geolocate seismic
sources from paleoliquefaction and assess their rupture magnitudes. An
analytical framework developed from the fundamental research will then be
applied to paleoliquefaction evidence in regions where enigmatic seismic-hazards
significantly impact society. These include the Cascadia Subduction Zone of the
Northwest U.S.; the New Madrid Seismic Zone of the Central U.S.; the South
Carolina Coastal Plain of the Eastern U.S.; and Coastal New England in the
Northeast U.S. Aided by physical and numerical multi-scale modeling, field
testing, and unprecedented case-history data, this research will advance both
paleoliquefaction analytics and the understanding of liquefaction hazards in
general, thus reducing future earthquake impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.