* 1751498
* CAREER: Collective behavior in multi-agent systems with active sensing
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Nicole Abaid, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 02/29/2024
* USD 514,400.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project will study how
large groups of individual agents may collectively use active sensing to improve
on the performance of any one individual. In particular, the project seeks to
understand and emulate the way in which swarms of bats use echolocation, which
is a type of active sensing. In active sensing, for example sonar or lidar, an
agent uses the reflection of an emitted signal to learn about its surroundings.
Passive sensing, in contrast, relies on the reflection or emission of signals
originating elsewhere, such as vision systems that rely on ambient light, or
thermal imaging systems that detect heat. In large bat swarms it has been
observed that some members seem to navigate by "eavesdropping" on signals
emitted by other bats, instead of generating their own. This observation raises
many possibilities, including questions of whether eavesdropping changes the
behaviors that the swarm can achieve. This project will address these questions
through studies on wild bat swarms, then will employ the results in experiments
on multiple mobile robots. Of interest will be the ways that simple rules for
active sensing by the collective may give rise to complex emergent behavior. The
results of this project will benefit national prosperity and welfare by enabling
new capabilities in multi-agent networks of mobile robots, for applications such
as search and rescue, surveillance and environmental monitoring, package
delivery, and construction. This work will also provide insight into the native
behavior of bats, many species of which are critically imperiled due to disease
and habitat loss. The project includes engagement with K-12 students across
Virginia, and supports the development of educational modules that will be
disseminated to classrooms throughout the state. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role
of sensing in the collective behavior of multi-agent systems -- and particularly
the impact that active and passive sensing may have on emergent phenomena -- is
currently unexplored. Robotic systems are increasingly turning to distributed
approaches, therefore understanding how to leverage their interaction over
sensing channels could represent a paradigm shift in the control of such
systems. This project seeks to provide a new vision for the dynamics and control
of multi-agent systems by coupling sensing and communication. This project is
motivated by the intercepted sensing observed in bat swarms. The research team
will collect quantitative data from field experiments with wild gray bats,
perform model-free analyses to determine how collective sensing and behavior
manifests in bats, use this insight to inform and validate a model of group
behavior with active sensing, and create numerical and robotic testbeds for
hypothesis-based exploration of these novel collective
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.