* 1751255
* CAREER: Towards Automated Security Vulnerability and Patch Management for Power Grid Operations
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Qinghua Li, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2024
* USD 427,600.00

The power grid is a critical infrastructure for national security, the economy,
and daily life, and faces many cybersecurity threats. A proof-of-concept attack
hit the Ukraine in 2015, and cut off the power supply to hundreds of thousands
of people for several hours. In many successful cyber attacks so far, security
vulnerabilities in software have played an important role, exposing systems to
attackers who aim to compromise and hence control the system. Vulnerabilities
may exist in controllers, meters, circuit breakers, and control computers, and
as such, electric utilities usually use vulnerability and patch management to
monitor the security vulnerabilities of assets, analyze the remediation and
mitigation action for each vulnerability (e.g., applying a patch), and deploy
the action to secure the vulnerabilities before attackers exploit them. This
remains a heavily manual process in the energy sector, where electric utilities
spend a tremendous amount of time on such analyses over a large number of
vulnerabilities, and increases the time window in which vulnerabilities are
known but not mitigated, putting the system into a high risk of being attacked.
This problem has received insufficient attention and has defied commercial
solutions. This project will address this problem through automating this
analysis process. If successful, it will drastically reduce the human resources
and time spent by electric utilities on vulnerability and patch management, and
increase the security of the nation's energy infrastructure through mitigating
vulnerabilities much more quickly. This project will also develop a training
course for security operators in electric utilities and a graduate-level course
on vulnerability and patch management. Industry workshops and tutorials on
security conferences will be developed to disseminate research discoveries.
Undergraduate students and underrepresented students will be involved in the
research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop methodologies for
automated vulnerability and patch management in electric utilities that can
expedite decision making of how to remedy and mitigate security vulnerabilities.
It has several research tasks. (i) Develop an automated solution that can
predict whether a vulnerability should be patched immediately or mitigated in
other ways. A prediction model will be built using machine learning methods to
predict human operators' remediation actions for vulnerabilities, and easy-to-
verify rationale will be provided so that security operators can validate the
predictions if needed. (ii) Design a quantitative approach for automating
mitigation action analysis. This task will devise a data flow model to capture
the interactions between mitigation actions and system components and the
interactions among system components, and formulate mitigation action selection
as an optimization problem, where the goal is to minimize the negative impact of
the selected mitigation actions for a given set of vulnerabilities to the power
grid. (iii) Develop a prototype of the proposed tools and conduct field tests in
electric utility partners. (iv) Develop recommendations for the vulnerability
and patch management ecosystem, including vendors, third-party services,
regulation authorities, and standardization organizations. The recommendations
to the whole ecosystem developed in this project aims for a systematic, multi-
party approach for mitigating vulnerabilities, offering the potential to
transform vulnerability and patch management practices in the energy sector from
manual to automated operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.