* 1751839
* CAREER: Catalytic Electrochemical Amination Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Song Lin, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 04/30/2023
* USD 650,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Song Lin. Professor Song Lin is a faculty member in the Department of
Chemistry and Chemical Biology at Cornell University. Prof. Lin's lab aims to
develop new methods for building organic molecules that contain carbon-nitrogen
bonds. Carbon-nitrogen bonds are critically important. Over 85% of the top-
selling pharmaceuticals have at least one carbon-nitrogen bond. With this in
mind, the goal of the research being pursued is to establish efficient,
selective, and sustainable reaction technologies that will promote the formation
of carbon-nitrogen bonds from abundant starting materials. Electrochemistry, a
process that directly uses electricity to drive chemical reactions, is an
intrinsically efficient, selective, and sustainable technology. It would appear
to be an ideal method for making carbon-nitrogen bonds in a sustainable manner.
However, electrochemical reactions frequently do not afford the chemical
selectivity and efficiency necessary to accomplish a particular transformation.
The introduction of catalysis that can control the chemical reaction portion of
the process can solve this problem. In so doing, the catalyst augments the
energy efficiency of electrochemical reactions by offering an opportunity to
better control the yield and identity of the end product. The project lies at
the interface of organic synthesis, catalysis, and electrochemistry. Therefore,
it is also well suited for the education of scientists at all levels. Prof.
Lin's group is actively engaged in outreach activities by integrating the key
elements of their research into the education and training of the next
generation of scientists at both collegiate and K-12
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Synthesis Program of
the Chemistry Division, Prof. Lin of Cornell University is developing
electrocatalytic methods for new carbon-nitrogen coupling reactions. The
proposed research enlists the combination of electrochemistry and redox-active
metal catalysis as a general approach to enable highly efficient and
chemoselective amination of organic substrates. Three specific aims are being
pursued simultaneously. The scope of the electrocatalytic diazidation of alkenes
for the synthesis of vicinal diamines is being investigated, the electrochemical
azidooxygenation of alkenes for the synthesis of aminoalcohol products is being
advanced, and an electrocatalytic paradigm to decarboxylative and deborylative
azidations is being expanded. Additional efforts are studying the mechanisms of
the electrochemical reactions using kinetic and voltammetric experiments.
Finally, the new reaction methods are being employed to improve the synthesis of
bioactive complex targets. The proposed educational plan is working to expand
the nation's infrastructure for STEM education on collegiate and K-12 levels
with a particular emphasis on sustainability. Toward this goal, the Lin Lab is
actively participating in the development and promulgation of electrosynthesis-
related teaching modules aligned with the Next Generation Science
Standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.