* 1751710
* CAREER: Self-consistent models of electronic dynamics and relaxation
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,07/31/2018
* John Parkhill, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 07/31/2018
* USD 16,909.00

John Parkhill of The University of Notre Dame is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program and the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program in the Chemistry
Division to develop theories and computer software to model the motion of
electrons in molecules that are stimulated by light. This software allows users
to predict important photodynamic properties of materials. For example it could
be used to improve photovoltaic materials, pigments, optical media, organic
light emitting diodes, and other light emitting/absorbing materials without
expensive synthetic trial-and-error. Improved mathematical models for how light
imparts motion on clouds of electrons, and how these electrons lose their energy
to vibrations of atomic nuclei and other surrounding material underlie these
developments. John Parkhill and his research group also develop an open source
chemistry web portal where the chemical community and educators can access and
apply these tools without expensive computer hardware, software or expertise.

The Parkhill group pursues self-consistent methods for studying non-equilibrium
quantum electronic dynamics using dynamical embeddings that provide a common
framework to treat extended systems, correlation, and vibronic effects. These
tools fluidly expand the standard toolbox of molecular quantum mechanics into a
regime where electronic states are statistically mixed. A self-consistent beyond
mean-field correlated dynamics method is being developed to study the interplay
between electron correlation and decoherence. The Parkhill group?s realtime
transient absorption technique is being generalized to reproduce coherent
multidimensional experiments. These new tools are used to produce real-time
simulations of photo-induced charge separation that feature an accurate
treatment of quantum correlation effects, thermalization, and the environmental
surroundings of a molecule. These simulations shed light on the mechanisms
controlling plasmonic generation of hot electrons and charge separation in
photovolatics. Embedded dynamics methodology complements existing approaches by
providing a unified and systematically improvable platform for studying
electronic dynamics in condensed systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.