* 1751889
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The role of testosterone in the modulation of parental behaviors in primates
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2018,08/31/2019
* James Higham, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2019
* USD 9,450.00

The hormone testosterone (T) occurs in females as well as males, and there is
growing interest in understanding the role of T in female reproductive
behavioral biology. This doctoral dissertation project investigates
relationships between T and maternal behaviors in free-ranging monkeys. The
study of T in relation to motherhood in these non-human primates will contribute
to the literature on the hormonal mechanisms of parenting, and provide
comparative data for understanding the development of human-like parenting
behavior during primate and hominin evolution. The project will facilitate
training in STEM fields for undergraduates and graduates, including women from
underserved and underrepresented backgrounds. This project will also support
research collaborations and public science outreach about human and primate
biology and evolution.

This project will investigate the role of T in regulation of maternal care away
from the current offspring towards future reproduction, and displays of
aggression to other group members who can potentially harm offspring ('maternal
aggression'). The investigators will collect longitudinal data on behaviors and
physiology from 49 Cayo Santiago rhesus macaque mothers during their first 3
months postpartum, when maternal care steeply decreases in preparation for the
reproductive transition to the next offspring, and when maternal aggression
towards others is heightened. Advances in field endocrinology, including the
measurement of fecal hormone metabolites, will enable the continuous tracking of
physiology along with a rich suite of behaviors and provide new methods for
future studies. Comparative data from living non-human primates are valuable for
investigating the evolutionary origins of human behavior. The project will
therefore contribute to nascent efforts to expand the study of T across taxa and
sexes, and to enhance our understanding of how parental care evolved in primates
and early humans.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.