* 1751455
* CAREER: Confining Magnetism to Two-Dimensions in Transition Metal Oxide Atomic Layers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Divine Kumah, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 06/30/2023
* USD 589,530.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: As the dimensions of materials in modern devices
approach thicknesses close to a few atomic layers, small deviations in atomic
arrangements can occur leading to electronic and magnetic properties which
differ vastly from the properties of the bulk materials. Using advanced
synthesis tools which permit the combination of atomic layers of materials with
different compositions, the atomic deviations can be effectively manipulated to
produce novel effects. In this project, high-intensity X-rays are used to image
the atomic-scale structure of the interfaces of layers of thin crystalline oxide
films. The information gained from imaging these materials is required to help
scientists and engineers understand why some oxide materials lose their useful
magnetic properties when their thicknesses are reduced to a few atomic layers.
The X-ray results are combined with high-resolution electron microscopy,
magnetic and transport measurements, and theoretical calculations to design
specific combinations of oxide materials to achieve magnetism in single layers
of oxide materials. This project has exciting implications for the design of
novel materials and devices for information processing, quantum computing and
low-powered sensors. This project provides a highly collaborative environment
and access to advanced technical resources for training undergraduate and
graduate students in the development of the next generation of advanced
nanoscale materials. The project provides low-cost tools for visualizing
abstract concepts related to crystallography to foster the public understanding
of the development of new technologically-relevant crystalline
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This project uses state-of-
the-art synchrotron X-ray facilities at the Argonne National Laboratory and the
Berkeley National Laboratory to carry out three-dimensional non-destructive
atomic-scale mapping of the atomic, electronic and magnetic structures of
magnetic perovskite oxide surfaces and interfaces. This research provides a
comprehensive understanding of the fundamental interactions which occur at the
interfaces between atomically-thin magnetic oxide films and other polar and non-
polar perovskite materials and establishes a link between the observed
interactions and the physical properties of these systems. A combination of
first principles theory, high-resolution electron microscopy and temperature-
dependent magnetic, transport and element-specific synchrotron X-ray magnetic
dichroism measurements is used to design novel oxide heterointerfaces for
achieving the confinement of ferromagnetism in two-dimensional oxide layers.
These materials have applications in novel spin-based electronic devices. The
wide range of cutting-edge research tools utilized in this activity are used to
enhance the education of undergraduate and graduate students to prepare them for
careers in scientific research and materials and device engineering. An
important component of this project is the development of low-cost augmented
reality tools for visualizing complex atomic and electronic structures for
classroom instruction and public outreach to K-12
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.