* 1751369
* CAREER: Framing and Reframing Agency in Making and Engineering (FRAME)
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Vanessa Svihla, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 12/31/2023
* USD 516,061.00

A persistent problem in engineering classrooms is that students don't see value
in what they are learning and don't know how to direct their own learning when
faced with real-world open-ended design problems. This problem stems from
students' past experiences of predominantly solving problems that have a single
correct answer. One reason students have few such opportunities is that faculty
lack the constellation of instructional tools needed to feasibly support
students to take ownership of open-ended design problems. The Framing and
Reframing Agency in Making and Engineering (FRAME) project investigates the
constellation of instructional tools needed to develop students' "framing
agency" -- defined as having and taking opportunities to make consequential
decisions about a design problem and ways to proceed in learning and developing
solutions. Faculty members are sometimes uncertain why some activities support
students to take ownership of core concepts, whereas other activities do not.
The construct of framing agency will help clarify critical differences in what
-- on the surface -- appear to be similar learning experiences. The
constellation of instructional tools -- which are developed, tested and refined
across engineering settings at a Hispanic-serving institution -- will help
faculty to effectively support students to take ownership of their learning.
Additionally, the FRAME project is set in a minority-majority state that is
blessed with a rich tapestry of cultures. Recent research at UNM has uncovered
engineering assets such students bring; the FRAME project will provide new
supports for faculty to engage these assets. The findings have relevance for
guiding other states whose future demographics are predicted to be similar to
New Mexico's.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Research from a number of fields suggests
that framing problems may explain outcomes such as learning and the creativity
of solutions, but the empirical backing for this remains weak. The FRAME project
fills this gap, providing new theory, empirical backing, a validated measurement
tool, and research-based instructional tools. Research questions guide this
work: (1) How and when do students make decisions that are consequential to
their designing and learning? (2) What resources support students to frame
problems? (3) To what extent does framing agency explain variance in key
outcomes, such as intent to persist in engineering, professional engineering
identity development, relevant learning, and innovative design? Phase 1 of the
FRAME project clarifies "framing agency" as a construct by conducting
qualitative analysis, contrasting cases from multiple settings in which students
engaged in design activities did and did not display framing agency. The
analysis focuses on language use and interactions. Phase 2 builds on this work
through interviews with student designers to understand their point of view on
framing agency. This analysis feeds into the development and validation of a
survey to measure framing agency. Phase 3 builds theory about framing agency,
using the validated survey to test the hypothesis that framing agency predicts
key outcomes: professional engineering identity development, intent to persist
in engineering, and innovative designing. Phases 4 and 5 integrate research and
educational goals by using design-based research with a goal of jointly
developing theory about how framing agency supports the development of key
outcomes and developing instructional tools. This phase is guided by a research
question: How can a constellation of instructional tools -- including explicit
positioning of students as designers, a "wrong theory protocol" that helps
students understand and generate novel ideas about the problem, and design
conjecture/reflection maps that support students to trace the development of
their understanding of decisions related to the problem over time -- support the
development of framing agency, and in turn, key outcomes?