* 1751417
* TCUP Leaders Forum 2018
* EDU,EES
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2019
* Joshua Kaakua, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 11/30/2019
* USD 89,026.00

The University of Hawai'i proposed to host the 2018 Tribal Colleges and
Universities Program (TCUP) Leaders Forum (TLF). The TLF is a biennial gathering
of TCUP Principal Investigators and Project Directors (PIs/PDs) and other
members of the tribal college and university (TCU) community to discuss
challenges and strategies for developing STEM research and education capacities
at the TCUs, institutions that serve some of the country's most underrepresented
groups in STEM. A goal of the TCUP is to increase the science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and research capacities of
tribal colleges and universities (TCUs) and institutions of higher education
that serve significant numbers of Indigenous students. This project aligns
directly with that goal and moreover, will catalyze partnerships between TCUP
institutions and mainstream university or private sector entities. The
conference theme will focus on the development of pathways for Indigenous
students that support their success in STEM from K-12 through college and into
the STEM workforce. The conference will convene TCU administrators, faculty, and
staff, as well as experts in STEM education external to the TCU community, to
collaborate on this work. Participants will focus on the application of high-
impact practices in pathway development and explore the role of TCUs and TCUP-
funded projects in serving as the connector between K-12, university, and
workforce/career systems. Findings from the conference will be disseminated
widely in hardcopy and online to reach a broad audience. The conference
proceedings will have high applicability for Alaska Native, Native Hawaiian,
American Indian, and Pacific Islander settings and will be of value to TCUs,
mainstream universities, and private industries seeking to partner with TCUs to
increase the representation of Indigenous people in STEM degrees and
professions. Conference proceedings will be published and disseminated broadly,
offering insights to issues across STEM disciplines as TCUP-funded projects
focus areas ranging from linguistics to education, engineering, and
genomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Hawai'i will convene a 2017
Tribal Leaders Forum for NSF-TCUP project leaders. At this workshop, TCUP
leaders, as well as experts external to the TCUP community, will share
experiences and collaboratively develop strategies to strengthen STEM programs,
with an emphasis on developing STEM pathways for Indigenous students. Pathways
deliberations will extend from K-12 through college and on into the STEM
workforce. The conference will serve as a catalyst for forming partnerships
across these institutions, partnerships that will improve the STEM educational
and research capacity at TCUs. During the three-day TLF, participants will
immerse in formal sessions to share and explore innovative best practices
related to building effective pathways that support Indigenous students' STEM
outcomes. Participants will focus on context-specific issues related to STEM
workforce challenges and opportunities for Indigenous people, and the economic
impact of TCUP on tribal communities.