* 1751471
* CAREER: Multiscale Modeling of Peptide Self-Assembly with Experiment Directed Simulation
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Andrew White, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 05/31/2024
* USD 508,610.00

PI: White, Andrew D. &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1751471 &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Rochester&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Multiscale Modeling of Peptide
Self-Assembly with Experiment Directed
Simulation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Self-assembly is the
spontaneous organization of molecules into a supramolecular complex or new phase
without the formation of chemical bonds. This process describes a wide range of
phenomena from protein folding, to liquid crystal orientation, to polymer
nanocomposite formation. Modeling of peptide self-assembly has been driven by
applications in materials science and structural biology. In structural biology,
research is motivated by the many disease causing peptides that self-assemble
into toxic structures. The main objective of this proposal is the development of
a framework for multiscale modeling of peptide assembly, in which molecular
simulations are corrected using experimental data. The proposed research
combines state-of-the art computer simulation techniques with the novel
capability of using experimental data as an extra input to simulations to
improve their accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Self-assembly is one of the most
challenging problems for molecular modeling and simulation because it spans
multiple length-scales and often multiple time-scales. Coarse-grain techniques
which group atoms together in order to simulate larger-length scale interactions
suffer from poor agreement with reference experiments and lack rigorous theory
for correcting these discrepancies. This proposal aims to address these
shortcomings by minimally biasing simulations to correct discrepancies between
simulation predictions and experimental data. The proposed new methodology is
supported by preliminary data demonstrating improved accuracy and efficiency.
These improvements allow a large number of distinct systems to be simulated and
guarantee consistency with proposed parallel laboratory experiments. The
increase in fidelity and simulation number may lead to the development of deep-
learning models that will allow de novo design of self-assembling structures.
The main objective of the proposal is to use this biasing technique along with
established multiscale simulation methods to study multiple self-assembling
peptides, with a particular emphasis on Amyloid beta peptide which is the toxic
agent responsible for Alzheimer's disease. The overall scientific objective of
the proposed research is to better understand the molecular details of the
interplay between entropy, molecular structure and self-assembly through the use
of computer simulations. Integration of research and education will involve the
development of web-based applications for teaching undergraduate students about
coarse-graining, experiment-directed simulation, and self-assembly and a virtual
reality workshop to high school students participating in the University of
Rochester's Kearns Center mentorship program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.