* 1751687
* CAREER: Direct Radical Functionalization of Alcohols using Cobalt Photocatalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2018,11/30/2019
* David Martin, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 11/30/2019
* USD 650,000.00

In recent years, significant progress has been made in the design of new
chemical reactions that use light energy to power them. Often, these reactions
need catalysts based on precious metals. Significant improvements need to be
made to reduce costs and waste. Catalytic reactions and processes with
inexpensive and widely-available metals metals, simple substrates and reagents,
and generation of benign by-products will serve this need. In this project, Dr.
Dave Martin is developing new light-driven reactions with a novel cobalt-based
catalyst that converts simple chemicals into a host of useful products. This
approach is leveraging cheap, abundant feedstocks such as biomass. New insights
into the mechanism of these reactions are also being learned. Sharing these new
developments with undergraduate students at UC Riverside promotes green
chemistry values as a part of a larger effort to increase research participation
and scientific engagement. Through chemistry demonstrations and interactions
between K-12 students from local schools and members of his research group, Dr.
Martin fosters excitement and curiosity for the sciences and encourages young
students from all backgrounds to pursue higher education and careers in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis
Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Dave Martin of the University of
California, Riverside is developing a cobalt-based catalyst system that
harnesses light energy to perform the direct functionalization of alcohols via
acyl and alkyl radical intermediates. Current methods typically require a pre-
functionalization step and produce undesirable, often toxic by-products that
must be separated. The use of abundant cobalt-based catalysts inspired by the
biochemistry of vitamin B12 provides an alternative mechanism for in situ
activation and generates versatile radical intermediates that can participate in
a wide variety of chemical transformations including catalytic deoxygenation,
radical cyclizations and intermolecular cross-coupling. Direct alcohol coupling
processes leverage readily available feedstock chemicals from conventional
sources and also provide a powerful means for the valorization of renewable
sources such as sugars and lignin biomass. The mechanisms of stoichiometric and
catalytic pathways are being studied to provide a deeper understanding of the
interaction of Co(II) complexes with radical intermediates under photochemical
conditions. Dr. Martin is also engaged in outreach to increase research
participation and scientific engagement at UC Riverside, especially among
minority students, including research panel discussions and local
demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.