* 1751424
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Genetic impacts of European colonization on ancient and modern Native American populations
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Ripan Malhi, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2020
* USD 31,168.00

The population history of First Nations people cannot be fully understood
without knowing the genetic effects of European colonization, including whether
these effects differed for indigenous men versus women. In this doctoral
dissertation project, the student co-PI will study a population of First Nations
people through time by comparing DNA diversity of contemporary community members
to those of their ancestors from archaeological sites. Using both maternal
(mitochondrial) and paternal (Y-chromosome) DNA for modern and ancient samples
will provide information on the genetic diversity and structure before and after
European colonization and identify effects that differed for males and females.
This project will support graduate student training and mentoring, including
experience as teaching assistants for the genomic lab portion of the SING
(Summer internship for INdigenous peoples in Genomics) workshop where indigenous
peoples learn how to use genomics as a tool and form a network of indigenous
scientists. Using a community based approach, this project completes research in
a collaborative way with indigenous communities, resulting in more accurate
information and enhanced scholarship.

Researchers have speculated about the demographic effects of European
colonization, the population genetic structure of Native Americans pre-contact,
the amount of European admixture and the estimates of the number of indigenous
Americans present pre-contact. It has been difficult to quantify these
demographic changes because there are no published datasets with large numbers
of ancient individuals and their descendants. In this project, mitochondrial and
Y-chromosome DNA data will be combined with existing archaeological information
and documented oral histories to infer the effects of European Colonization on
males and females in the ancient Prince Rupert Harbour (PRH) population and
modern descendants. The researchers hypothesize that the effects of European
colonization will be greater for men than women because of differences in
activity patterns and admixture. The large sample size present in the PRH
population, in addition to the long-term continual habitation in the coastal
area, provides a unique dataset to use as comparative data for other
researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.