* 1751699
* CAREER: A Micromechanics-Based Approach to Ductile Fracture Simulation in Additively Manufactured Steels for Seismic Structural Fuse Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2024
* Gary Prinz, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 04/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award will advance
knowledge and innovation to improve the seismic performance of the nation's
civil infrastructure through the development of a micro-mechanics based
framework for ductile fracture prediction in additively manufactured (AM)
steels. Emerging AM technologies, such as 3-D metal printing, are promising for
performance-based optimization of seismic steel systems, as they can accommodate
highly irregular component designs through highly controlled weld-free geometry
formation. In order for AM steel parts to transition to functioning components
in seismic structural systems, the ability to predict damage limit states, such
as ductile fracture and low-cycle fatigue, is needed. Existing ductile fracture
models lack the ability to accurately capture fracture processes in AM steel
alloys due to the complex micro features formed during fabrication. This
research will develop an innovative framework for upscaling micro-scale material
measurements in AM steel alloys to predict macro-scale behavior in seismic
structural fuse components. These micro-scale measurements and up-scaling
framework can lead to the creation of a hybrid analysis-AM framework, allowing
iteration and optimization of seismic structural fuse performance through
probabilistic fracture predictions prior to fabrication. The capability to
optimize the seismic performance of steel buildings through AM structural fuse
design will promote national welfare and prosperity through safer and more
resilient and sustainable building construction to better protect life and
property during earthquakes and to maintain essential services and business
continuities during response and recovery. Integral with this research are an
innovative middle school outreach program and a graduate-level international
research collaboration with the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology. The
middle school outreach, in the form of engineering songwriting workshops, will
couple music education with science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM)
curricula. Termed STEMusic, the outreach plan aims to promote creativity,
understanding, and retention of engineering principles through the engagement of
alternative cognitive processes. The international research collaboration will
include the exchange of graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of this CAREER award is to test the hypothesis that measured micromechanical
material behavior can be scaled to accurately predict macroscale ductile
fracture in steel alloys created through common AM processes such as selective
laser melting. In the research, modern technologies such as scanning electron
microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and modified nano-
indentation will be used to measure the fundamental localization processes
driving ductile fracture in AM steels and create a new simulation framework to
allow the future creation of more generalizable fracture models. Steel specimens
approximately 0.002 millimeters in diameter will be fabricated using focused ion
beam milling and mechanically tested using a modified in-SEM nano-indentation
device. The measured micromechanical behavior, coupled with TEM spatial
characterizations of the fracture surface microstructure, will be used to inform
statistical volume element simulations for upscaling to larger material volumes.
This micro-mechanics based framework will be used to investigate the ductile
fracture performance of free-form structural fuse geometries (geometries created
using AM processes). Potential impacts of this award outside the described
application to seismic design include advances in materials engineering and AM
fabrication. The micromechanical experiments have the potential to provide
fundamental insights into the effects of underlying material morphology and
chemistry on macro-mechanical AM steel alloy response, allowing material
response (e.g., fracture, yielding, and deformation) to be designed into the AM
geometry creation process. Coupling this within the field of nonlinear topology
optimization, the framework to be developed will be essential for deriving
optimum design solutions that satisfy complex performance criteria involving
high plastic strains that lead to fracture or fatigue under various complex
loadings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.