* 1751426
* CAREER: Probing Mechanisms of Beta Cell Dysfunction via Quantitative Droplet Molecular Transport
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Joe Lo, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

In diabetes, insulin secretion is impaired in specialized cells (called beta
cells) in the pancreas, and this impairment may be related to chemical factors
in the local environment around the beta cells. Of particular importance are two
common risk factors of diabetes: a fatty diet (fatty acids) and lack of
sufficient oxygen. In this project, a novel miniaturized pump will precisely
control the beta cells' local environment so that the mechanisms of diabetes can
be studied quantitatively and precisely. Results of the research will transform
understanding of how diabetes develops and may explain why not all obese
patients develop diabetes despite similar risk factors. These novel and
transformative biomedical science and engineering investigations (or
experiments) will be conducted by a team of interdisciplinary, peer-learning
students, under the guidance of the principle investigator. Research is also
interwoven with education, where students from graduate, undergraduate, local
high school, and elementary school all participate in the experimental,
interpretive, and peer-teaching aspects of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal focuses on probing
mechanisms of beta cell dysfunction, a hallmark of diabetes, through studies
performed in a highly integrated platform termed "quantitative droplet molecular
transport (qDMT)" based on the PI's "smart microgel" droplets and a novel
microfluidic Tesla pump. The two mechanisms for initial study are 1) enhanced
immunogenicity as a result of neoantigen binding to free fatty acid (FFA)
exposed beta cells and 2) beta cell impairment as a result of a potential
synergy between FFA and hypoxia in modulating adipocyte cytokines. The qDMT is a
unique tool for quantifying protein transport in situ due to three novel
features:: 1) Smart microgels allow antibody binding to be assayed while
modifying the antigens in situ, i.e., within the porous droplets, bead
biosensors can be placed right next to cells of interest so the diffusion length
is dramatically shortened, accelerating sensitive protein detection in situ; 2)
The miniaturizing bladeless Tesla pump optimizes use of boundary layers,
enabling a completely sealed, continuous flow difficult to achieve with
conventional pumps and 3) Microchannel dimensions can be varied to create
predictable diffusion models to quantify molecular kinetics. The Research Plan
is organized around three objectives: 1) Engineer qDMT with cell &amp; biosensor
laden smart microgels, a micro-Tesla pump and reconfigurable microfluidics. 2)
Apply qDMT to study neoantigen (insulin, GAD, IA-2, ZnT8) binding in FFA exposed
beta cells and 3) Apply qDMT to study FFA+hypoxia synergy in adipocyte cytokine
(IL6, TNFÃ¡) modulation of beta dysfunction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.