* 1751821
* CAREER: Neuroprostheses for Functional Reaching by Users with High Tetraplegia
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Eric Schearer, Cleveland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 06/30/2024
* USD 549,994.00

Functional-electrical-stimulation (FES) neuroprostheses are devices capable of
restoring hand and arm function to individuals experiencing paralysis resulting
from spinal cord injury. However, individuals with whole-arm paralysis typically
do not receive much benefit from these types of neuroprotheses because the
devices are not yet capable of replicating the complexity and range of motion of
human arm movements. Additionally, the devices must be regularly "tuned" by
experts to meet the wearer's changing needs. Thus, there is a significant need
to develop FES neuroprostheses capabilities for use by people with whole-arm
paralysis. This study will create ways to coordinate electrical stimulation of
the wearer's shoulder and arm muscles with control of reaching movements. It
will also create a way for a non-expert to update control to respond to changes
in the user's muscles and desired movements. The study will test the hypothesis
that models of muscle response to electrical stimulation, specific to each
wearer, can be learned by the neuroprosthesis and used to coordinate muscles to
perform reaching movements. A secondary hypothesis that will be tested is that a
caregiver can apply physical cues at the patient's forearm, "teaching" the
neuroprothesis to refine and expand reaching movements. Research and education
are integrated in the project through the creation of an empathy training
program for aspiring rehabilitation engineers. Engineering students, alongside
medical, therapy, social work, and nursing students, will visit the homes of
people with disabilities. Through these home visits and classroom instruction,
engineers will develop empathetic skills like affective sharing, self- and
other-awareness, perspective taking, and emotional
regulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's long-term career goal is to create
easily usable and widely available neuroprostheses to restore arm function to
people with high tetraplegia. Toward this goal, the research objectives for this
project are to: (1) create an architecture to control whole-arm reaching motions
with FES that retains the arm's natural kinematic and force-producing
flexibility and (2) empower a non-expert to easily improve and expand the
capabilities of an FES neuroprosthesis. Experiments will address the question of
how to control a multi-joint system where the direction of muscle action is
state dependent. The PI will gather force and motion data during stimulation of
muscles and apply the data to plan achievable hand motions, predict shoulder and
elbow torques required to move the arm, and choose muscle stimulation commands
to produce those torques. Additionally, the PI will investigate approaches to
train the FES controller based on intuitive human intervention. Caregivers will
apply manual corrections to the patient's forearm to adjust the system's control
policy and refine inaccurate movements. The outcome of the study will be a
flexible, subject-specific FES planning and control strategy to coordinate
muscles across multiple joints that non-experts can easily modulate, which is a
significant step toward neuroprostheses that achieve functional tasks like
grooming and feeding oneself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.