* 1751472
* CAREER: Designing Interfaces for Electrochemical Energy Storage: A Mechanistic Perspective
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2024
* Leela Arava, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 01/31/2024
* USD 625,954.00

This CAREER project focuses on lithium-sulfur (Li-S) batteries, which promise
lower cost and higher capacity in next-generation energy storage systems.
Advanced lithium batteries for vehicles and energy storage could improve
domestic energy security, but their use is mainly limited by undesirable
chemical side reactions at the electrode/electrolyte interface. This project
seeks to fundamentally understand the reactions at this interface during battery
operation. This fundamental understanding will help resolve the issues of
battery stability and overall battery performance. The education and outreach
activities associated with this project are to (i) provide hands-on experience
to high school students and middle school students, (ii) engage undergraduate
students in cutting-edge research activities with strong emphasis on the
involvement of underrepresented students in STEM and (iii) provide innovation
and entrepreneurship exposure to graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
Li-S batteries have been extensively explored, many aspects of the mechanisms of
polysulfide redox reactions at solid/liquid electrolyte interfaces remain
unclear. In the absence of detailed mechanistic understanding, rational design
of electrode architectures has been difficult. The technical objective of this
project is to map the temporal and spatial evolution of polysulfide speciation
during the charge/discharge process in a Li-S battery through use of in-situ
scanning electrochemical microscopy methods coupled with Raman spectroscopy
(SECM-Raman). The research program is underpinned by two guiding hypotheses; (1)
measuring interfacial properties will allow for mechanistic elucidation of
(electro)chemical reaction pathways and provide information on kinetics of
polysulfide dissolution-disproportionation-precipitation and (2) elucidating the
reaction mechanism will control the electrochemical interface and thereby
polysulfide-shuttle with an appropriate material design. The successful
completion of the project is expected to (i) enhance fundamental understanding
of interactions at the electrode/electrolyte interface at the nanoscale level
with high spatiotemporal resolution using a new analytical tool, (ii) map the
interaction of polysulfides with the electrode surface and with electrolyte
solvents under transient conditions with a high temporal resolution, and (iii)
define the role of catalysts and the rate-limiting step in the overall
polysulfide redox process to assess superior performance of materials for Li-S
batteries. The resulting mechanistic elucidation of sulfur (electro)chemical
reactions occurring at the interfaces will provide new insight into Li-S redox
chemistry and will allow for detailed mapping of the spatial and temporal
evolution of the polysulfide shuttle; a core issue in the Li-S system.