* 1751548
* CAREER: Modeling and Control of Undulating-Fin Underwater Vessels in Close Formation
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,11/30/2024
* Oscar M Curet, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 11/30/2024
* USD 697,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project will study
underwater vehicles equipped with a bio-inspired fin-based propulsion system.
The specific configuration under study consists of a single undulating fin
running along the length of the vehicle, which controls both forward motion and
directional maneuvers. The project will first use analytical, computational, and
experimental studies to describe how the fin shape and motion relates to the
movement of a single vessel. Those results will then be extended to cooperative
groups of multiple vessels traveling in formation. Of particular interest are
the ways in which formations can make full use of the control inputs available
from each vessel's undulating fin to improve collective maneuverability and
efficiency, and to alter far-field wake patterns. The results of the project
will be applicable to other related undulating propulsion and control
configurations. The development of these multi-agent underwater systems will
benefit the nation scientifically and economically, by allowing efficient and
versatile operation to explore for resources and perform oceanographic
observations, with minimal disturbance to the underwater environment. These
systems will also be important to the nation's defense, due to their ability to
travel long distances, perform multiple simultaneous independent tasks, and
control their acoustic signature. Groups underrepresented in engineering -- in
particular Hispanic students -- will be recruited for this project, thus
increasing the diversity of the engineering student body and the future US
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will investigate a class
of undulating fin underwater vehicles, both singly and collectively, leading to
understanding of how hydrodynamic interactions affect the speed, wake signature,
energy efficiency, and maneuverability of the vessels and the formation.
Critically, each agent should fully exploit hydrodynamic interaction within the
system, and also with the surrounding fluid environment. The objectives of the
research program include (i) measuring the dynamics and wake of single and
multiple vessels; (ii) developing a dynamic model of the system; (iii)
establishing a control model relating parameters in the fin kinematics to the
motion of the vessel; (iv) studying the performance and hydrodynamic interaction
of an array of bio-inspired underwater vessels. The research will combine
experimental work and modeling using a novel bio-mimetic vessel with undulating
fin propulsion. The methods will include measurements of kinematics,
hydrodynamic forces, flow fields and power
consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.