* 1751340
* Workshop : Summer School on Decision-Making in Design and Systems Engineering; University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California; June 18-22, 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2018
* Ali Abbas, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Rich Malak
* 08/31/2018
* USD 49,990.00

This award provides partial support for a summer school that will provide an
intensive and interactive educational experience to graduate students who are
interested in studying decision making in the context of engineering design and
systems engineering. It is specifically intended to provide educational
opportunities for students from graduate programs that do not have appropriate
coursework in this area. The summer school will cover theoretical and practical
issues. It will provide students with foundational understanding about how to
conduct research about decision making in design and systems engineering, create
a network of peers who are studying these issues, and advance community research
standards. It is anticipated that the summer school will have a broad impact in
the research community, including other NSF-supported research projects, by
advancing training and standards in this area of research. Travel and
participation scholarships will serve to ensure a broad participation that
maximizes community impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The summer school will be held
during the week of June 18-22, 2018 at the University of Southern California in
Los Angeles, CA. Experts from the community will provide instruction and
experiential insights on topics that include topics such as probability theory,
utility theory, and research methodology. The workshop will combine lectures,
in-classroom discussions, out-of-classroom exercises, and student-led research
topic discussions. Invited speakers will discuss theoretical and practical
considerations as well as future directions in the research area. Scheduled
social events will enable students to develop their networking skills. A survey
of summer school participants will be conducted to provide information about
success and can inform similar efforts on other topic areas within the
engineering design and systems engineering research communities.