* 1751308
* CAREER: Understanding the Role of Structure on Ionic/Electronic Properties in Polymeric Mixed Conductors
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Jonathan Rivnay, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2024
* USD 552,273.00

Nontechnical description: Plastics that conduct charged particles- electrons and
ions- are critical for a broad range of applications including biomedical
devices for health monitoring and treatment, realization of compact batteries
for energy storage, and development of new computers inspired by the brain. Of
particular interest are applications in biology, where these soft conducting
materials can be used to detect signals from body organs or stimulate living
cells. For example, such materials show promise in controlling prosthetic limbs
for amputees, and may also help manage epilepsy and Parkinson's disease. This
project seeks to study how the design of several soft conducting materials
influences the flow of electrons and ions, by specifically aiming to understand
how each material rearranges itself when interacting with its surroundings. The
outcome of this research intends to enable the design of more efficient and
sensitive materials for biomedical devices. The integrated educational
objectives are to develop a program for graduate students to improve their
science communications skills for a broad and diverse audience, to explore the
nature of community engagement for teacher/mentor development, and, through
these efforts, to stimulate the interest of Chicago-area students in materials
science and bioelectronics. These objectives train researchers to be better
mentors, helping promote public scientific literacy and engagement with
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Engineering polymeric
materials to support mixed conduction presents a number of challenges stemming
from their sensitivity to intra- and inter-molecular interactions needed for
efficient electronic and ionic transport/injection. Conducting polymer systems
have shown promise as mixed conductors for a range of applications, including
bioelectronics; their success has been attributed to effective electrochemical
properties owing to bulk ion penetration. Missing, however, is a fundamental
understanding of ionic transport, the tradeoffs it imposes on electronic
processes, and thus, the design rules critical to achieving high performance in
mixed polymeric conductors. This project addresses these needs by tracking
microstructure and morphology of both current high-performance polymers and new
materials as they are influenced by device relevant conditions. The research
employs operando X-ray studies and UV-visible spectroscopy on electrochemical
devices to address the interplay amongst structure, processing, and
ionic/electronic transport. The research component of this project aims to
inform the development of effective signal transducing devices for in vitro and
in vivo diagnostics and therapeutics, thus contributing benefits to society by
improving societal health outcomes and speeding up the materials development
cycle. The educational component of this project centers on improving scientific
literacy and engagement in science and technology by building infrastructure for
teaching researchers to communicate complex findings to a broad audience ranging
from peers, to non-specialists and K-12 students. The project develops
curricular materials for community-centered engagement activities of varying
duration to determine the effect on, and efficacy of, communicator/mentor
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.