* 1751380
* Combining mechanism and maximum entropy in a dynamic hybrid theory of disturbance macroecology
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2018,09/30/2021
* John Harte, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 09/30/2021
* USD 460,000.00

This research will advance the capacity of science to forecast the behavior of
ecosystems undergoing change as a consequence of either natural or human
disturbance. With the development of quantitative predictive theory and models,
ecologists have already made considerable progress understanding the structure
and properties of undisturbed ecosystems. But numerous observations indicate
that this understanding fails when ecosystems are changing rapidly. The project
will build upon ideas that have proven successful in statistical physics and the
relatively new field of information theory. The expected output is a
quantitative, predictive and thus testable, theory of ecosystem structure that
will be applicable to both undisturbed ecosystems and to those that are changing
rapidly in response to disturbance. Because our livelihoods are entangled with
the health of our ecosystems in numerous ways, both insofar as our activities
can alter nature and nature can enrich our lives, this research will contribute
to the betterment of humankind as well as the advancement of basic science. This
project will support a postdoctoral research fellow and provide research
training experiences for graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of this research is to advance and test a dynamic theory that can predict
patterns in the abundance, distribution, and energetics of individuals and
species in ecosystems. The theory should apply to ecosystems that are either
static or changing rapidly in response to disturbance. To achieve that goal,
insights from statistical physics and information theory will be combined with
explicit mechanisms governing organismal and population growth, as well as
migration, diversification, and extinction. Stochastic mechanistic theory will
predict the time-dependent probability distributions of a small set of governing
state variables that play a role similar to that of pressure, volume, and
temperature in thermodynamics. These state variables will then provide the
constraints used in maximizing information entropy to yield predicted
probability distributions for the detailed patterns displayed by individuals and
species. The expected outcome is a general theory of both static and dynamic
ecology. Ecological census data from the tropics to the tundra, from plants to
animals, across a wide range of spatial scales, and under a variety of
disturbances, will be used to test the predictions of the new
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.