* 1751392
* CAREER: Transducer-Centric Parallelization for Scalable Semi-Structured Data Processing
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Zhijia Zhao, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 04/30/2024
* USD 461,272.00

Semi-structured data is the de facto standard for exchanging data over the web
and the default data type for many document-based data stores. With its fast
growth in volume, it becomes critical to process semi-structured data on
parallel processors, which have become ubiquitous and increasingly powerful.
However, data-parallel processing of semi-structured data remains a fundamental
challenge, due to its inherent nested structure. A partitioning of semi-
structured data can easily break the well-formed nature of nested levels, making
the data hard to process. To address the challenge, this research proposes to
examine the basic computation models used for processing semi-structured data --
pushdown transducers, and designs a transducer-centric parallelization paradigm.
This enables automatic generation of data-parallel processing routines for
software applications that consume semi-structured data. Because of the
fundamental role of semi-structured data, the insights gained from this research
will facilitate research advancement beyond program
parallelization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transducer-centric parallelization
consists of four components. The first component examines inherent dependences
in pushdown transducer executions and designs a series of basic mechanisms to
break them by leveraging their special properties, such as 'finite-state' and
'bounded stack access'. The second and third components focus on improving the
parallelization efficiency either by exploiting the transition structures of
pushdown transducers and the grammars of semi-structured data, or by adopting an
aggressive speculative execution scheme. The last component of this research
develops algorithms and software tools to automatically generate parallel
pushdown transducers for commonly used processing routines of semi-structured
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.