* 1752449
* CAREER: Fracture Mechanics of Soft Dissipative Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Rong Long, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 04/30/2024
* USD 551,205.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award will support
fundamental research on the fracture resistance of soft elastomers and
hydrogels. Soft materials that can undergo large reversible deformation have
been widely utilized in industrial applications such as tires and soft
adhesives, or emerging technologies such as soft robots, biomedical implants and
stretchable display. In these applications, the underlying soft materials are
required to be stretchable to enable functionality and yet fracture resistant to
enhance reliability. Driven by this need, various physical or chemical
mechanisms have been developed to enhance the fracture resistance of soft
materials, and they share a common theme: to introduce energy dissipation or
consumption by the material during deformation. However, theoretical modeling
and experimental characterization of fracture in such soft dissipative materials
are challenging due to the lack of understandings on the quantitative relation
between energy dissipation and fracture resistance. This research program will
establish experimental and modeling capabilities to uncover the complex
nonlinear mechanics associated with soft material fracture, which will lead to
quantitative principles for engineering new soft functional materials that are
mechanically robust, as well as new tools to measure and predict fracture in
soft materials. Thus, the research will promote the science of soft material
fracture to advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare. As part of
research, education and outreach programs will be developed to promote research
of soft material fracture in academic, educational and industrial sectors by
creating an interdisciplinary summer workshop, integrating research findings
into curriculum and K-12 outreach activities, and building collaborations with
industrial partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major challenge in soft material
fracture is the large deformation near the tip of a crack, which causes
nonlinear strain and stress fields as well as complex failure and dissipation
behaviors. To address this challenge, a particle tracking method will be used to
measure the crack tip deformation field in model soft materials under various
fracture modes. For elastic materials, the experiments will provide data to
assess the region of validity for existing crack tip asymptotic solutions, to
discover new structures of crack tip fields, and to enable local evaluation of
energy release rate through the J-integral, thus eliminating the requirement of
specialized experimental geometries. For dissipative materials, the experimental
data of crack tip deformation field, augmented by accurate constitutive models,
will be used to identify the crack tip dissipation zone and to separately
measure the intrinsic and dissipative toughness. A finite element model will
also be developed to couple the crack tip failure process, represented by a
cohesive zone, with the bulk material dissipation, which will enable the
prediction of crack growth in soft dissipative
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.