* 1752140
* CAREER: Development and Applications of Photocontrolled Cationic Polymerizations
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2023
* Brett Fors, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 01/31/2023
* USD 675,000.00

Professor Brett P. Fors of Cornell University is supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) program of the Division
of Chemistry to develop new synthetic methods for the preparation of polymers
with control over chemical structures and properties. This approach takes
advantage of interesting characteristics of visible light to enable the
synthesis of previously inaccessible polymer architectures. The properties of
polymeric materials are directly controlled by chemical structure and the
methods developed in this project enable the synthesis and utilization of
improved polymeric materials for applications in adhesives, elastomers, and
electronics. Educational activities are integrated into this project. The focus
of these activities is on the development of a polymer science summer camp that
exposes Native American students to Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics (STEM) education and research at an early age. The objective is to
stimulate the interest of Native American students in STEM related
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops a cationic polymerization
process for vinyl ethers that is regulated by visible light through the
reversible oxidation of a polymer chain end with a photocatalyst. Precise
spatial and temporal control over polymer chain growth is achieved by the
photoinitiated reversible formation of a propagating cation. This cationic
polymerization process is being used in combination with other photocontrolled
radical polymerization processes to enable switching between different
polymerization mechanisms. Monomer selectivity in situ is achieved by modulating
the wavelength of irradiation. This protocol provides control over polymer
sequence with an external stimulus and allows the synthesis of previously
inaccessible polymer structures. Additionally, similar strategies are being
developed for photocontrolled polymerization of epoxides, thus extending the
scope and expanding the practicality of this approach. Synthetic polymers are of
importance in all aspects of modern life and have facilitated major societal
advances. Innovative synthetic methods are required to enable the synthesis of
complex materials with unknown function. Photocontrolled cationic processes
allow for the development of new polymeric structures with previously
inaccessible architectures. Importantly, high levels of spatial and temporal
control gained in photocontrolled polymerizations facilitate the application of
these new methods in fields such as lithography, coatings, and biology. This
award enables the establishment of a polymer science camp on the Flathead Indian
Reservation in collaboration with the Salish and Kootenai College. This summer
camp introduces Native American students to research activities at an early age
in order to increase their interest and participation in STEM fields.
Additionally, through workshops for teachers on the Flathead Indian Reservation
the quality of STEM related education increases for elementary and middle school
Native American students. These efforts contribute to creating a diverse STEM
workforce in the United States.