* 1752614
* CAREER: Computer-Intensive Statistical Inference on High-Dimensional and Massive Data: From Theoretical Foundations to Practical Computations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Xiaohui Chen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

In an era of Big Data, computer-intensive statistical inference faces
unprecedented challenges and opportunities. High-dimensional and massive data
are now emerging in scientific areas including biomedical engineering,
environmental science, financial econometrics, array signal processing, and
social networks, among many others. An important associated research challenge
is to develop efficient methods to extract information and quantify its
uncertainty for a large number of variables and measurements. Data-driven
statistical inferential procedures for uncertainty quantification via the
bootstrap methods are often computationally intensive for high-dimensional
large-scale datasets. On the computational side, this research project will make
use of distributed inference via the parallel high-performance computing
technique, which is an essential ingredient to speed up bootstrap calculations.
On the statistical side, this research will introduce a general framework for
studying the performance of various bootstrap methods. This research project
aims to lead to a comprehensive understanding of the fundamental tradeoff
between statistical and computational concerns in quantifying uncertainty for a
broad class of inferential procedures, thus providing guidance to practically
optimize statistical accuracy and computational cost in potential real
applications. Both undergraduate and graduate students are involved in the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this research project is
to provide new insights and deepen the theoretical understanding of strengths
and fundamental limitations of fully data-dependent inferential procedures (such
as bootstraps) in the high-dimensional and massive data framework on two
classical problems: i) change point detection and identification; ii)
computationally-aware statistical inference for U-statistics. The research aims
to develop statistically correct and computationally scalable inferential
procedures when the dimension can be larger (or even much larger) than the
sample size. In contrast to existing work, the methods under development have
strong theoretical guarantees, are robust under mild assumptions, require no
tuning, and are easy to parallelize. Of practical interest, the research will
develop needed software tools for researchers from disciplines with applications
of high-dimensional and nonparametric statistics. Theoretical contributions of
the proposed research include establishing new approximation and coupling
theorems (under weaker regularity conditions than existing literature) in high-
dimensional and infinite-dimensional spaces of increasing dimension and
complexity, where classical probability tools such as the central limit theorem
and extreme value theory are no longer applicable. The mathematical theory is of
independent interest and will provide powerful new tools to analyze other
statistical procedures on high-dimensional and nonparametric
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.