* 1752036
* CAREER: First Principles Modeling of Solvothermal and Coverage Effects for Selective Deoxygenation on Transition Metal Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Neeraj Rai, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 04/30/2024
* USD 523,992.00

The conversion of biomass into fuels or chemicals often involves catalytic
treatment of the bio-derived oil to produce high-value products. Catalyst
selection involves a complicated juggling act to identify materials that
selectively promote desired chemical reactions while avoiding undesired side
reactions. Typically, catalysts are selected through tedious trial-and-error
screening of many combinations of materials. In contrast, this project seeks to
accelerate the catalyst discovery process through mathematical and computer
models that relate the properties of prospective catalytic materials to their
ability to carry out the desired reactions under a wide range of conditions. The
improved catalyst designs resulting from the project will promote broader
utilization of biomass as a carbon-neutral source of energy, directly addressing
the nation's energy security while minimizing environmental impact. Training of
graduate and undergraduate students in computational research will provide a
future workforce for the emerging areas of computational and data-enabled
science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on an
integrated research and education program that provides molecular insights into
the selective catalytic deoxygenation activity of transition metal catalysts
(TMCs), particularly those based on bimetallic phosphide and carbide materials
as the active components. From a technical standpoint, the primary objectives
will be to understand the effects of solvent, temperature, and pressure on the
binding modes of aromatic oxygenates while revealing mechanistic insights into
C-O bond cleavage and competitive pathways for undesired products in the
presence of solvents and high surface coverages of adsorbed species. The
objectives will be accomplished by developing advanced first-principles Monte
Carlo (FPMC) and molecular dynamics (FPMD) algorithms. These novel sampling
algorithms will be used to investigate catalytic activity for the cleavage of
carbon oxygen bonds including the beta-O-4 linkage by considering model
compounds containing a phenolic hydroxyl group. In all these calculations,
solvent molecules will be explicitly represented to determine their effect on
reactants, transition states, products, and catalytic sites. Composition of
model phosphide and carbide catalysts will be systematically varied to
understand the structure-composition-property relationship for catalytic
activity. More broadly, the FPMC and FPMD simulations will significantly advance
the state-of-the-art in computational modeling, and provide advanced simulation
tools to model catalytic processes under relevant thermodynamic constraints. The
fundamental knowledge thus generated will provide a rational framework for
designing efficient and effective catalysts for converting lignocellulosic
biomass into fuels and chemicals. The algorithmic developments will be
implemented in a widely distributed software suite, CP2K, enabling modeling of a
wide range of heterogeneous catalytic processes, including zeolite-based
catalysis and electrocatalysis. Beyond the graduate and undergraduate
educational components, the project will provide K-12 educational outreach to
economically disadvantaged communities. In addition, professional development of
middle school teachers, through workshops targeted at inquiry-based learning,
will lead to higher retention of underrepresented groups in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.