* 1752431
* CAREER: Business Taxation and Local Fiscal Policy
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Owen Zidar, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 04/30/2024
* USD 416,065.00

Policymakers at both the national and sub-national level must not only finance a
growing public sector, but they also need to do so while fostering growth and
providing a competitive environment for businesses and top earners. This
research consists of two lines of research related to these fiscal policy design
challenges: business taxation and local fiscal policy. The goal of the first
line of research is to document facts on U.S. business income and taxation, and
then to develop estimates that are needed to inform the design of the business
tax system. The second line of work focuses on local fiscal policy. It
investigates what state and local governments have been doing to respond to
adverse labor market conditions and then builds a framework for evaluating
policy tradeoffs in a setting in which states want to provide safety net
programs while facing a mobile tax base. These projects can help inform
policymakers and improve the design of economic policy, which can increase
incomes and opportunity for millions of people. It can also encourage additional
research on these key areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first line of research
documents facts on U.S. business income and taxation, and then characterizes and
estimates parameters needed to inform the design of the business tax system. The
investigator first examines the causes of rising business income, which accounts
for much of the rise of top incomes since 2000. The investigator further
investigates how business tax cuts impact firm performance and inequality. This
project also evaluates investment policy provisions, the merits of broadening
the tax base and lowering the corporate rate, and policies affecting the
creation of new high-growth firms. The second line of work focuses on addressing
state and local fiscal policy challenges. This research investigates what state
and local governments have been doing to respond to adverse labor market
conditions and then builds a framework for evaluating policy tradeoffs in a
setting in which states want to provide safety net programs while facing a
mobile tax base. The investigator further evaluates the equity and efficiency
consequences of eliminating the state and local tax deduction, which is related
to recent reforms that substantially raised tax rates on top earners in some
locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.