* 1752785
* Collaborative Research:  Unlocking the evolutionary history of Schiedea (carnation family, Caryophyllaceae): rapid radiation of an endemic plant genus in the Hawaiian Islands
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Norman Wickett, Chicago Horticultural Society
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 07/31/2024
* USD 568,366.00

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------&lt;br/&gt;Plants exhibit a
diverse array of breeding strategies, but the genetic changes and environmental
conditions that lead to this diversity are poorly known. Pinpointing these
genetic mutations and understanding the environmental conditions that favor
changes in breeding system are of great interest to both evolutionary biologists
and plant breeders. The plant genus Schiedea (carnation family, Caryophyllaceae)
is only found on the Hawaiian Islands and is a model to better understand the
evolution of breeding strategies in plants. Among the 32 species of Schiedea,
some only breed with other individuals of the same species, others only self-
fertilize, and others still are transitional between the two. Additionally,
different outbreeding species of Schiedea use different pollinators, including a
recently discovered moth found only in Hawaii. This project will apply cutting-
edge DNA sequencing and analysis methods to reconstruct the genealogy of
Scheidea and investigate the evolution of plant breeding strategies within the
group. Data from this project will provide new insights into the evolution of
plant breeding strategies that could be applied to crop species in the carnation
family, including amaranth, rhubarb, quinoa and spinach. The project
incorporates extensive opportunities for education and training at multiple
levels, including high school teachers, undergraduate and graduate students, and
a postdoctoral researcher. The project will produce educational videos about
Hawaiian plants for posting on the internet to inform the public. Researchers
will also offer public seminars about Schiedea highlighting their research
findings about the group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
aim of this project is to reconstruct the pattern of breeding system evolution
in Schiedea (Caryophyllaceae) through an integrated program of field,
laboratory, and genomic studies. Nuclear genome sequencing, targeted sequence
capture, and Genotyping By Sequencing (GBS) methods will be used to reconstruct
a highly resolved phylogenetic tree of Schiedea, identify sources of
phylogenetic conflict, and investigate patterns of introgression among taxa. The
phylogenetic hypotheses developed will be used to interpret the evolution of
breeding systems including transitions from hermaphroditism to dioecy, shifts
from biotic to abiotic pollination, and traits associated with pollination
biology (including scent and nectar production). Field studies and densely
distributed Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNP) markers generated by GBS will
be used to test hypotheses concerning the influence of reproductive systems on
gene flow, hybridization, and population genetic structure. Data obtained during
this project will be applied directly to land management in Hawaii, including
the establishment of wild populations of different Schiedea
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.