* 1752110
* CAREER: Pushing the Extremes of Heat Conduction via Multiscale Phonon Modeling from First-Principles
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2018,08/31/2018
* Zhiting Tian, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 08/31/2018
* USD 523,334.00

Recent advances in nanomaterials and processing technologies have enabled the
creation of a large number of heterogeneous nanostructures for a variety of
applications including thermoelectric energy generation, microelectronics
cooling, thermal barrier materials, solar cells, and energy storage. The number
of complex systems consisting of hierarchical structures spanning the nano-,
meso- and macro- scales is increasing rapidly. Thermal modeling of these devices
requires attention to a broad range of length scales and physical phenomena.
Small scale transport in these hierarchical materials is poorly understood
mainly due to the lack of a proper description of energy transport by vibrations
in the structures, called phonons, across these multiple scales. A rigorous
understanding of multiscale phonon transport is crucial for pushing the extremes
of heat conduction for the advancement of diverse, transformative applications
such as economical thermoelectric energy conversion, which requires ultralow
thermal conductivity, and more efficient electronics cooling, which demands
ultrahigh thermal conductivity. By improving the efficiency of energy conversion
and heat rejection, the project can essentially contribute to global sustainable
energy solutions. The educational objective of this CAREER project is to promote
academic diversity and equal educational opportunities and to prepare a highly
educated workforce in the STEM fields by encouraging interest in thermal science
and engineering via a creative museum exhibit for the general public, engaging
in research activities via a novel international collaborative course and
outreach activities for kindergarten-to-college students, and sharing of the
state-of-the-art research findings with industrial partners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this CAREER project is to obtain
a comprehensive understanding of multiscale phonon transport from first-
principles in order to push the upper and lower boundaries of thermal
conductivity. Despite well-established theories at the macroscale and the
significant progress made at the nanoscale over the past few decades, mesoscale
thermal transport remains poorly understood. This project focuses on mesoscale
phonon transport to bridge the knowledge gap between nanoscale and macroscale
phonon transport. The research tasks are below: (1) Generate the key input
parameters for mesoscale simulations, phonon mean free path and interface
transmittance, from atomic- and nano-scale first-principles calculations using
density functional theory, atomistic Green?s function method, and ab initio
molecular dynamics simulations; (2) Solve the Boltzmann transport equation using
Monte Carlo simulations for mesoscale transport; (3) Validate multiscale
simulation results using time-domain thermoreflectance measurements; (4) Develop
a compact robust analytical model for thermal engineers and heat transfer
researchers. The outcome of this project is expected to be a major leap in the
fundamental understanding of multiscale phonon transport, enabling the creation
of novel materials with unprecedented thermal transport properties for numerous
applications including thermal energy conversion and management.