* 1752784
* CAREER: The Extreme Quantum Limit of Weyl Semimetals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Brad Ramshaw, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,050,351.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;Electrons behave differently in metals than
they do in a vacuum: in a sense each metal has its own laws of physics that
electrons must obey, turning each new material into its own universe where
discoveries can be made. This work focuses on a new class of metals - Weyl
semimetals - that have massless electrons similar to those in graphene but that
are free to move in three dimensions. By applying extremely large magnetic
fields this project seeks to force the Weyl electrons to interact with one
another and form new states of matter. There is a large gap in our understanding
of what happens to three dimensional metals in extreme magnetic fields, and this
project fills that gap. The plan includes measurements under these extreme
conditions, pushing the frontier for techniques such as ultrasound spectroscopy
up to 100 tesla and eventually beyond. This broadens the range of parameters
where discoveries can be made by all researchers investigating new materials. A
resonant ultrasound spectroscopy lab module will be developed, bringing this
modern experimental technique to the classroom. This module will be made
available through the American Association of Physics Teachers Advanced Lab
website, and the undergraduate will have the opportunity to present their work
at the "Beyond First Year Labs" conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract&lt;br/&gt;The quantum limit is the magnetic field beyond which all
electrons in a metal are confined to the last Landau level. This state is highly
degenerate and prone to the formation of density waves, excitonic phases, and
possibly Wigner crystals. While the quantum limit has been studied extensively
in gate-tunable two dimensional systems such as GaAs/AlGaAs heterostructures and
graphene, very little is known about 3D metals in the quantum limit, and even
less is known about 3D Dirac and Weyl semimetals in this limit. This project
studies how Weyl fermions behave when magnetic fields provide the dominant
energy scale in the system. Questions include: do Weyl fermions survive when the
cyclotron and Zeeman energies are larger than the spin-orbit coupling; are Weyl
fermions unstable to the formation of a new state of matter in high magnetic
fields; and does the Weyl topology of the electronic structure play an important
role in magnetic-field induced correlated states? This project develops
experimental tools aligned along two complementary directions of ultrasound and
electrical transport to answer these questions. This includes quantitative
resistivity measurements using focused-ion-beam lithography for investigating
phenomena such as the chiral anomaly. These transport measurements (including
Hall effect) are used to develop a realistic tight-binding model for TaAs in the
quantum limit, enabling theoretical calculations of possible high-field
correlated states. The principle investigator's previous work on TaAs suggests
the formation of a correlated electronic phase above 80 tesla. This project
develops frequency-dependent pulse echo ultrasound, covering frequencies from
the low MHz up to a few GHz, to probe quasiparticle dynamics near the field-
induced phase transition, and to uncover which (if any) symmetry is broken at
the transition. The synthesis of these two approaches will yield both a
quantitative picture of how the electronic structure of a Weyl semimetal evolves
with field into the quantum limit, and how that electronic structure becomes
unstable to interactions and ultimately leads to a new field-induced state of
matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.