* 1752844
* CAREER: Heat, Work and Information in Quantum Circuits
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Kater Murch, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 04/30/2024
* USD 599,996.00

Thermodynamics is a field of physics which describes quantities such as heat and
work and their relationship to entropy and temperature. Originally developed as
a theory to optimize the efficiency of heat engines, two extensions of
thermodynamics in the last century advanced the theory to the point at which
quantum mechanics should be incorporated. First, the identification of the role
of information in thermodynamics makes strong connections between heat, entropy
and information. Second, extensions of thermodynamics to the realm of
microscopic systems in which fluctuations are significant allow the application
of thermodynamics at the level of single trajectories of classical particles.
Quantum mechanics requires both of these features as information and
fluctuations are central to the behavior of quantum systems. The experimental
control over single quantum systems that has been achieved in this century
places us in a unique position to extend thermodynamics into the quantum regime.
Understanding quantum thermodynamics will be increasingly important as quantum
machines become more complicated and as classical machines are further
miniaturized. The experimental work will utilize microscopic superconducting
circuits as artificial atoms and the interaction of these atoms with microwave
light to control the atom's environment. The team will conduct a series of
experiments elucidating the relationship between quantum information, heat and
work. An additional goal of this project is to increase the diversity and talent
pool of future physicists. The team will create a three and a half day pre-
orientation program for entering freshman focused on building community among
women and minority physics majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
builds on previous work using superconducting artificial atoms and the physics
of cavity quantum electrodynamics to create quantum systems with exquisite
control over the environment of the system. The team will undertake a series of
experiments to study the relationship between quantum information and the
thermodynamic quantities of heat and work. The first experiment will examine the
interplay between quantum feedback, quantum coherence, and work in a
continuously monitored superconducting qubit that realizes a quantum version of
Maxwell's demon. The team will look for uniquely quantum features stemming from
the quantum coherence of the qubit and the backaction of the continuous
measurement. In the second project the team will create a single atom heat
engine that utilizes the electronic degrees of freedom of a superconducting
artificial atom. This will explore how quantum superposition, entanglement, and
quantum control can affect the Carnot efficiency of the engine. In a final
experiment, the team will study the microscopic physics of thermalization with a
thermal bath from the perspective of quantum measurement by simultaneously
monitoring heat transfer to and from the bath.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.