* 1752085
* CAREER: Metallooxaziridines for the Synthesis of Nitrogen-Containing Three-Membered Heterocycles
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Gustavo Moura-Letts, Rowan University
* Continuing Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 04/30/2024
* USD 525,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Gustavo Moura-Letts. Professor Moura-Letts is a faculty member in the
Department of Chemistry at Rowan University. He is developing new classes of
chemical reagents for the synthesis of nitrogen-containing molecules. These
nitrogen-containing molecules are important for the construction of medicinally
relevant natural products and can be found in several approved drugs. In spite
of their importance, there remains a significant need for the development of
short and selective methods to make these nitrogen-containing drug molecules.
The goal of this research is to exploit the unique chemical properties of
specific metal complexes that allow for the construction of a wide variety of
nitrogen-containing molecules in a fashion previously unexplored. This project
is also developing mechanisms to engage undergraduates, high school students,
and returning veterans in chemical research. The goal is to stimulate their
interest in scientific careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metallooxaziridines are
stable nitrogen-containing organometallic complexes that have the potential to
efficiently promote the formation of three-membered ring heterocycles through
the delivery of a nitrogen atom across pi-systems. To capitalize on this
reactivity, three objectives are being pursued. 1) The reaction efficiency and
scope of metallooxaziridine reactions with alkenes, aldehydes and imines for the
synthesis of aziridines, oxaziridines and diaziridines respectively is being
explored. 2) The reaction between pi-systems and metallooxaziridines are being
studied in order to determine if the reactions can be run with using catalytic
amount of the metal. 3) The potential for the reactions to be conducted in an
asymmetric fashion are being investigated. In combination with these efforts,
the work in connection with the educational plan is establishing a laboratory
training system in which undergraduates and graduate students can receive a
broad preparation in chemical synthesis along with research-training rotations
in correlated areas of research. A plan to develop a science certificate program
for returning Veterans is also being pursued in an effort to provide those
individuals with a path to a productive career in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.