* 1752516
* CAREER: Compressive Laser Absorption Spectroscopy for Supercritical Combustion Studies
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Raymond Spearrin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 12/31/2023
* USD 587,892.00

The next generation of ultra-clean, efficient combustion engines are expected to
operate at much higher pressures than today's engines. Unfortunately, combustion
physics and chemistry are poorly understood at these high pressures, which has
slowed the advancement of cleaner, more fuel-efficient engines (including
automotive, diesel, jet, and rocket engines). Therefore, the overarching goal of
this project is to better understand combustion at extreme pressures. A new
laser diagnostic method is used to investigate fundamental chemistry and
radiative properties of combustion at extreme pressures, targeting specific
fuels and operating conditions relevant to current and future engine
development. Successful completion of the project will yield (1) a novel,
broadly-applicable diagnostic tool that will accelerate basic combustion
research in a critically important, but largely unexplored high-pressure domain,
and (2) new insights into the fundamental chemistry of ignition and pollutant
formation at these conditions. Complementary educational activities will
leverage modern media technologies to test the integration of laboratory
research in the classroom and to engage broader groups outside the university in
current scientific and engineering challenges related to energy and
combustion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A challenge and research focal point of this
project is combustion at supercritical thermodynamic conditions, where the
reacting fluid is neither liquid or gas and exhibits non-ideal behavior that is
difficult to model. To study non-equilibrium processes in this regime, an
experimental method is introduced that adapts advanced theories of signal
compression to the wavelength domain in order to conduct laser absorption-based
measurements of species and temperature at supercritical pressures. The proposed
method can be used to perform broad spectral surveys of the mid- to far-infrared
domain or ultra-fast sensing in a narrower wavelength range. Accordingly, this
project involves a re-examination of the approaches to fundamental high-
temperature spectroscopy studies and in situ species measurements in shock
tubes, and enables new exploratory approaches that leverage the strengths of the
novel measurement technique. It is envisioned that the compressive sensing
method, when synergistically combined with a high-pressure, high repetition-rate
shock tube, will (1) extend and/or allow the building of new spectroscopic
databases to include extreme pressures, and (2) enable new combustion chemistry
studies that isolate high-pressure reaction kinetics in the supercritical
regime. A research plan is set forth to test variations of the compressive
sensing technique, investigate spectroscopic properties of supercritical fluids,
and examine chemical kinetics of high-pressure ignition and soot formation.