* 1752340
* CAREER: SusChEM: Tunable Electrocatalysis at Buried Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2018,12/31/2023
* Daniel Esposito, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 12/31/2023
* USD 657,073.00

The project will investigate electrochemical catalysis on metal catalysts that
are fully- or partially-covered by ultra-thin layers of porous materials. The
coated catalysts will be evaluated for their effectiveness in promoting clean
energy technologies related to fuel cells and reduction of carbon dioxide
emissions. The research will be coupled with teaching and outreach efforts
emphasizing crowdsourcing tools and problem-based learning principles that
actively engage students and citizen scientists in the generation and evaluation
of innovative clean energy technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
focus on well-defined planar electrodes on which ultra-thin overlayers of
silicon oxide and titanium oxide will be deposited by a room temperature
ultraviolet (UV)- Ozone process that allows for nanometer-level control of the
oxide thickness. The thickness and surface chemistry of the oxide films will be
tuned to control the selective transport of active species and/or modify the
unique catalytic sites at the buried interface. The well-defined oxide-
encapsulated electrocatalysts will be investigated for alcohol oxidation and
carbon dioxide reduction using a suite of imaging and spectroscopy techniques
that will enable i.) deconvolution of transport and kinetic effects, ii.)
elucidation of the mechanisms by which ultrathin oxide overlayers influence
reaction selectivity, and iii.) the development of design rules that can be
applied across a wide range of materials and reactions. Experimental
measurements will be closely coordinated with numerical modeling and density
functional theory calculations performed by collaborators. A specific focus of
this research is to compare the catalytic properties of buried oxide/metal
interfaces to those at oxide/metal/electrolyte triple-phase boundary sites.
Overall, the proposed research will lay the groundwork for the rational design
of stable oxide-encapsulated electrocatalysts capable of highly efficient and
selective generation and use of fuels. Beyond the specific research, the project
will launch an initiative entitled "Crowdsourcing for Energy Innovation" that
will leverage emerging crowdsourcing principles and online tools to i.)
accelerate training of today's students to become the inventors and evaluators
of tomorrow's energy technology, ii.) increase participation in the Nation's
innovation network, and iii.) increase student and public awareness of cutting-
edge clean energy technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.