* 1752024
* CAREER: Stochastic Effects in the Microbial Cell Cycle: From Single-cell Level Variability to Population Growth
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Ariel Amir, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2024
* USD 735,877.00

This project focuses on mathematical and biophysical modeling of the mechanisms
through which microorganisms such as bacteria regulate the various cellular
processes in the cell cycle in a robust and efficient way, focusing on the
coupling of DNA replication, division and protein production. The team will
construct mathematical models that will elucidate the laws describing microbial
growth, and the interplay between size regulation, cell cycle progression and
protein production. Moreover, the implications of single-cell variability on the
growth of the population as a whole will be studied. Model predictions will be
used to design new experiments and will be tested by collaborators. Building on
the PI's rich experience in outreach for more than a decade, the PI proposes to
develop three important educational programs, each aimed at a different target
audience. First, the PI will continue and extend his support to the "Teach"
initiative, developing new content for a program which exposes the ethnically
diverse K-12 community in Cambridge to STEM content, and in particular the
physics of living systems. Within this project, the PI and his group will
interact directly with hundreds of seventh graders from the Cambridge public
system, exposing them to academic life and to modern science. Second, the PI
will collaboration with Harvard's Museum of Natural History, and will take a
role in a new exhibit on "Microbial Life: A Universe at the Edge of Sight",
where he will present to K-12 teachers. Third, the PI will develop a mentoring
program for the Physics Olympiad for high school students in the Boston area,
putting special emphasis on female students and students from underrepresented
groups. Together, these projects will expose a large number of students and
teachers to exciting topics which are not covered in their school curriculum,
and will aim at attracting the students into science and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project deals with mathematical modeling of
the cell cycle in microbes, focusing on the regulation and coupling of DNA
replication, cell division and protein production. These are fundamental
processes common to all life forms. One of the proposed approaches is to use
Langevin-type equations to produce coarse-grained descriptions of the cell
cycle. Such phenomenological models have proven to be extremely useful in the
study of cell physiology, and can provide us with important insights into the
biological processes. The existence of strong feedback in biological systems, in
addition to various sources of stochasticity, leads to significant theoretical
challenges, which will be addressed and developed within this proposal.
Similarly, the study of population growth involves dealing with subtle
correlations between cells in a lineage tree, which is a long-standing,
mathematically challenging problem. To these technical difficulties is added to
one of a more profound nature: choosing the "correct" minimal model that can
capture the essence of the phenomena and yet have predictive power. Deepening
our fundamental understanding of the cell cycle will have direct manifestations
on a broad spectrum of problems. Developing novel antibiotics will be aided by
an improved understanding of the bacterial cell cycle, as well as the proposed
study of the effects of single-cell variability on the population growth. In
particular, the growth and cell cycle of mycobacteria is an underexplored and
poorly understood problem, its advance having significant impact on treatment of
M. tuberculosis. Similarly, studying the cell cycle in single-celled microbes
will allow us to resolve it at the single-cell level, without the added
complication of cell-cell signaling, which will provide us with important
insights that might be generalized to growth regulation in mammalian tissues,
and its failure during cancer growth. The non-trivial connections between
physics, mathematics, engineering and biology appear to hold much promise and
will lie at the heart of this research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.