* 1752709
* CAREER: Mathematical Analysis and Numerical Methods for the Underground Oil Recovery Models
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2024
* Ying Wang, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 05/31/2024
* USD 400,054.00

This CAREER award supports a coordinated set of research and educational
activities with the goals of elucidating the modeling and computation of
underground oil recovery and stimulating the environment for research and study
in applied analysis and computation at the University of Oklahoma. The project
involves the Oklahoma Applied Analysis &amp; Computing Group, a team consisting
of undergraduate and graduate students, postdoc researchers, University of
Oklahoma faculty, and faculty from Oklahoma's network of universities and
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate mathematical analysis and efficient
numerical methods play a more and more important role in studying partial
differential equation (PDE) models in the petroleum industry. The goal of this
project is to perform research in the mathematical analysis and high order
accuracy numerical methods design for the PDE models describing the water-drive
secondary underground oil recovery. The PI will combine mathematical analysis,
numerical scheme design and computational techniques in our proposed research.
The mathematical analysis is based on PDE theory, and the numerical methods
proposed are based on state-of-the-art discontinuous Galerkin (DG) schemes.
Furthermore, the obtained results will be cross-validated using data from
laboratory experiments provided by the PI's academic collaborator, and oil
reservoir simulation provided by the PI's industry collaborator. The
interdisciplinary nature of this project will provide an environment of
communication and collaboration, as well as provide an opportunity for students
at different levels and with diverse background to apply mathematical and
computational tools to investigate the underground oil recovery
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.