* 1752765
* Collaborative Research: The interplay between host diet, immunity, reproduction, and the microbiome across an anthropogenic-disturbed landscape
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Dale DeNardo, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 201,940.00

It has recently become evident that microbes within the digestive tract of an
animal are not only important for digestion but also influence overall health.
An animal lives with trillions of microorganisms in its body, yet the
implications of having most of these microorganisms are unknown. What is known
thus far is focused primarily on the importance of microorganisms for digestion.
However, current work suggests that an animal's microbes have effects that
extend far beyond the gut, impacting the immune system and even stress. This
project seeks to understand the importance of these microorganisms for health
and survival in free-living populations of endangered iguanas that are exposed
to changing and unnatural diets via ecotourism. The project will test how
changing microbial communities and key physiological parameters relate to
reproduction and survival in natural populations. Additionally, in the
laboratory the researchers will experimentally test how changes in diet, stress,
and microbes affect health and physiology in order to understand what is causing
the observed changes in wild iguanas. Connecting physiological and microbial
changes with animal population fluctuations in nature will be an innovative step
forward. Finally, understanding both the occurrence and direction of these
interactions will provide important insights into the effects of human-induced
diet shifts on wildlife and much needed biological knowledge regarding
threatened species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many recent studies have identified
significant connections between the microbiome and host health in model systems.
However, mechanistic links between the microbiome and physiological functions
that are key to health and survival remain mostly unexplored. Furthermore, given
that evolutionary history is one of the primary determinants of microbiome
composition, the lack of taxonomic breadth severely restricts understanding of
the physiological link between host habitat, diet, and immunity with microbiome
composition and metagenomic function. There is also a paucity of research
investigating microbial communities and health-related metrics within free-
living animals. Thus, current knowledge of these relationships lacks critical
ecological relevance and an understanding of the impact of environmental changes
on endo-microbial communities. To address these current knowledge gaps, the
project will study iguanas in both natural and captive settings, in order to
test relationships among ecoimmune indices, anthropogenic-based diet changes,
and the microbiome across a fragmented, insular landscape in The Bahamas. In the
laboratory, the principal investigators will perform ecologically-relevant
experimental manipulations in captive iguanas to test directional relationships
in wild populations. The principal investigators will also investigate the
stability of these associations over time in conjunction with a long-term mark
recapture data set (37+ years) to estimate the influence of ecoimmunological,
oxidative, and microbiome indices on reproductive output and survival across
different populations exposed to variable human
influence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the Division of
Integrative Organismal Systems, the Division of Environmental Biology, and the
Rules of Life Venture Fund within The Directorate for Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.