* 1752796
* CAREER: Understanding the Time- and State-Dependence of Climate Sensitivity
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Kyle Armour, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2024
* USD 799,815.00

The educational component of the CAREER award seeks to introduce climate science
to the classroom at the high school, college and graduate school levels. The
project works with high school science teachers to develop educational materials
through workshops held on the University of Washington campus. The goal is to
introduce the climate system in an accessible form, simplifying it as much as
possible while retaining the essential elements and their interactions. Simple
models are developed which use one or two equations to represent the evolution
of global temperature in response to radiative forcing, incorporating factors
such as feedback effects and time delay due to ocean heat storage. Despite their
simplicity the models are closely related to cutting-edge research, as such
models are commonly used to understand behaviors found in full complexity
climate models and the observational record. The models and accompanying
materials also introduce students to simple differential equations, scientific
computation, hypothesis testing and the scientific method. A parallel effort is
organized for high school science teachers in eastern Washington with the help
of scientists and education specialists at the Pacific Northwest National
Laboratory in Richland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research component of the award
is an effort to understand the sensitivity of global temperature to changes in
greenhouse gas concentration. This sensitivity, commonly referred to as climate
sensitivity, is quantified as the warming produced by a doubling of carbon
dioxide (CO2) over its pre-industrial level. Climate sensitivity is an important
indicator of the risk posed by greenhouse gas increases, and much effort has
been devoted to estimating its value.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;But the extent to
which the impact of greenhouse gas increases on global temperature can be
represented by a single, fixed sensitivity value is unclear. Several lines of
research suggest that global temperature becomes more sensitive to the radiative
effect of CO2 increases as climate warms. In that case that the warming
ultimately produced by CO2 doubling is greater than what would be expected from
sensitivity estimates calculated at any time prior to the full temperature
increase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The temperature increase achieved when the
climate system has fully adjusted to the radiative effect of CO2 doubling is
termed the equilibrium climate sensitivity, or ECS. The terminology
distinguishes between ECS and instantaneous climate sensitivity (ICS), meaning
the incremental temperature increase from an incremental radiative increase
during the ramp-up to CO2 doubling. ECS is a fixed value whereas ICS evolves
over time, approaching ECS as the ultimate doubling temperature is realized.
While there is evidence that ICS is always less than ECS, the excess of ECS over
ICS has not yet been satisfactorily explained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
under this CAREER award seeks to understand why ICS changes over time and why it
is consistently lower than ECS. A key issue in the research is the dependence of
climate sensitivity on feedback mechanisms that are specific to particular
regions. A simple example is the sea ice albedo feedback, in which warming
causes sea ice retreat, replacing bright reflective ice cover with the darker
ocean surface, causing more solar energy to be retained in the climate system
and causing further warming. Since the albedo feedback only occurs within ice
covered regions, the feedback strength depends on the warming of the polar cap
rather than the increase in globally averaged temperature. The PI hypothesizes
that much of the ECS-ICS difference is due to regional differences in the rate
of warming produced by greenhouse gas increases: if different regions are home
to different feedback processes and some regions warm faster than others,
different regional feedback mechanisms will be prominent during different stages
of the transition to a warmer climate. Changes over time in the mix of feedback
processes can then account for the evolution of ICS. The research thus focuses
on the spatial pattern of temperature increase, which is explored primarily
through analysis of climate model output and a set of focused climate model
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.