* 1752255
* CAREER: Next-Generation Neural-Machine Interfaces for Electromyography-Controlled Neurorehabilitation
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Xiaorong Zhang, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 03/31/2024
* USD 549,760.00

The lives of millions of patients worldwide are severely impacted by upper
extremity loss or impairment. An emerging technology, electromyography
(EMG)-based Neural Machine Interface (NMI), offers enormous potential in the
restoration of function through neuroprosthetics for this population, including
amputees, stroke survivors, and cerebral palsy patients. The technology senses
bioelectrical signals from muscles, interprets them to identify the intended
movement of the patient, and makes decisions to control neurorehabilitation
applications (e.g., a prosthetic limb). While neurorehabilitation system design
has progressed remarkably over several decades, no system is currently capable
of meeting all desired technical specifications for commercial and clinical
implementation. This project takes a computer engineering approach toward
improving EMG-based NMI technology functionality and robustness. Software will
be developed for managing the sensor status and real-time responses, and novel
computing platforms will be implemented to handle the large-scale, data-
intensive computations required for responsive neurorehabilitation applications.
The project integrates research and education through several avenues:
enhancement of undergraduate curricula with embedded research experiences,
development of a massive open online course on neural machine interface, and
initiation of a K-12 through community college outreach program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's long-term career goal is to develop next-
generation NMIs that will connect people and enable the exploration of big data
and deep learning technologies in neurorehabilitation research. Toward this
goal, the project's objectives are to (1) develop new hardware and software
methods to enable the use of high-density grid sensing technology in real-time
EMG-based NMIs to improve the functionality and robustness of the NMIs and (2)
develop new computing technologies so that computing power and storage capacity
are no longer barriers to the advancement of NMI neurorehabilitation research.
The PI will first address the challenge of applying high-density EMG grids to
real-time NMIs by employing a Grid Status Awareness and Response Engine to
closely monitor the status of the EMD grids and respond accordingly. The issue
of computational burden posed by the high-density EMG grids will then be tackled
through the development of a neuromorphic computing system. Finally, a
hierarchical computing platform that provides sufficient computational and
storage capabilities to enable real-time response and portability will be
developed. Insights and advancements made here in EMG-based NMI design will
markedly improve reliability and functionality of EMG-controlled
neurorehabilitation systems. Additionally, the developed NMI methods and tools
are applicable to research fields beyond neurorehabilitation applications, such
as brain-computer interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.