* 1752268
* CAREER: Focused Hard X-ray Study of Energy Releases on the Sun and Stellar Objects
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Lindsay Glesener, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 04/30/2024
* USD 819,697.00

This five-year CAREER project is intended to form an important link between the
high-energy solar and astrophysics communities, and offers a rare opportunity to
use the same high-energy telescope (NuSTAR) to study flares on the Sun and other
stars. In tandem, undergraduate and graduate students will construct and run a
set of citizen science projects aimed at the investigation of particle
acceleration in solar flares using data from the past generation of (indirect)
hard X-ray observations. The family of citizen science projects will serve the
important purpose of education at the university level and will additionally
serve as a solar physics outreach tool as we directly engage the public in high-
energy research. Thus, education, outreach, and research are naturally
integrated within the project. It is intended that these initial citizen science
efforts will develop and blossom beyond the extent of this project, opening up
citizen science as a platform to analyze the wealth of data provided by multi-
wavelength observations of the Sun. In addition, this project will provide
significant support for a relatively new solar physics research group at the
University of Minnesota that includes several early-career women, directly
affecting the future gender balance of the solar and stellar physics
communities. The research and EPO agenda of this CAREER project supports the
Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and
interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program of this
five-year CAREER project constitutes an integrated approach to studying particle
acceleration and coronal heating associated with impulsive energy releases
(flares) on the Sun and other stars. The main objective is to investigate how
high-energy flare properties scale with total energy released by using newly
available focused hard X-ray measurements. This objective will be achieved
through three complementary efforts. Firstly, existing and anticipated data sets
from the Nuclear Spectroscopic Telescope Array (NuSTAR) and the Focusing Optics
X- ray Solar Imager (FOXSI) will be used to investigate the physics of small
microflares on the Sun. Second, the first set of focused hard X-ray observations
of young stellar objects (YSOs) will be analyzed to understand energy release in
giant flares. Finally, a student-built family of citizen science projects will
analyze solar flares observed over the last solar cycle by the Reuven Ramaty
High Energy Spectroscopic Imager (RHESSI) in order to unearth new insight into
flare particle acceleration. The research agenda is expected to significantly
advance flare knowledge by illuminating the physics of small-scale energy
release in sub-A-class microflares -- a regime never before studied at high
energies. Furthermore, the project will utilize never-before-available hard
X-ray observations of YSO flares to investigate whether they are governed by the
same processes of energy release, particle acceleration, and heating as in solar
flares, and will ascertain the aspects of those flares that may have the ability
to affect developing planetary systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.