* 1752172
* CAREER: Directed Epitaxial Assembly of Structural Biopolymers in Hierarchical Mesostructures for Enhanced Mechanical Behavior, Mass Transport and Heat Transfer
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Benedetto Marelli, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 03/31/2024
* USD 570,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award supports basic
research that enables a new nanomanufacturing paradigm, which has been mastered
by living organisms, to impart hierarchical organization at the mesoscale
(50-500 nanometers) to nanostructured materials. Current nanomanufacturing
processes involve complex time- and energy-consuming steps, require meticulous
regulation of the assembly environment, and, generally do not allow hierarchical
organization across length-scales (from nano to macro). This project
investigates directed epitaxial assembly that enables the efficient fabrication
of hierarchical mesostructured materials using the building blocks of life --
like silk. Such a capability allows integration of mesoscaled features in three-
dimensional materials and the manufacture of multifunctional materials with
enhanced mechanical, heat transfer and mass transport properties. Hierarchical
mesostructured materials are, in fact, a new class of materials with increasing
importance in the design of the next generation of high tech materials.
Additionally, the basic understanding nanoscale assembly phenomena in natural
polymers liaises the rules of fabrication in living matter with technology. The
outcomes of this project have the potential to greatly impact national economy
and general welfare, with ramification in the NSF's Big Ideas of the Future of
Work at the Human-Technology Frontier and Understanding the Rules of Life.
Furthermore, the interdisciplinary nature of the study, which involves
nanomanufacturing, material science, protein engineering, thermodynamics and
biochemistry, helps broaden participation of young scientists and
underrepresented groups in research and positively impact engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this CAREER project is to
understand and exploit the orchestration of forces and fields that enable the
nanomanufacturing of structural biopolymers in hierarchical mesostructured
materials, mimicking processes that occur in living organisms. This basic
understanding defines a new nanomanufacturing paradigm that enables the
formation of complex architectures at the mesoscale. The major barriers to this
vision are a poor understanding of the phenomena that modulate biopolymer
assembly and the lack of fabrication techniques that blend bottom-up and top-
down approaches in complex systems. In this study, thermodynamic principles,
directed assembly, additive manufacturing and protein engineering provide the
basic tools to explore and harness structural proteins folding, assembly and
fusion. In particular, epitaxial growth of structural proteins, e.g., silk, is
studied at the nanoscale using design principles that liaise the sequence-
structure-assembly properties of polypeptides and that allow for their use as
seed materials to template and direct assembly processes. This basic
understanding enables the nanomanufacturing of biopolymer-based hierarchical
mesostructured materials, unattainable with current nanomanufacturing
techniques, that exhibit enhanced toughness and resilience, selective mass
transport and modular heat dissipation, impacting several technological fields
that span biomedical, agriculture, aerospace, automotive, microelectronics and
energy applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.