* 1752114
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The effects of past dietary adaptations on modern populations
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2018,08/31/2018
* Andrea Wiley, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2018
* USD 15,194.00

As a biological species, humans continue to adapt genetically to various
environments through natural selection. However, cultural and lifestyle changes
occur much more rapidly than those biological changes, leading in some cases to
a mismatch between our biology and our modern life. This doctoral dissertation
project investigates how past differences in the food resources of two
populations (foragers vs. agropastoralists) may have led to different genetic
adaptations in metabolism, and how those adaptations may relate to modern-day
well-being and chronic conditions. The investigator hypothesizes that past
genetic adaptations to domesticated foodstuffs could result in fewer chronic
health problems when a population transitions to a modern diet and lifestyle.
The study will contribute to our understanding of the role of diet in human
evolution and adaptation, and its effects on well-being in contemporary
populations. Genetic, epidemiological and cultural data from Amerindian
individuals, which are crucial for understanding the role of genomic variants in
modern well-being among admixed populations, will be shared with participants
and stakeholders as well as the scientific community. This investigation will
include individuals from underrepresented groups as both research participants
and researchers, build and strengthen international research collaborations, and
contribute to student training at the graduate and undergraduate levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Grounded in the literature of human biology, nutritional
and molecular anthropology, and evolutionary medicine, the proposed research
aims to (1) evaluate whether genomic regions involved in nutrient metabolism
have been differentially targeted by selection in two post-nutrition transition
Amerindian populations with contrasting histories of subsistence strategies
(hunting-gathering vs. agropastoralism) and (2) evaluate whether these
signatures are subsistence-specific and correspond to the prevalence of several
chronic condition risk biomarkers. The question arises as to whether relatively
recent dietary shifts have had evolutionary consequences for human populations,
and to what extent these are related to the rise in chronic conditions in post-
nutrition transition populations. This study will include two Amerindian
populations: one that until recently engaged in hunting-gathering in the
temperate forest, and the other that has been long engaged in agropastoralism in
a desert environment. The research design will comprise ethnographic fieldwork
including oral history interviews, dietary and physical activity surveys,
measurements of blood and anthropometric chronic condition risk biomarkers, and
genome-wide scans for selection.