* 1752564
* CAREER: Crossing over into the geochemical milieu: Using the molecular genomic record to inform the geologic biomarker record
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Paula Welander, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 647,389.00

Earth has experienced significant environmental change throughout its history
and these changes have impacted life and its evolution. Our understanding of how
life has evolved on our changing planet is primarily based on studies of plant
and animal fossils that have revealed profound changes in the abundance and
diversity of macroscopic organisms. However, prior to the emergence of animal
and plant life, the ancient Earth was dominated by microbial organisms that did
not leave easily identifiable structural fossils. Thus, alternative approaches
are necessary to study microbial life in the context of Earth's distant past.
One such approach is to link molecules produced by modern day microbes to
molecules preserved in sedimentary rocks. These biomarker molecules function as
molecular fossils that can provide significant insight into ancient climatic
events, mass extinctions, and various evolutionary transitions throughout
Earth's history. However, the proper interpretation of lipid biomarkers is
dependent on a broad understanding of their production in modern systems today.
This project will use a combination of molecular and biochemical approaches to
address outstanding biomarker questions that have confounded the interpretation
of these molecules in the rock record. These studies will inform our
understanding of how life has responded to dramatic ecological change throughout
Earth's history and could provide insight into how modern organisms may respond
to long-term atmospheric and climate changes today. The broader impacts of this
project focus on developing an inquiry-based undergraduate laboratory course
that incorporates the proposed research objectives into the curriculum. The
Molecular Geomicrobiology Laboratory course will allow students to experience
the full scientific process - from developing hypotheses to testing those
hypotheses to preparing a manuscript to disseminate their findings. In addition,
this course will expose students from diverse scientific backgrounds to the
interdisciplinary nature of geobiology. This proposal will also provide
undergraduate student from diverse backgrounds research opportunities in the
laboratory of the PI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address three
biomarker uncertainties with the goal of providing experimental evidence to
allow for improved biomarker interpretations. These include identifying
potential microbial sources for orphan biomarkers detected in sedimentary rocks,
determining the robustness of the sponge sterol biomarker hypothesis, and
characterizing the synthesis of the paleotemperature proxy lipids, GDGTs, in
archaea. Earth's history is marked with periods of dramatic atmospheric and
climate fluctuations that greatly impacted the Earth's biosphere and geosphere.
Biomarker lipids can provide a window into those interactions and it is the goal
of this project to generate a better understanding of the processes and sources
that control the distribution and preservation of lipid
biomarkers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.