* 1752903
* CAREER:Mineralogical and Biogeochemical Control of Phosphorus Transformation during Soil Development
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Mengqiang Zhu, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 676,163.00

Phosphorus (P) cycling and bioavailability in soils shapes ecosystem structure
and function. At a given soil developmental stage during soil formation, the P
chemical composition provides a useful context for evaluating contemporary
cycling of P, carbon and other nutrients, and for determining how changes in P
availability might affect diverse ecosystem processes, such as primary
productivity. In this project, the PI and his team will address transformation
of P composition in soils and its coupling to organic carbon cycling during
long-term ecosystem development. The proposed work will transform the current
understanding of P dynamics and its coupling to carbon cycling in terrestrial
ecosystems. This work also has important implications for P utilization in
agriculture and will advance the understanding of P fate after P fertilizer
application. The proposed education work will have broad impacts on Earth
Science education of various levels of students in the state of Wyoming through
developing courses, curriculum and STEM activities, and preparing earth science
teachers. The research, education and outreach components of this proposal have
been developed synergistically to maximize the impact on the PI's, as well as
existing on-campus outreach organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The well-
received Walker and Syers model describing P transformation during pedogenesis
or soil development is based on operationally-defined P fractions as measured by
chemical extractions, rather than P speciation. Thus, it has significant
limitations in describing P biogeochemical transformation involving P
interactions with minerals and organics. Moreover, the model was developed from
humid environment and has limited applicability to semi-arid ecosystems as the
model does not consider aeolian dust deposition as another important P input in
the semi arid environment. There is, therefore, a great need to develop P
speciation-based models that can accurately describe P transformation in both
humid and semi-arid ecosystems. In this project, P X-ray absorption spectroscopy
will be used to determine P speciation in soils, the P pools of the Walker and
Syers model, and aeolian dust. Chronosequences in contrasting climate conditions
and/or parent materials will be examined. A P-speciation based transformation
model during ecosystem development will be proposed. To gain insights into
coupled cycling of organic P and carbon facilitated by interacting with
minerals, P speciation in soil organic matter associated with soil particles of
different size regimes will be characterized using spectroscopic and biochemical
analyses. Results are expected to have significant implications for
understanding P cycling and bioavailability in terrestrial
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.