* 1752598
* CAREER: Alaska Native Belonging in High School Math and Science Classrooms
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2023
* Michele Yatchmeneff, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 01/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Alaska Natives are overwhelmingly underrepresented in and underprepared for
engineering pre-college and college degree programs. There is a crucial need to
help Alaska Native pre-college students become better prepared for engineering
degree programs. Previous research indicates that a feeling like they belong in
engineering is important for Alaska Native engineering students to succeed in
high school preparatory engineering courses and engineering degree programs.
This CAREER project aims to investigate belonging among Alaska Native high
school students in engineering preparatory classrooms. The project will lead to
new teaching approaches that support Alaska Native students prepare for
engineering, and increase the diversity of the engineering
profession.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study seeks to 1) determine community
characteristics that Alaska Native students and Alaskan teachers describe as
important or necessary for developing a sense of belonging among Alaska Native
students in high school engineering preparatory classrooms; and 2) determine how
a sense of belonging influences Alaska Native high school students to make
decisions to take advanced engineering preparatory courses in high school.
Through theoretical frameworks of sense of community and belonging, this study
will use a narrative approach to construct a model for design of educational
innovations for Alaska Native students. This model will contribute to
engineering education researchers' understanding of Alaska Native
underrepresentation and under-preparation in pre-college and college engineering
degree programs. The research team will interview current or recently graduated
Alaska Native high school students and Alaskan teachers from diverse Alaska
Native communities. Based on the research findings, the team will design and
implement a professional development course for Alaskan K-12 teachers. The
intent is to offer the course in multiple years following the end of the grant
to extend its impact. This work will be used to augment the existing pre-college
and college components of the Alaska Native Science &amp; Engineering Program
(ANSEP) by being directly implemented into engineering classrooms, engineering
preparatory classrooms, and hands-on engineering recruiting activities. The
results of this research will also be disseminated through engineering education
and Native education research journals and conferences.