* 1752986
* CAREER: Reductive Carboxylation of Unsaturated Hydrocarbons
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Brian Popp, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 02/29/2024
* USD 675,000.00

With this CAREER Award from the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Chemistry
Division, Professor Brian Popp at West Virginia University (WVU) is developing
new catalytic methods that utilize carbon dioxide (CO2) in chemical synthesis.
CO2 is an undervalued and underutilized chemical raw material. This project is
focusing on reactions of CO2 to prepare important chemicals useful for the
manufacture of pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals, and materials. Professor Popp's
research is using both experimental and computational methods to better
understand how these reactions work and how to improve them. Professor Popp is
pursuing educational activities aimed at increasing the quality and quantity of
U.S. scientists, especially from underrepresented groups served by WVU. This is
being accomplished by enhancing the academic experience both in the classroom
and the laboratory. Specific activities are aimed at enhancing the university
experience for student Veterans of the U.S. Armed Forces at WVU interested in
pursuing Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon dioxide (CO2) is an attractive renewable
resource for the production of chemicals; however, it is traditionally
undervalued by the chemical industry because of its stability. Nevertheless, its
broader utilization as a C1 feedstock could help shepherd a more sustainable
carbon economy in the future. Catalytic olefin reductive carboxylation with CO2
is a potentially powerful way to create new carbon-carbon bonds while generating
minimal waste. Professor Popp is focusing on two underdeveloped olefin reductive
functionalization strategies: hetero(element)carboxylation and transfer
hydrometallation/carboxylation. The former strategy employs element-boron
reagents (where "element" includes boron, silicon, and tin) and copper catalysts
to enable olefin difunctionalization using CO2 under mild conditions. Building
upon insights gained from extensive kinetic study of iron-catalyzed
hydromagnesiation, the latter strategy investigates new systems that achieve
hydrozincation/carboxylation in a single catalytic reaction. Rational method
optimization is accomplished in parallel with studies of catalytic reaction
mechanisms using a combination of operando spectroscopic techniques, studies of
stoichiometric reactions and preparation of plausible intermediates, as well as
computational methods. In support of the broader impacts of the project,
Professor Popp is organizing new training and career mentorship opportunities
for STEM-interested student Veterans of the U.S. Armed Forces at WVU,
collaborating with a primarily undergraduate institution in the Appalachian
region on catalysis research relevant to this project, and developing a new
multimedia tool for organic chemistry education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.