* 1752782
* CAREER:Harnessing Photon Upconversion Via Self-Assembled Hybrid Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Kenneth Hanson, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 05/31/2024
* USD 549,028.00

Nontechnical description: The abundant and sustained nature of sunlight leaves
little doubt that solar cell technology will play a pivotal role in future clean
energy strategies. It is for this reason that considerable efforts are underway
to improve upon current solar cell designs that can only convert less than a
third of sun light into electricity. The research team seeks significantly
increased conversion efficiencies through a new, low cost, next generation solar
cell that utilizes previously unharnessed low energy sun light. Achieving this
goal requires an understanding of how molecules assemble and interact on solar
cell surfaces, how fast each step in the light-to-electricity conversion process
unfolds, and the barriers preventing solar cell materials from creating more
energy from available light. Integrated into the project are outreach activities
that engage the online community with research-related photos, videos, and
stories via blogs and other social media. Complementing this online effort is
also an event called Ask a Scientist where several scientists engage local
community members in casual conversations about science during a once-a-month
art, music, and entertainment festival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: Photon upconversion, combining two or more low energy photons to
generate a higher energy excited state, is an intriguing strategy to harness low
energy light, circumvent the Shockley-Queisser limit, and increase the maximum
theoretical solar cell efficiency from 33% to above 45%. However, achieving
efficient upconversion under ambient solar intensities and incorporating this
process directly into a solar cell remains challenging. This CAREER project
utilizes multilayer self-assembly on inorganic surfaces to manipulate energy and
electron transfer dynamics at an interface and directly harness upconversion in
a solar cell. This project also combines electrochemical and spectroscopic
techniques to gain a fundamental understanding of the rate and efficiency
limiting energy and electron transfer processes in assemblies at metal oxide
interfaces. The incorporation of new sensitizer and acceptor molecules into the
bilayer film is necessary to achieve efficient upconversion under low energy,
solar irradiation. Complementing this research effort are a number of outreach
activities that target individuals from many different educational, socio-
economic, and racial/ethnic backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.