* 1752941
* CAREER: The Social Ecology of Relational Mobility
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Joanna Schug, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 04/30/2024
* USD 580,461.00

Cultures around the world show remarkable variation in their social behaviors
and cognition. People vary in their willingness to trust others, to cooperate
across group boundaries, and how they enforce pro-social behaviors in their
communities. These cultural differences have major implications for important
social outcomes, from individual well-being to the economic prosperity of
nations. To develop policies that promote beneficial social outcomes, it is
important to understand the mechanisms that drive such differences. This project
addresses this challenge by focusing on the nature of social environments, or
social ecologies, that vary from culture to culture. One way in which social
ecologies vary is in relational mobility, which refers to the opportunities
people have to voluntarily enter into and exit from social relationships.
Variations in relational mobility are expected to have predictable and important
influences on behavior and cognition, helping to account for differences in
social behaviors often observed across cultures. By understanding the origin of
such cultural differences, societies will be better informed to promote positive
and beneficial policies and to reduce harmful and counterproductive social
behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research component of this project has two
major parts: The first examines patterns of social interactions in a large-scale
study of daily social interactions across cultures. The goal is to determine the
extent to which patterns of relational mobility and social interactions coincide
with historical and environmental factors, and lead to psychological and
behavioral outcomes. The second part of the research component uses experimental
approaches to examine whether changes in relational mobility can lead to changes
in social behavior within and across cultures. The goal is to uncover the
mechanisms by which social ecological factors impact individual behavior. The
project also includes an educational component, providing international research
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students in the United States, and
helping to establish long-lasting collaborative networks for the next generation
of scientists. Contributions of the research and educational components of the
project will promote the integration of international and interdisciplinary
perspectives, and provide opportunities for social impact by developing tools to
promote socially beneficial behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.