* 1752840
* CAREER:Understanding the Effects of the Immediate Environment on Intrinsic Properties of 2D Crystals: From Fundamental Science to Real World Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Pratibha Dev, Howard University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2024
* USD 558,295.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF CAREER award supports
theoretical and computational research focused on the effects of the immediate
environment on physical and chemical properties of layered two-dimensional
materials. In 2004, a single-atom thick layer of carbon, called graphene, was
extracted from a piece of graphite. Subsequently many other two-dimensional
crystals have been discovered. This rapid phase of material discovery has been
fueled by the interesting and unusual properties of the two-dimensional layered
crystals that are, not surprisingly, very different from those of conventional
three-dimensional crystals. In addition, disparate layers of these crystals can
be stacked to make designer materials with unique properties. Owing to their
surface-only character, the interactions between two-dimensional crystals with
their immediate environment become more important than similar interactions for
bulk crystals. The immediate environment may include ambient gases and the
substrates. These interactions can alter different properties of two-dimensional
crystals in unpredictable ways, but have remained mostly unexplored. In this
project, the PI and her group will use state-of-the-art computational methods to
study interactions between two-dimensional materials and their local
environment, advancing the field of layered materials. In the process, they will
develop a fundamental understanding of factors influencing the structural,
electronic, magnetic and optical properties and hence, the physical and chemical
behavior of two-dimensional materials. This research will benefit not only basic
science, but also technologies of societal importance such as, relativistic
electronics, quantum computing, and highly sensitive sensors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While pursuing the research goals for this project, the PI
will also support and enhance educational activities at the Howard University.
The PI will mentor a new generation of scientists in Condensed Matter Physics
and Quantum Chemistry, as well as in the use of computational techniques for
investigating material properties. Different elements of this research will also
be incorporated in the Solid-State Physics courses for undergraduate and
graduate students. The PI also plans to develop and offer a course called, "The
Art of Communicating Science". This course will address the need to effectively
and efficiently communicate scientific results, which need to be disseminated to
the broader scientific community and the general public. Further, in order to
cultivate the scientific culture in the community, the PI plans to establish a
public lecture series at Howard University called "Cutting Edge Science". This
lecture series will be open to everyone in Howard University, all high schools,
local universities and the surrounding community in the DC metro area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF
CAREER award supports theoretical and computational research focused on the
effects of the immediate environment on physical and chemical properties of
layered two-dimensional materials. Different properties of novel layered systems
are only beginning to be understood and the field requires detailed atomistic
studies to explain the functionalities of these materials. Due to their very
nature, it is important to explicitly consider: (a) interfacial effects between
two-dimensional materials and their substrates, whether conventional three-
dimensional or two-dimensional substrates on one side, (b) interfacial effects
between layered-materials and the atmosphere to which they are exposed on the
other side, and (c) how defects within the two-dimensional layers alter the
interfacial interactions, and in turn, are themselves modified due to the
interfaces. These effects have, thus far, been mostly overlooked in theoretical
studies of novel layered two-dimensional crystals, but are expected to play an
important role in determining their properties. Using Density Functional Theory-
based computational methods, the PI and her team will address this gap in our
knowledge by explicitly including the relevant local environment, and will
therefore determine how the properties of layered structures are affected by it.
The emergent properties from these composites will help to understand existing
experiments and will be exploited to propose novel, technologically-relevant
devices using two-dimensional structures as building blocks. The PI's research
team will study these effects in context of different applications, such as: (a)
quantum emitters in layered two-dimensional crystals for quantum technologies,
(b) phase-change properties of transition metal dichalcogenides for
nanoelectronics and next-generation batteries, and (c) highly-selective and
sensitive biochemical sensors. Such applications have potential to benefit
society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While pursuing the research goals for this
project, the PI will also support and enhance educational activities at the
Howard University. The PI will mentor a new generation of scientists in
Condensed Matter Physics and Quantum Chemistry, as well as in the use of
computational techniques for investigating material properties. Different
elements of this research will also be incorporated in the Solid-State Physics
courses for undergraduate and graduate students. The PI also plans to develop
and offer a course called, "The Art of Communicating Science". This course will
address the need to effectively and efficiently communicate scientific results,
which need to be disseminated to the broader scientific community and the
general public. Further, in order to cultivate the scientific culture in the
community, the PI plans to establish a public lecture series at Howard
University called "Cutting Edge Science". This lecture series will be open to
everyone in Howard University, all high schools, local universities and the
surrounding community in the DC metro area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.