* 1752417
* CAREER: Quantum Entanglement and Geometric Frustration in Correlated Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Tarun Grover, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2024
* USD 479,555.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER supports research and
education on long-standing conceptual questions in the quantum condensed matter
physics of metallic systems. Most materials order in one pattern or another as
the temperature decreases. For example, water molecules order to form ice
crystals at low temperatures. However, there exists an interesting possibility
whereby a material doesn't order even at the absolute zero temperature; such
materials go by the moniker "quantum liquids". One of the major theoretical
discoveries of the past decade is that quantum liquids are distinguished by a
feature of exclusively quantum nature: they are highly entangled objects. In an
entangled quantum system, the state of an individual component cannot be
described independently of the other components. In a quantum liquid,
approximately a trillion trillion particles can be entangled with each other!
Due to its counter-intuitive properties, quantum entanglement potentially offers
exciting applications ranging from ultrafast computing to novel encryption
schemes. At the same time, however, entanglement can often be fragile.
Therefore, a key question is: where to look for materials with robust
entanglement?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and his group will develop a
multipronged approach to study highly entangled materials by combining tools
from theoretical physics, quantum information science, and state-of-the-art
computational algorithms. Developing proper understanding will allow the
researchers to make precise predictions, which is essential for harnessing the
technological potential of quantum entanglement. Another desired goal is to
develop a deeper understanding of strongly interacting matter using ideas from
computer science. Such progress will potentially impact several areas of
scientific inquiry at once, ranging from quantum materials to high-energy
particle physics and quantum information science. The algorithms and software
developed will be disseminated to the community in open-source
form.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In tandem with the research project, the PI will
organize and participate in a variety of educational and outreach activities.
Firstly, the PI will try to bring the excitement of quantum physics to
undergraduates by presenting introductory lectures on the PI's research.
Secondly, the PI will organize a yearly workshop aimed at socio-economically
disadvantaged high-school students, which will develop skills in formulating
estimates relevant for everyday life. Finally, the PI will mentor undergraduate
and graduate students on research topics closely aligned with the research
component.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER supports research and education on
long-standing conceptual questions in the quantum condensed matter physics of
metallic systems. Specifically, the PI will focus on questions informed by
materials which either do not fit within Landau's Fermi liquid theory, or whose
description solely in terms of conventional symmetry-breaking order parameters
misses key physical aspects. A common thread connecting these materials is that
they are highly quantum entangled. To make progress, the PI will develop new
ideas and tools at the intersection of quantum information theory, quantum field
theory and state-of-the-art Quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) techniques.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;One of the big impediments in understanding strongly correlated
metals is the Fermion sign problem. The problem is compounded when the fermions
are further coupled to geometrically frustrated spins. Such a set-up is directly
relevant for a wide variety of frustrated heavy-fermion systems. To make
progress on this front, the PI will implement a newly discovered algorithm that
for the first time allows for unbiased simulations of a large class of
frustrated Kondo lattice systems. This approach will also shed light on the
entanglement structure of frustrated metallic systems. The PI will also study
the global phase diagram of heavy fermions from a quantum-information-theoretic
perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected outcomes of this research are: 1)
Predictive power on a large class of Hamiltonians that model correlated metals
potentially relevant for quantum technologies. 2) A quantum-information-
theoretic understanding of the global phase diagram of correlated metals. 3)
Development of new computational algorithms that will be capable of addressing a
wide range of problems relevant to distinct areas of quantum physics, from
condensed matter physics to atomic physics and high-energy particle physics. The
algorithms and software developed will be disseminated to the community in open-
source form.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In tandem with the research project, the PI
will organize and participate in a variety of educational and outreach
activities. Firstly, the PI will try to bring the excitement of quantum physics
to undergraduates by presenting introductory lectures on the PI's research.
Secondly, the PI will organize a yearly workshop aimed at socio-economically
disadvantaged high-school students, which will develop the skill of using order-
of-magnitude estimates relevant for everyday life. Finally, the PI will mentor
undergraduate and graduate students on research topics closely aligned with the
research component.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.