* 1752048
* CAREER:  SusChEM: Engineering Molecular Interactions to Control Ion Transport in Hydrated Polymers for Membrane Separations
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Geoffrey Geise, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2024
* USD 556,898.00

Within the next decade, the removal of salt from salty and contaminated water
may be needed to alleviate water shortages in the USA. Also, removal of nitrogen
and phosphorus from agricultural runoff may be implemented to prevent
eutrophication and remediate a "dead zone" in the Gulf of Mexico. Additionally,
novel routes may be developed to recover rare metals that are in short supply in
the USA, and subject to export controls, yet are required components of magnets
and sensors for military applications and electronics. These three technological
challenges--desalination, nutrient recovery, and rare metal recovery--all
involve the removal of charged molecules (ions) from water. To separate these
ions from water requires selective materials, such as membranes, that allow one
type of molecule to pass, while prohibiting others. Minimization of the energy
required for the separation increases economic viability. Although current
membranes separate molecules based on size and/or charge, they do not currently
discriminate between similarly charged ions. This CAREER project will design and
synthesize new molecularly-tailored polymer membranes that create unique
electrochemical environments to selectively discriminate ions of similar charge,
size, and other properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will elucidate
the influence of ion properties, molecular confinement, and the polarity of
charged groups on ion transport in charged polymer membranes. Fundamental
structure-property relationships will be developed for single electrolytes, and
extended to ion mixtures. These relationships will be used to tailor the
electrochemical environment in the confined nano-space of charged membranes,
thereby laying the foundation for rational design of advanced polymeric
materials. The chemical structures and morphologies of the new membranes will
enable high ion selectivity, and minimize energy consumption of ion separation
processes. The mechanical and chemical stability of the membranes will be
addressed. An integrated educational plan incorporates the research outcomes
into all levels of engineering education, by providing internships for high
school students, workshops for high school teachers, dissemination of a web-
based membrane performance calculator, incorporation of this calculator into
undergraduate courses, direct laboratory training of undergraduate and graduate
students, and broad dissemination of research results. The integrated research
and education plan will lead to robust membranes to address global water and
energy resources that lie at the heart of food-energy-water nexus
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.