* 1752362
* CAREER: Control, Optimization, and Market Design for Efficient and Reliable Integration of Renewable Energy Sources in Electric Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Enrique Mallada, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The U.S. power grid is in the midst of its most fundamental transformation since
its inception. Spurred by the need to reduce emissions, the electric generation
mix is drifting away from traditional fuel-based sources, towards new renewable
sources with very different characteristics. However, integrating renewable
sources into the existing grid in an efficient and reliable manner will not be
possible unless one devises appropriate mechanisms to overcome the technical
challenges associated with high levels of renewable penetration. The main
challenges that hinder high levels of renewable penetration include (a) the
increased dynamic degradation induced by renewable sources, (b) the uncertainty
and intermittency in energy production levels, and (c) the incentives
misalignment that preclude renewable energy sources to behave in a more grid-
friendly manner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these challenges this CAREER
proposal aims to develop a new generation of decentralized controllers,
distributed algorithms, and market designs that can unlock today's grid
rigidity, capture the value of fast timescale actions in operational costs, and
allow a seamless integration of renewables. This is achieved by focusing on two
main goals. The first goal aims to develop analysis and design tools that allow
the systematic design of (i) decentralized algorithms with robustness
guarantees, (ii) dynamics-aware distributed optimization algorithms that can
perform real-time optimization without introducing system-wide instabilities,
and (iii) multi-timescale markets that integrate operations and controls. The
second goal is to leverage the developed tools in the design of new control
features that are aimed at boosting the grid flexibility. The three new
applications proposed in this project are: (a) Dynamic Droop Control (iDroop),
(b) Real-time Congestion Management (RCM), and (c) Voltage Collapse
Stabilization (VCS). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also contains an
integrated educational and outreach plan that includes (a) development of a new
course on networked dynamical systems, (b) undergraduate research that explores
high-risk high-reward topics, (c) involvement of women and ethnic minorities in
the preparation of demonstrations and testbeds, and (d) K-12 and community
outreach through the Johns Hopkins Center for Educational
Outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.