* 1752274
* CAREER: Resolving action potentials and high-density neural signals from the surface of the brain
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Jonathan Viventi, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 04/30/2024
* USD 549,953.00

The surface of the brain remains an unexplored frontier in brain/neural
interface design, despite the fact that it is simpler and safer to place
electrodes ?onto? the brain than ?into? the brain. The research goal of this
project is to build and optimize an innovative electrode array device that will
improve the resolution of brain interface devices by more than 1000-fold. This
goal is now considered possible due to the PI?s breakthrough success in
developing electronics that can support more than 650 electrodes with a single
wire. The array, which can both record brain activity and stimulate the brain,
will enable research into the subtle brain signals that generate seizures in
people with epilepsy and unlock new treatment options. The technology will also
dramatically improve the performance of motor prosthetic devices for the
paralyzed, visual prosthetic devices for the blind, and facilitate new
treatments for other neurological disorders. The educational goal is to engage
students and teachers in understanding brain-machine interfaces and increase
interest among students in pursuing STEM undergraduate degrees and careers. In
collaboration with several local high schools, a high-school written science
module on neuroengineering, meeting state and national science standards, will
be created. The PI will develop materials for high school biology and physics
teachers to introduce the field of neuroengineering with a hands-on laboratory
exercise. The PI will host an annual workshop for 20 science teachers from
around the state to introduce the field of neuroengineering and to give the
teachers a chance to try out the lab materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project's research objective, driven by the PI's recent breakthrough development
of active, flexible electronics that will enable implanted neural interfaces in
which greater than 65,000 electrodes can be sampled using fewer than 100 wires,
is to advance and optimize these brain interfaces by measuring fundamental
neural interface design parameters. These design parameters critically influence
the signal to noise ratio, total information content, and long-term reliability
of electrode implants. Leveraging both computational models and experimental
results related to audio responses in rats and comparisons to nonhuman primate
data made available by a collaborator, three aspects critical to the performance
of neural interface devices will be investigated: 1) electrode material and
contact size, 2) electrode spacing, and 3) array geometry. The implant design
uses the same electronics that permit a digital camera to have millions of
pixels without millions of wires and will improve the resolution of brain
interface devices by more than 1000-fold. The Research Plan is organized under 3
objectives: 1) Measure the effect of cortical surface contact size, material,
and impedance on the properties of the recorded neural signals, including the
recording of action potentials (APs); 2) Determine the surface electrode spacing
required to satisfy Nyquist-Shannon spatial sampling by measuring the
information content of neural signals from varying length scales and 3)
Understand the biological and non-biological factors that influence the long-
term reliability of surface electrode arrays by chronically implanting surface
electrode arrays in freely behaving rats and evaluating long-term function and
biocompatibility. The project's educational objective, to create a high-school
science module, involves development and dissemination of curricular resources
and a lab exercise using Arduino microcontrollers that will allow students to
record and display their own electromyographic(EMG) signals and use them to
control a video game.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.