* 1752938
* CAREER: Control of Spatial Quantum Correlations for Enhanced Quantum Networks
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Alberto Marino, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 06/30/2024
* USD 565,000.00

Over the last decades there has been a tremendous increase in the information
capacity of classical channels that has led to an "information revolution" that
has had profound effects in how information is processed, stored, and
distributed. The ability to use the higher dimensionality of the spatial degree
of freedom of quantum states of light in a long-distance quantum network can
bring about an analogous revolution to the field of quantum information science
by making it possible to transmit large amounts of information through a quantum
channel. This CAREER project will study the use of spatial quantum correlations
in entangled beams of light to provide more control over the spatial degree of
freedom with the goal of making it compatible with long-distance quantum
networks. This will enable new possibilities for the use of this degree of
freedom in applications that range from long-distance quantum communications to
quantum imaging. The research will be integrated with an educational program
that seeks to develop the problem-solving skills of the undergraduate students
through their active participation in research and the introduction of quantum
optics experiments in the undergraduate teaching laboratories. It will also
provide educational outreach opportunities for the general public through the
involvement of high-school teachers from the NSF RET program in the development
of didactical quantum optics demonstrations. Active efforts will be made to
involve underrepresented groups, such as Native Americans, Hispanics, and women,
in the research and educational programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The spatial
degree of freedom has been recognized to hold the promise for significant impact
in the field of quantum information science due to its large dimensionality.
However, this promise has largely been unfulfilled due to the limited
capabilities that exist in terms of the control and manipulation of this degree
of freedom and its incompatibility with long-distance networks. The goal of this
CAREER project is to demonstrate the compatibility of the spatial degree of
freedom of quantum states of light with long-distance quantum networks. This
will be done through the control of the distribution of the spatial quantum
correlations present in continuous-variable (CV) entangled twin beams generated
through a four-wave mixing process in a double-lambda configuration in rubidium
vapor. The focus on CVs will make it possible to overcome important limitations
that result from the probabilistic nature of the more commonly used discrete
domain approach. In particular, CVs allow for a deterministic implementation of
quantum protocols. This is particularly important for applications, such as
quantum repeaters, in which the low yield rate that results from the
probabilistic occurrence of events leads to impractical constraints on the
apparatus. Among other things, this CAREER project will provide a source capable
of generating CV entangled states of light whose distribution of spatial quantum
correlations can be engineered. This will enable the use of the spatial degree
of freedom in quantum information applications such as secure communications,
information processing, and distributed quantum
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.