* 1752839
* CAREER: A Multi-modal Study of Bi-continuous Pattern Formation  in Nano/Meso Composite and Porous Metals Films via Solid-State Interfacial Dealloying
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Yu-chen Karen Chen-Wiegart, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 06/30/2024
* USD 558,426.00

Non-Technical Summary: Fundamental kinetics and thermodynamics understanding in
materials across multiple time and spatial scales will lead to elegant methods
for designing novel architectures that enable new capabilities and benefits for
society. Driven by this overarching goal, this Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) award supports research to examine an emerging versatile method for
fabricating interconnected bi-continuous metal-metal composites and high-surface
porous metals at nano/meso scales. The project will enable the design of new
materials possessing new functions in a wide range of important fields,
including sensing, actuating, energy storage and catalysis. This CAREER award
will also support an integrated educational plan based on a Stony Brook
University (SBU) - Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL) collaboration. The
efforts will inspire and grow a diverse student body to pursue materials science
and engineering, a critical technology for our society's future. In particular,
students will be inspired by gaining opportunities to study materials using
advanced synchrotron X-ray techniques at the National Synchrotron Light Source
II (NSLS-II). Creating synergy between a university, a national laboratory and
the community will directly benefit students, researchers and the general
population by enabling them to work in and/or gain inspiration and knowledge
from the research being performed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary: This CAREER award will support research that focuses on examining an
emerging dealloying process: solid-state interfacial dealloying (SSID). A self-
organizing process, SSID is a versatile method for fabricating bi-continuous
metal-metal composites and porous metals at nano/meso scales. SSID opens a new
route to synthesize such structures, particularly in non-noble metals. SSID may
also potentially be used to create high surface area metal/metal oxides with
high thermal stability and chemical reactivity. The processing-structure-
property correlations in these materials will be characterized by in situ
synchrotron techniques. A multi-modal approach will be implemented by combining
different X-ray techniques at NSLS-II. The research objectives of this proposal
are 1) to create a new class of nano/meso metal-metal composites and porous
metal films via this SSID process, 2) to understand the fundamental mechanisms
that govern its material evolution in morphology, structure and chemical
composition, and 3) to correlate processing and structure with the thermal and
chemical properties. The educational objectives of this proposal are to
integrate synchrotron techniques in materials science and engineering education
through personal research engagement and mentoring, as well as curriculum
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.