* 1752206
* CAREER:Active Nano-Acoustic Waveguide Matrix to Tackle Signal Processing Limits: Enabling Wideband and Nonreciprocal Integrated Communication Beyond the UHF
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2024
* Roozbeh Tabrizian, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 01/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Wireless technologies are poised to revolutionize all aspects of human life
through enabling the infrastructures of a modern society, including intelligent
transportation systems, internet of things, smart manufacturing, and connected
healthcare. To enable such a revolution, there is a pressing need for tremendous
enhancement of the scarce radio spectrum resources and their use efficiency. The
effective access to radio spectrum is crucial for a diverse span of social needs
ranging from national security and public safety to transportation, broadcasting
and commercial services and plays a decisive role in continuous economic growth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The wireless access to radio spectrum resources is
currently limited by the available signal processing hardware that are only
efficient in the lower end of the spectrum; hence, forcing current wireless
systems such as smart phones, tablets and global positioning systems (GPS) to
operate in a very limited frequency range (i.e. over ~0.3-6 GHz). Such a small
frequency range is already overcrowded and cannot accommodate new wireless users
or amenities that require ultra-fast data communication. Furthermore, available
hardware are fundamentally incapable of simultaneous data transmission and
reception in the same frequency band and at the same time. Therefore, current
wireless systems are forced to occupy separate bands for data transmission and
reception; hence, cutting the efficiency of the spectrum use in half.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research targets surpassing the fundamental limitations
of current integrated signal processors through development of a transformative
nano-acoustic technology in single crystal germanium (Ge) that 1) operates
efficiently over the entire super- and extremely-high-frequency regimes (i.e.
3-300 GHz), and 2) enables simultaneous data transmission and reception in the
same frequency band and at the same time, through fundamentally different
operation physics; hence, doubling the spectrum use efficiency. Research shall
consist of (1) investigation of nano-acoustic waveguides in semiconductors, with
a focus on single crystal Ge, for wideband signal processing beyond the ultra-
high-frequency regime (&gt;UHF: 0.3-3GHz); (2) exploration of the
physics/science of active electronic amplification of elastic signals through
the acoustoelectric effects in piezoelectric-semiconductor nano-acoustic
waveguides; (3) design and demonstration of low-loss and wideband signal
processors beyond the UHF; and (4) engineering of chip-scale nonreciprocal
signal processors, with a focus on isolators and circulators.
&lt;br/&gt;Integrated with the research, this project targets the enrichment of
social knowledge on novel nano-electro-mechanical systems and their
indispensable role in everyday life through educational kits and high-school
curriculum, and enhancement of diversity in interdisciplinary Science,
Technology, Engineering and Math (iSTEM) research and careers through
involvement of female and minority students.