* 1752220
* CAREER: Transforming the synergistic interactions between pyrogenic carbonaceous matter and sulfur species into solutions for contaminant detoxification
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Wenqing Xu, Villanova University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 550,125.00

Many halogenated pollutants enter the environment as pesticides, surfactants,
and industrial chemicals. These toxic pollutants often end up in the sediment of
lakes, rivers, estuaries and the ocean, along with combustion-derived air
pollutants like soot and char called pyrogenic carbonaceous matter (PCM). PCM
can mix and react with a chemical known as sulfide that naturally exists in many
sediments. This project aims to understand how the interaction between PCM and
sulfide can degrade halogenated pollutants naturally. The ultimate goal is to
use the new understanding of these reactions generated from this research to
produce inexpensive engineering solutions that will detoxify pollutants in the
sediment and improve human and ecological health. In conjunction with this
research initiative will be an educational outreach program targeted at
underserved high-school students that will use 3D virtual reality modules and
hands-on lab experiences to help students understand how pollutants enter the
environment and how natural processes can promote their clean up. A technology-
rich and inquiry-based instruction manual will also be developed and distributed
to teachers through training workshops and online venues to more efficiently
reach the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a pressing need to develop
ecologically sound and economically feasible solutions to degrade toxic
halogenated pollutants in the environment. These pollutants are found in
existing contaminated sites and new halogenated pollutants continue to enter the
environment. A recently published study by the PI demonstrates that PCM and
sulfide together promote the abiotic degradation of DDT, a halogenated
pollutant, which released lower toxicity products. This dehalogenation reaction
represents a vast untapped resource for detoxifying pollutants as both PCM and
sulfide are naturally occurring in sediment. Yet, due to the complexity that
arises from the heterogeneity of the PCM system in the environment, the required
conditions for dehalogenation are not understood. This project aims to define
these conditions. The specific goals of this project are to: 1) isolate surface
functionality, conductivity, and porosity from the complex properties of PCM by
synthesizing PCM-like polymers as a model system; 2) characterize the mechanism
for the PCM-dependent formation of surface-bound sulfur species using X-ray
absorption near-edge structure spectroscopy (XANES); 3) understand how surfaces
are involved in dehalogenating contaminants; and 4) investigate the long-term
effectiveness of PCM-facilitated dehalogenation in environmental matrices. The
results from this project will transform our current understanding of how
halogenated pollutants are degraded in the environment by recognizing the
abiotic dehalogenation capacities of naturally abundant environmental reagents.
An in depth investigation of the speciation and distribution of sulfur species
formed on PCM surfaces using XANES will allow for the discovery of a novel
reaction pathway that can be harnessed to detoxify pollutants. Moreover, by
identifying important PCM properties that are responsible for its reactivity, a
new generation of carbon-based materials can be tailored to achieve simultaneous
sorption and destruction of pollutants. This will revolutionize current
remediation practices by utilizing these carbon-based materials. Lastly, this
project will identify the chemical structures that are susceptible to natural
breakdown by PCM and inform industry on sustainable chemical designs that
minimize environmental impacts. The educational component of this project aims
to engage students with diverse learning styles by incorporating innovative
instructional strategies, such as developing 3D virtual reality learning modules
and employing inquiry-based teaching. The PI will offer a four-week long program
each year, entitled ?Water and Pollutants,? to engage high school students from
inner city Philadelphia on current environmental issues and engineering
solutions. In addition, teacher-training workshops will be organized in the 5th
year to promote broader participation and help implement the developed
activities into high school classrooms. This project will directly impact
approximately 300 undergraduate students, 800 high school students, and 38 high
school teachers through the teacher-training workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.