* 1752751
* CAREER:  Mapping the neural locus of cognitive processes in word reading
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Randi Martin, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 430,693.00

The ability to read written words depends on a complex series of
transformations, ranging from patterns of stimulation on the eye to neural
representations of a word's spelling, pronunciation and meaning. These
transformations occur quickly and automatically in literate adults, despite the
fact that written language is a relatively recent cultural invention and that
reading is something learned in school rather than acquired without formal
teaching. Rapid advances have been made in the understanding of how people read
words - both in terms of better models of the computational processes involved
in these transformations and better understanding of how the brain responds to
written stimuli. This project aims to bridge these computational and cognitive
neuroscience approaches, using brain activity data from neuroimaging studies to
answer some fundamental questions about how people read. What code does the
brain use to recognize written words? How do individuals differ in how they
process written words? Do people read words differently depending on the context
in which they are read? In answering these questions, the ultimate goal of this
research is to develop a neurocognitive theory of reading that can provide
critical insights into how people read words. This in turn can benefit society
by informing literacy education, the treatment of learning disabilities or the
remediation of language loss after brain injury.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project's goal will be achieved by collecting functional neuroimaging data while
people read, and analyzing it with an approach that maps between different
cognitive reading processes and different patterns of brain activity. By using
this approach, the PI can identify the pattern of brain activity elicited by
individual stimuli, and calculate the similarity in the pattern between all
pairs of stimuli. They can then compare these brain-based similarity measures to
formal predictions of similarity derived from computational models of reading.
Consider how DOUGH relates to the words TOUGH, SEW and BREAD; DOUGH is spelled
similarly to TOUGH, sounds similar to SEW, and has a meaning related to BREAD.
Using the logic of this analysis, brain regions in which DOUGH elicits a similar
response to TOUGH, but not to BREAD or SEW can be interpreted as regions
involved in the neural representation of word spellings. In this way, the
current approach provides a tool for linking neural activity to cognitive
operations. Using this technique, the proposed research will test competing
computational models of the front end of the reading system, evaluate how
differences in a task alter reading-related processes and assess individual
differences in the cognitive processes used by skilled readers. This project
will advance research methods in bridging computational theories of cognition
and neuroscience data that could be useful for many questions in cognitive
science. Along the same lines, the project includes the educational goal of
developing new approaches to teaching students from high school, through
college, and into graduate school how to think about the relationship between
brain data and cognitive theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.