* 1752016
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Evaluating ecosystem respiration in urban streams using reactive tracer and dissolved oxygen loggers
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2018
* Sarah Ledford, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2018
* USD 14,737.00

Investigators will quantify shifts in aerobic respiration below the effluent
discharge of a wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) in an urban stream and compare
these rates to community respiration rates quantified by diel oxygen methods.
The request is for the purpose of testing the use of the tracer resazurin (Raz),
which irreversibly transform into resorufin (Rru) in the presence of aerobic
bacteria, and whose efficacy has not been verified in urban streams. The working
theory is that urban streams are overwhelmed by nutrient additions through WWTP
effluent for quite a distance downstream, reducing nutrient retention efficiency
for kilometers. The impacts on the functioning of stream ecosystems, including
the ability of stream ecosystems to ameliorate anthropogenic nutrient loading
are poorly understood. This study will fill a gap in quantifying WWTP impacts on
the metabolism of the Wissahickon Creek, located in Montgomery and Philadelphia
counties, Pennsylvania. The investigators are two early-career scientists
launching a research career. Student volunteers involved in data collection
during the stream tracer test will learn about stressors in urban streams and
field characterization methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigators obtained
preliminary results based on diel oxygen monitoring, indicating that even in
this stream where a majority of baseflow is comprised of effluent, respiration
can be as high as -13 g O2 m-2 day-1 within five kilometers of effluent
discharge. Raz-Rru injections would allow for an independent and reach-specific
method of calculating instantaneous aerobic respiration. They propose to conduct
two tests at WWTPs on the Wissahickon Creek with differing effluent nutrient
concentrations. The basic research question being addressed is whether the
stresses of urban systems (in this case, high nutrient concentrations) inhibit
or enhance metabolism, and at what temporal scale. The experiments proposed will
provide a better understanding of spatial and temporal variation in metabolism,
with the added benefit of evaluating a new method for determining metabolism in
urban streams. The urgency of this project is controlled by their extensive
probe set up for measuring dissolved oxygen, which will only be deployed in
summer and fall 2017.