* 1752129
* CAREER:In Situ Measurement of Ultrafast Processes During Molecular Aggregation
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Cathy Wong, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 02/29/2024
* USD 623,923.00

With funding from the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A) program
of the Chemistry Division, Professor Cathy Wong of the University of Oregon is
developing an instrument to observe the interaction of light with organic
molecules as these molecules assemble to form semiconducting materials. Organic
molecule-based semiconductors have many potential applications, such as light-
emitting diodes (LEDs) and light harvesting photovoltaics (solar panels). How
the molecules come together to form materials is not well understood, in part
because existing measurement tools are too slow to capture the fast formation
events. Professor Wong overcomes this problem by using a specialized laser
system that is capable of rapid measurement. The measurement of properties that
directly impact the function of a material will provide feedback for rational
materials design, and possibly more efficient and economical LEDs and
photovoltaics. The graduate student researchers engaged in this project are
gaining experience in a variety of disciplines, including physical chemistry,
laser and optical instrument design, and computer simulations. The concepts of
instrument design are also being shared with UO undergraduate students and local
community college students via a virtual instrument simulation
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focusing on the dynamics of
exciton formation, singlet fission, and charge transfer processes in organic
semiconducting materials. Of particular interest are the photo-physical
processes that occur during molecular aggregate formation. An in situ transient
absorption spectrometer is constructed by using a tilted pump pulse to spatially
encode its arrival time at the sample. A second laser pulse probes these excited
regions simultaneously, thus measuring absorption at a range pump-probe time
delays in parallel. The spectrometer is incorporated into a solution deposition
apparatus for optical interrogation during thin-film formation. A model of how
molecular aggregation affects the rates of singlet fission and charge transfer
processes is being developed. The production of molecular aggregates with
designer properties is demonstrated by judiciously changing the environmental
conditions during the aggregation process, informed by insights from the
aggregation model. The scientific broader impacts of this work will be the
extended application of transient absorption to non-equilibrium chemical
systems. This is a valuable real-time diagnostic tool for understanding the
physical phenomena that underpin chemical and materials synthesis, tightening
the feedback loop and accelerating progress towards designer electronic
materials. The measurements yield a deeper understanding of how molecular
interactions impact singlet fission and charge transfer
rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.