* 1752756
* CAREER: Did Carlin-type Gold Come From Magmas?
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Elizabeth Holley, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2024
* USD 664,174.00

Nearly 80% of the gold produced in the United States comes from northern
Nevada's Carlin-type gold deposits. Despite more than 50 years of production and
the great economic importance of these deposits, their genesis is debated. Some
researchers argue that the gold must have come from magmas emplaced in the
shallow crust, while others propose that the gold was already present in the
sedimentary host rocks and magmatism was not necessary to create economic
concentrations of gold. This project addresses the scientific controversy and
aims to facilitate exploration efforts through improved understanding of how
Carlin-type gold deposits formed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particularly in Nevada's
prolific Carlin trend, many studies have attempted to link the gold to Eocene
magmas; although the data are permissive, unequivocal evidence remains elusive.
This project takes a new approach by focusing on the northern Battle Mountain
district, where there is Carlin-type gold, porphyry and skarn deposits that are
known to have a magmatic origin, and distal disseminated deposits bearing hybrid
characteristics of all of those deposit styles. In order to determine whether
the distal disseminated deposits link the Carlin-type gold to causative magmatic
intrusions, this project will characterize the nature of the ore fluids and the
timing of mineralization at adjacent gold deposits. In addition to addressing a
long-standing knowledge gap in economic geology, this work contributes towards
advancing broader geoscience initiatives to characterize magmatism and metal
flux in the crust. Despite the critical importance of mining to national
security and the increasingly complex environmental and social framework in
which mining occurs, the United States has a shortage of skilled labor in this
sector. This project integrates teaching and research on ore deposits to develop
innovative curricula that will recruit and retain students in educational
pathways leading to careers in mining. The project science will be incorporated
into a graduate field course and undergraduate case study modules at Colorado
School of Mines, and a K-12 teacher training workshop conducted in collaboration
with Relay Graduate School of Education and the Colorado Mining Association. In
addition to serving as the basis for two PhD dissertations, the 5-year project
will reach 50 graduate students, 150 undergraduate students, 25+ science
teachers, and 600+ K-12 students.