* 1752815
* CAREER: Organic Molecular Paleohypsometry: A new approach to quantifying the topographic history of the most rapidly eroding mountain belt on Earth
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2024
* Michael Hren, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 04/30/2024
* USD 506,340.00

Movement of Earth's tectonic plates controls the formation of mountains, affects
the frequency and magnitudes of earthquakes and influences the transport and
burial of carbon responsible for the formation of hydrocarbon reservoirs.
Despite the critical importance of mountains in shaping geologic hazards,
sediment export and global environmental conditions, there are few ways of
quantifying their growth over time. This project is focused on development of a
new tool to quantify changes in the paleoelevation of mountains that will have
implications for geophysics, the oil and gas industry and studies of surface
change. This project benefits society by contributing to the development of a
globally competitive STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics)
work force by providing support for graduate student training in a core STEM
discipline. Further societal benefits include support for the integration of
earth science education into Connecticut State Science Standards through the
creation of a new STEM education outreach collaboration with Hartford area STEM
Magnate schools that serve a majority minority population. This outreach
program, entitled "Mountains, Rivers and Carbon", provides traditionally-
underrepresented students with hands-on exposure to earth science research,
routine engagement with the principal investigator, and opportunities for
students to participate in a workshop at the University of Connecticut campus
that bridges sampling in a modern river with activities in a working lab and
engagement with university faculty and students. The research is also fostering
the development of new international collaborations between U.S. and Taiwan
scientists.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research is developing a new
geochemical tool to reconstruct the paleoelevation history of mountain belts
based on the isotope chemistry of organic matter preserved in sedimentary
archives. This method, entitled Organic Molecular Paleohypsometry, exploits the
measured and predictable variation in the stable isotope composition of water
and organic matter as a function of elevation. Organic matter sourced from
different elevations is characterized by distinct stable isotopic signatures,
and changes in the isotope chemistry of sedimentary organic matter should
reflect changes in the integrated elevation of the source area. The method is
being tested, refined and applied to Taiwan, one of the fastest uplifting and
eroding regions of the globe, but a region for which no paleoelevation technique
has been applicable, until now. Calibration of this method includes sampling of
modern river waters, soils and sediments from across Taiwan to quantify how the
isotope chemistry of organic matter in river sediments reflects the chemistry of
organic material from across mountainous catchments. This approach will be
applied to geologically-recent marine and terrestrial floodplain sediment cores
from the Gaoping river and submarine canyon to examine short-timescale effects
on organic molecular signatures during the recent late Pleistocene global
deglaciation. In addition, the proposed research focuses on the analysis of 5
million year and younger sediments from basins along western Taiwan to test
whether organic molecular records of the Taiwan orogen show that it was uplifted
simultaneously along the length of the island, or experienced a southward
propagation of high topography over the last 1.5 million
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.