* 1752846
* CAREER: Designing Microscale, Shape-Morphing Liquid Crystal Elastomers as Tissue Adhesives
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Taylor Ware, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Smith
* 08/31/2020
* USD 299,960.00

CAREER: Designing Microscale, Shape-Morphing Liquid Crystal Elastomers for
Implantable Micromechanical Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Non-
technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award by the
Biomaterials Program in the Division of Materials Research, to the University of
Texas at Dallas, is to design and characterize shape-changing liquid crystal
elastomers for implantable micromechanical systems. Liquid crystal elastomers
are rubbery materials that can reversibly change from one shape to another in
response to changes in their environment. This shape change occurs without
requiring external power and control equipment, which is particularly useful in
implantable medical devices where water can disrupt circuitry, batteries are
difficult to charge, and space is limited. This research effort will enable the
synthesis and fabrication of liquid crystal elastomers, with dimensions smaller
than a human hair, which bend, stretch, or twist near body temperature. These
small structures will be able to penetrate tissue and the subsequent shape
change will enable strong adhesion of synthetic materials to soft, wet, and
moving tissues of the human body. This new strategy will address a critical
national need for improved tissue adhesives. For example, many common
treatments, such as hernia repair, require synthetic materials to adhere to the
soft tissue, and adhesion failure leads to increased healthcare-related costs
and pain. These smart materials will also serve as powerful tools to demonstrate
basic scientific concepts to the next generation of scientists and engineers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will enable the
design of biodegradable physical adhesives using the programmed shape change of
microscale liquid crystal elastomers. Microneedle arrays that penetrate soft
tissue and then undergo controlled shape change to enhance tissue adhesion are
envisioned. The large, programmable, and reversible shape change of liquid
crystal elastomers make these materials ideal candidates for the design of
active microstructures. This work will overcome three critical limitations
currently preventing the use of liquid crystal elastomers in biomedical
applications: 1) the temperatures that induce shape change of these materials
are too high for use in biomedical applications, 2) the biodegradability of
these materials is uncontrolled, and 3) the shape change is difficult to program
in 3D microscale structures. This award supports development of liquid crystal
elastomer chemistries and post-processing strategies to tune transition
temperatures and biodegradability. Furthermore, this award enables micromolding
techniques to process these materials in 3D microstructures that undergo complex
shape change. These active microstructures will be characterized for the ability
to create mechanical adhesion to soft tissue that resists both tensile and shear
loading. Research activities will be coupled to primary, secondary, and post-
secondary student interactions, to help train the next generation of STEM
graduates. Design-based learning modules will be created and assessed that teach
fundamental concepts in chemistry and physics through the constructs of smart
materials and medical devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.