* 1752231
* CAREER: Engaging Communities to Bridge the Local to Regional Gap in Air Pollution Exposure Assessment
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Kristina Wagstrom, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Over 19% of the United States population lives near major roads. This can
negatively impact health and lead to lower life expectancy. This project will
equip communities to obtain and understand information on local air pollution
and advocate for solutions to local, near-road air quality concerns. Student
involvement will lead to an increase in participation of underrepresented groups
in engineering. The team will achieve these goals by combining air quality
measurements, modeling, and community engagement. If successful, the results of
this research will transform air pollution exposure assessment modeling and
highlight the potential for productive collaborations between researchers and
community members to solve air quality
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central research question for this
project is how accounting for spatial and temporal variation in air pollutant
concentrations impacts exposure estimates for socioeconomically disadvantaged
populations and active individuals. The primary hypothesis is that the proposed
hybrid modeling approach will yield better estimates of air pollutant
concentrations than each model individually. The central education question is
whether combining undergraduate service learning projects and community
engagement increases retention and recruitment of underrepresented students in
engineering and empowers community members around local air pollution concerns.
This project pursues the following aims to address these questions: (1) Create a
dataset of extensive, detailed, and accessible modeled air pollution
concentrations and exposures needed for community planning, advocacy, and
empowerment. (2) Partner with neighborhood associations to create a robust local
dataset of measured air pollutant concentrations in Hartford, CT. (3) Engage
engineering students in service learning projects using local air pollution
assessment projects. The coupling of computational modeling, low-cost
monitoring, community engagement, and service learning will transform the way
air pollution researchers and impacted communities interact.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project moves beyond standard concentration estimates
for exposure by addressing a large number of chemical species from all spatial
scales. This project tests the effectiveness of high-resolution networks of low-
cost (&lt;$1000) air pollution monitors for use in model evaluation. This
contribution is significant because it uses an unprecedented combination of
model development, community engaged research (citizen science), and service
learning and will transform how policy makers, environmental justice
researchers, urban planners, and epidemiologists estimate human exposures to air
pollution and develop solutions to local concerns in a project that highlights
engineering as an agent for societal change. Community engagement during this
project increases the impacted public's literacy in areas pertaining to
environmental science and air pollution. This work positively impacts society by
facilitating the development of more effective and equitable air pollution
policies, providing improved estimates of concentrations and exposures for
epidemiological studies, informing urban planning, educating and empowering
local communities and individuals around environmental concerns, and increasing
retention and recruitment of underrepresented students in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.