* 1752355
* CAREER:  Human motor inhibition: a neural race between motor emission and cognitive control
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Jan Wessel, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 750,000.00

The ability to rapidly stop one's actions even after their initiation is
paramount to survival in modern society. Be it in benign scenarios (checking the
swing of a baseball bat) or in life-threatening scenarios, rapid action-stopping
is a core human ability that is highly relevant in everyday life. In this
project, Dr. Wessel will use neural recordings and brain stimulation in adult
healthy humans to further our understanding of how brain activity underlying
motor emission (initiating an action) and motor inhibition (stopping that
action) interact during the rapid stopping of action. Elucidating the neural
interactions underlying action-stopping will inform our basic understanding of
flexible behavior in both health and disease. This is especially relevant since
action-stopping is significantly impaired across many neuropsychiatric
disorders. During this project, Dr. Wessel will implement an educational
opportunity at his institution that aims to provide a first-hand research
experience in human neuroscience to first-generation college students, a
population that is traditionally underrepresented in basic academic science and
the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to stop the execution of an
already initiated action is a key cognitive control ability. In prominent
theoretical models, stopping is conceptualized as a race between a "go"-process
and a separate "stop"-process that races to intercept the go-process. While
extensive past research has established that a fronto-basal ganglia brain
network implements the "stop" side of this equation, human research has so far
fallen short of demonstrating the existence of an actual race between separate
stop- and a go-processes in the brain. By combining measurements of intra- /
extracranial electroencephalography and cortico-spinal excitability with brain
stimulation, the project aims to elucidate neural concomitants of the purported
race on all levels of processing (motor, cortical, subcortical). First, a pure
neural measurement of the stopping process will be identified by disentangling
neural processes that reflect stop-signal detection from those that reflect the
stop-process itself. Second, this signature of the stop-process and an according
measurement of the go-process will be used to predict behavior based on the
trial-by-trial outcome of their neural race. Third, cortical and subcortical
nodes of the neural network underlying the stop-process will be disrupted using
transcranial magnetic and deep-brain stimulation to test the hypothesis that
such disruptions impair motor inhibition specifically by biasing the race
towards the "go" process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.