* 1752600
* CAREER: Energy fluxes and community stability in a dynamic, high-latitude kelp ecosystem
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Kristy Kroeker, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 03/31/2024
* USD 652,918.00

High latitude kelp forests support a wealth of ecologically and economically
important species, buffer coastlines from high-energy storms, and play a
critical role in the marine carbon cycle by sequestering and storing large
amounts of carbon. Understanding how energy fluxes and consumer-resource
interactions vary in these kelp communities is critical for defining robust
management strategies that help maintain these valuable ecosystem services. In
this integrated research and education program, the project team will
investigate how consumer populations respond to variability in temperature,
carbonate chemistry and resource quality to influence the food webs and
ecosystem stability of kelp forests. A comprehensive suite of studies conducted
at the northern range limit for giant kelp (Macrocystis pyrifera) in SE Alaska
will examine how kelp communities respond to variable environmental conditions
arising from seasonal variability and changing ocean temperature and
acidification conditions. As part of this project, undergraduate and high school
students will receive comprehensive training through (1) an immersive field-
based class in Sitka Sound, Alaska, (2) intensive, mentored research
internships, and (3) experiential training in science communication and public
outreach that will include a variety of opportunities to disseminate research
findings through podcasts, public lectures and radio broadcasts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Consumer-resource interactions structure food webs and
govern ecosystem stability, yet our understanding of how these important
interactions may change under future climatic conditions is hampered by the
complexity of direct and indirect effects of multiple stressors within and
between trophic levels. For example, environmentally mediated changes in
nutritional quality and chemical deterrence of primary producers have the
potential to alter herbivory rates and energy fluxes between primary producers
and consumers, with implications for ecosystem stability. Moreover, the effects
of global change on primary producers are likely to depend on other limiting
resources, such as light and nutrients, which vary seasonally in dynamic,
temperate and high latitude ecosystems. In marine ecosystems at high latitude,
climate models predict that ocean acidification will be most pronounced during
the winter months, when primary production is limited by light. This project is
built around the hypothesis that there could be a mismatch in the energetic
demands of primary consumers caused by warming and ocean acidification and
resource availability and quality during winter months, with cascading effects
on trophic structure and ecosystem stability in the future. Through
complementary lab and field experiments, the project team will determine 1) how
temperature and carbonate chemistry combine to affect primary consumer
bioenergetics across a diversity of species and 2) the indirect effects of ocean
acidification and warming on primary consumers via environmentally mediated
changes in the availability, nutritional quality and palatability of primary
producers across seasons. Using the data from the laboratory and field
experiments, the project team will 3) construct a model of the emergent effects
of warming and ocean acidification on trophic structure and ecosystem stability
in seasonally dynamic, high latitude environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.