* 1752069
* CAREER: Smart Additive Manufacturing - Fundamental Research in Sensing, Data Science,and Modeling Toward Zero Part Defects.
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2018,01/31/2023
* Prahalada Rao, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 01/31/2023
* USD 657,731.00

Smart Manufacturing strives to monitor every aspect of the manufacturing
enterprise - from the individual machine-level to the factory-level - using data
gathered from multiple sensors. Resulting efficiencies can reduce product
defects and manufacturing costs by over 25 percent. When coupled with Additive
Manufacturing, Smart Manufacturing promises to transform U.S. industry. For
example, 20 pounds of raw material are currently required to make a one-pound
part for the aerospace industry using subtractive machining. Additive
Manufacturing can reduce this so-called buy-to-fly ratio of 20:1 to 2:1, while
simultaneously reducing lead time from six months to one week. Realization of
these potential manufacturing gains will advance the national prosperity and
welfare by increasing U.S. advanced manufacturing competitiveness. Despite these
advantages, industries are hesitant to adopt Additive Manufacturing due to
process inconsistency - parts may have undetected defects, such as porosity,
that make them unsafe for use in mission-critical applications. A potential
solution to this problem is a concept called Smart Additive Manufacturing, which
melds the ideas of Smart Manufacturing with Additive Manufacturing. Through this
Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award, in-process sensor data
will be utilized to understand the mechanisms of defect formation occurring
during the Laser Powder Bed Fusion Additive Manufacturing process. Advanced data
analysis approaches that incorporate the new fundamental understanding of defect
evolution will be leveraged to realize a robust correct-as-you-build
methodology. This foundational work will find application across many
manufacturing sectors including aerospace and defense. The award will also
facilitate a discovery-based learning approach to engage learners in hands-on
exploration of Additive Manufacturing at multiple levels. A research
collaboration with Navajo Technical University will be initiated to further
broaden project impact and train the advanced manufacturing workforce of the
future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this project is to establish
a Smart Additive Manufacturing framework for alleviating the poor part quality
in the Laser Powder Bed Fusion-based Additive Manufacturing of metals. Success
will result in a hybrid Additive Manufacturing strategy that combines material
deposition (additive) and material removal (subtractive) actions within the same
machine potentially giving rise to zero-defect parts. The research challenges
addressed by this award include: 1) understanding how and why certain defects
are formed by isolating and quantifying the underlying process phenomena as they
happen in real-time using in-process sensors, 2) advancing the mathematics of
spectral graph theory to capture defects from heterogeneous sensors in real-time
- a big data problem, and 3) forwarding reduced-order models to understand the
physical thermomechanical dynamics, such as layer re-melting and reflow, that
occur when defects are corrected with hybrid Laser Powder Bed
Fusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.