* 1752847
* CAREER: Development of Single Molecule Infrared and Visible Absorption Spectroscopies using Optical Trapping Force Detection
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Ziad Ganim, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Elles
* 02/28/2022
* USD 495,500.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Ganim at Yale University is building microscopes that
combine sensitivity (down to one molecule) with broad compatibility (any
molecule, any solvent environment, bio/non-biological reactivity, etc.) and
produce straightforward spectral data that any chemist can interpret. Professor
Ganim uses a combination of ultrafast infrared spectroscopy with precision force
microscopy to help scientists to watch the distribution of intermediates
occurring in a chemical reaction one at a time. The results could provide new
experimental and theoretical insights to comprehensively quantify distributions
of molecular structures that naturally occur. Professor Ganim also works with
three educational initiatives on campus. Exemplary projects include interactive
demonstrations for students to pull and push at the microscopic world using a
research-grade optical trap and workshops to build and take home a functional
spectrometer and microscope.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The support project is
motivated by the transformative progress that will be possible when measuring
reaction kinetics in complex mixtures is simple enough that chemists will apply
it to study the mechanisms of failed reactions. Professor Ganim builds on the
recent development of force-detected nanoscale absorption spectroscopy in
solution and develops single molecule (SM) infrared spectroscopy suitable for
chemical kinetics experiments. Specifically Professor Ganim and his group
develop a predictive model to explain the photoinduced signal magnitude and to
guide the synthesis of custom nanostructured force probes. Traditional SM
fluorescence is used to independently verify single molecule sensitivity. These
enhancements are then used in conjunction with a multiplexed, time-domain
implementation and maximum-likelihood signal processing to realize SM infrared
spectroscopy. The technique is then used to observe real-time ligand exchange in
single iridium(III) hydride complexes, which are known for their catalytic
hydrogenation and dehydrogenation properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.