* 1752809
* CAREER: Strong Gravitational and Electromagnetic Fields
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Samuel Gralla, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2024
* USD 493,006.00

Our universe abounds with exotic objects that push the familiar phenomena of
gravity, electricity, and magnetism to their extremes. Neutron stars have
magnetic fields billions of times stronger than the strongest terrestrial
magnets and drive electric current through space at more than a trillion volts.
The gravity of a black hole is so strong that nothing -not even light- can
escape its grip. A variety of astronomical mysteries, from fast radio bursts to
intergalactic particle jets, are connected to these strong-field conditions. And
a variety of new observational facilities, from radio to X-ray to gravitational
waves, promise new probes of the intense physics near black holes and neutron
stars. These exotic systems hold a perennial fascination with the public and
present opportunities for public engagement. The research component of this
proposal studies the physics of extreme gravity and electromagnetism, with the
aim of discovering new physical processes to explain existing astronomical data
and make new observational predictions. The education component leverages these
results to catalyze a public conversation about science more generally, via an
innovative series of videos to be posted on the video-sharing website
YouTube.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will perform analytic studies of force-free
electrodynamics, the physical theory that governs strong-field plasma near
compact objects (black holes and neutron stars). He will investigate stability,
turbulence, and the extraction of rotational energy from the compact object. He
will search for new exact solutions and general theorems governing the breakdown
of the theory. The PI will also study a class of 'extremal' black holes, which
are comparatively ill-understood. In astrophysics, extremal means rapidly
rotating, and the PI will search for new observational signatures of high-spin
black holes. The PI will also study a recently-discovered instability of
extremal black holes, aiming to determine the regimes in which it operates as
well as its generic physical outcome. The PI will create a series of short
videos about science and scientists and disseminate it on the video-sharing
website YouTube. The videos will feature the PI's own research, as well as that
of other scientists, in a format designed to be fun, casual, and informative.
The main goal is to build public familiarity with the process of science and
thereby increase public confidence in scientific
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.