* 1752752
* CAREER: Illuminating the Early Universe with Dark Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Adrienne Erickcek, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

This CAREER award funds the research activities of Professor Adrienne Erickcek
at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observations of the oldest light in the Universe indicate
that there was a period of accelerated expansion, called inflation, shortly
after the Big Bang. During inflation, quantum fluctuations in the energy density
of the Universe were imprinted on cosmological scales, seeding the structures
that eventually became galaxies. We do not know why inflation happened or why it
ended. Moreover, inflation left the Universe devoid of all matter and radiation,
yet the measured abundances of light elements imply that the Universe was filled
with extremely hot radiation one second after inflation ended. Professor
Erickcek aims to fill this gap in the cosmological record by studying the
smallest gravitationally bound clumps of dark matter, which is an unknown source
of mass that currently makes up about 25% of the energy density of the Universe.
In addition to improving our understanding of the early Universe and the
properties of dark matter --- thus advancing the national interest by promoting
the progress of science --- this project will also have significant broader
impacts. Graduate and undergraduate students will contribute to this
investigation and will receive training both in physical cosmology and in widely
applicable mathematical and computational techniques. Professor Erickcek will
also bring the excitement of this research to high-school students by working
with educators at the Morehead Planetarium and Science Center to develop an
inquiry-based curriculum module that incorporates the evidence for dark matter
into lessons on Newtonian mechanics, thereby exposing students to one of the
great mysteries of cosmology. This module will be made publicly available, and
Professor Erickcek will lead professional-development workshops at North
Carolina teaching conferences to train high-school teachers to use this module
in their classrooms. Finally, Professor Erickcek will share her research with
the general public by hosting Morehead's Carolina Science Cafe and Teen Science
Cafe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the smallest and earliest-forming
dark matter halos provide a window into the gap between inflation and the hot
Big Bang because their abundance is affected by the properties of the density
fluctuations created during the final stages of inflation and the evolution of
the Universe during its first second. Professor Erickcek will extend her prior
work on how gamma-ray observations constrain thermal dark-matter production
during an early matter-dominated era to other thermal histories and dark-matter
creation mechanisms. This investigation will narrow the field of potential dark-
matter candidates by restricting their production mechanisms and breaking the
degeneracy between relic abundance and thermal history. In particular, it will
determine if gravitationally coupled moduli fields with masses around the TeV
scale are compatible with neutralino dark matter, and may rule out super-heavy
hidden-sector particles as dark-matter candidates. This investigation will also
determine how enhanced small-scale inhomogeneity generated during inflation
affects the microhalo abundance and the dark-matter annihilation rate. Professor
Erickcek's group will then derive robust constraints on small-scale primordial
fluctuations that will improve our understanding of inflation. Both of these
tasks will utilize small-box, high-redshift simulations of microhalo formation.
Finally, Professor Erickcek will explore how observations of the cosmic
microwave background, 21cm tomography, and measurements of the temperature of
the intergalactic medium may expose the existence of early-forming microhalos
and allow us to close this gap in our understanding of the early
Universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.