* 1752685
* CAREER: Interfacing trapped ions with telecom light
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2024
* Steven Olmschenk, Denison University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 04/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Atomic physics experiments are making extraordinary advances in manipulating the
quantum states of atoms, ions, and photons. Quantum control of these systems
paves the way for new technologies such as quantum communication and quantum
computing. This project will pioneer the use of lanthanum ions as a quantum bit
in order to overcome some challenges for quantum communication networks. In
particular, the project seeks to demonstrate an interface between ions and
infrared photons. Since infrared light suffers minimal losses in an optical
fiber, this approach can extend the size and efficiency of quantum communication
networks. Students working on this project will benefit from atomic physics
research training using lasers, optics, photonics, and fiber technology. The
project will also develop new curricula incorporating quantum information
science and photonics technologies. These activities will help prepare the next
generation of STEM researchers, educators, and
innovators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research aim of this project is to
establish doubly-ionized lanthanum as a quantum bit, or qubit, that can be
controlled with telecom-compatible infrared light. Trapped atomic ions are one
of the leading platforms for quantum information processing applications due to
their long trapping times, good coherence properties, and the availability of
methods to precisely control their quantum states using radiation. However, the
established ion trapping experiments use ions from elements that mainly interact
with visible and ultraviolet light. This poses a challenge for quantum
networking because these wavelengths get attenuated in optical fibers. Doubly-
ionized lanthanum is unique because telecom-compatible infrared light is all
that should be needed for laser cooling and qubit operations. This project will
use telecom-compatible infrared light first for Doppler cooling, and then for
manipulation of qubits based on magnetic-field-insensitive hyperfine states.
This is expected to be advantageous for long-distance quantum communication
protocols that use atom-photon entanglement and for distributed quantum
computation schemes. Directly interfacing ions with infrared wavelengths will
also reduce the complexity of the system, and may thus enhance the potential for
scaling up larger quantum networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.