* 1752759
* CAREER: Topology and symmetry in non-equilibrium quantum systems
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Anushya Chandran, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2024
* USD 575,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
research and education in the dynamics of complex quantum systems away from
equilibrium. Recent experimental advances in laser physics have enabled the
control of electrons in materials at ultrafast time scales, before they can
equilibrate. Likewise, the production of ultracold gases of atoms that are well
isolated from their surroundings has enabled the real-time observation of their
quantum dynamics. These developments have opened up a new regime of inquiry
within quantum mechanics. This research seeks to elucidate complex quantum
dynamics in specific settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most unexpected
discovery in this context is that even extremely energetic quantum particles can
remain spatially localized under a broad range of experimental conditions. This
is in striking contrast with usual intuition from classical mechanics: if one
rapidly shakes a box full of marbles, they do not stay still. When quantum
particles localize, not only do they stay still, but they also become
potentially usable for controlled quantum computation. The project aims to
clarify the precise conditions under which this localization arises, determine
near-term experimental observables, and build towards a complete theory of this
poorly understood phenomenon. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On driving the support of a
simple pendulum quickly, the effects of gravity can be undone: the pendulum bob
can settle in the inverted position above the point of support. Recent
experiments in electronic systems suggest that strong laser radiation can
similarly stabilize exotic quantum effects, such as superconductivity at short
times, in materials which do not normally superconduct. Another aim of the
project is to develop a theory of such dynamically stabilized states so as to
control and engineer them for computation and other
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to mentoring and training
graduate and undergraduate students participating in the research program, the
PI aims to inspire local middle- and high-school students to explore careers in
STEM through "Physics days" involving lab tours, demonstrations, and faculty
interactions. Furthermore, this award will support the PI's role in a new public
lecture series, which aims to engage the broader Boston community on everyday
physics and the frontiers of research. As the future of nonequilibrium physics
increasingly relies on physicists with interdisciplinary skills, the PI proposes
to develop a new course unifying the approaches to out-of-equilibrium physics in
quantum, optical, and biological settings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award supports theoretical research and education in discovering,
characterizing, and controlling quantum orders in many-body systems far from
equilibrium. Through a multipronged approach that includes studies in model
systems, developing general theorems about quantum steady states, perturbation
theory and numerical computation, this project proposes to address the following
fundamental issues:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Strong quenched disorder can
indefinitely prevent local equilibration in a well-isolated system, a remarkable
phenomenon known as many-body localization. The PI will investigate foundational
aspects of many-body localization in higher dimensions, in quasiperiodic
settings, and the interplay of localization and
topology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Exotic nonequilibrium orders with no
equilibrium counterpart can arise in driven quantum systems, offering a unique
window into robust quantum coherent many-body phenomena. The PI will discover
and classify the complex orders accessible with multitone driving and
investigate their stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Environmental properties
are crucial in state preparation and stabilizing fragile topological states. The
PI will investigate the properties of unconventional environments, including
anyon baths and baths with memory in experimentally relevant systems and extract
their universal features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Remarkable experimental advances
in the past decade in the ultrafast spectroscopy of correlated materials and in
the construction of well-isolated ultracold atomic and molecular gases have
brought real-time dynamics of many-body quantum systems into sharp focus.
Concurrently, the quest to build a quantum computer in experimental platforms
like superconducting qubits and trapped ions has raised many interesting
questions about coherence in driven dissipative systems and has led to a rich
exchange of ideas between quantum information theory and condensed matter.
Theoretically, the understanding of far-from-equilibrium systems remains
challenging because the assumptions underlying statistical mechanics typically
fail to apply. The proposed research seeks to broadly advance our understanding
of quantum many-body dynamics in closed, driven, and open settings, and to
specifically apply it to the observation of novel quantum orders in dynamical
settings. The development of new computational methods and the understanding of
microscopic time scales in realistic experimental systems will also be a
priority.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to mentoring and training graduate
and undergraduate students participating in the research program, the PI aims to
inspire local middle- and high-school students to explore careers in STEM
through "Physics days" involving lab tours, demonstrations, and faculty
interactions. Furthermore, this award will support the PI's role in a new public
lecture series, which aims to engage the broader Boston community on everyday
physics and the frontiers of research. As the future of nonequilibrium physics
increasingly relies on physicists with interdisciplinary skills, the PI proposes
to develop a new course unifying the approaches to out-of-equilibrium physics in
quantum, optical, and biological settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.