* 1752009
* CAREER: Engineering Membrane-Wrapped Nanoparticles for Targeted RNA Delivery
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Emily Day, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 04/30/2024
* USD 506,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER award is to develop
nanoparticles that mimic the structure of cancer cells to enable tumor-specific
delivery of ribonucleic acid (RNA) molecules. RNA delivery to tumors is a long-
standing problem whose solution has exceptional promise, as RNA can suppress the
expression of target genes that facilitate tumor growth. This project will
package RNA inside polymeric nanoparticles, which are then "cloaked" with
membranes derived from cancer cells, in order to hide the nanoparticles from the
immune system and enable specific recognition of tumor cells inside the body.
This project will generate the nanoparticles, characterize their material
properties, and evaluate their cell-specific and tumor-specific RNA delivery
capabilities. For emerging technologies like this to be successfully implemented
in the future, a new generation of scientists must be trained how to develop and
analyze innovative bio-nanomaterials. Accordingly, this project's educational
goal is to create a comprehensive program spanning the K-12, college, and
graduate levels that will increase students' exposure to the field and increase
the pipeline of students, particularly women and minorities, pursuing careers in
bio-nanotechnology. These efforts include the development of a new college
course module about membrane-wrapped nanoparticles, the creation of
demonstrations about bio-nanomaterials for use in K-12 outreach, and the in-
depth training of high school and undergraduate students in bio-nanomaterials
via research internships. By integrating the proposed research with these
programs and targeting a large and diverse audience, this project will enable
the next generation of workers in the field to create innovative solutions to
grand challenges at the interface of nanotechnology, biology, materials science,
and medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL &lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop cancer cell membrane-wrapped nanoparticles (CCNPs) for targeted RNA
delivery to tumors. The use of membrane cloaks to disguise nanoparticles from
the immune system and enable tumor-specific delivery is at the forefront of
modern cellular engineering, nanotechnology, and materials science, yet the
features of these systems that are essential for their application in RNA
interference remain unknown. While prior work has shown that covering synthetic
nanoparticles with membrane coatings improves systemic delivery of hydrophobic
drugs, the ability to provide targeted delivery of hydrophilic RNA cargos, as
this project aims to do, has not yet been realized. This project will develop
CCNPs for RNA delivery through three aims, which are to: (1) Synthesize CCNPs
carrying RNA cargo and characterize their material properties and payload
release; (2) Determine how the size and membrane composition of CCNPs influence
their ability to engage cell receptors to mediate uptake and RNA payload
delivery, and; (3) Demonstrate the homotypic targeting of CCNPs carrying RNA
cargo both in vitro and in vivo. Together, these aims will advance fundamental
knowledge of CCNP technology and produce a new platform that may improve the
study and treatment of cancer. This project will also integrate this research
into educational activities in order to inspire and prepare students for careers
in STEM and bio-nanotechnology. The educational aims are to: (1) Create a new
module about "membrane-wrapped nanoparticles for cargo delivery" for the
Engineering Biomedical Nanostructures (EBN) course in the engineering
curriculum; (2) Work with students in the EBN course to develop bio-
nanomaterials demos for use in K-12 outreach facilitated by the University of
Delaware Lending Library, and; (3) Engage high school and undergraduate students
from groups underrepresented in STEM in bio-nanomaterials research via
internships. These educational efforts will be evaluated annually to confirm
their success in increasing the pipeline of students pursuing higher education
and careers in bio-nanotechnology and other STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.