* 1752956
* CAREER: Probing Crystallization of Atomic Layers Using In Situ Electron Diffraction
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Nicholas Strandwitz, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 599,844.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Control of atomic scale structure in ultra-thin films
on non-planar substrates is critical to next generation optical, electrical,
biological, and magnetic materials and devices. In particular, nanoscale control
of materials is essential to enable further decreases in the feature sizes and
growth of materials in three dimensional architectures that are being developed
for applications such as logic circuitry, memories, and photovoltaics. This
research investigates the fundamental rearrangement of single atomic layers on
surfaces during thin film growth, and provides important knowledge regarding the
factors that influence transformation of disordered layers of atoms into
ordered, crystalline arrangements. The primary experimental platform utilizes an
electron beam to probe the structure of atomically-thick layers during growth
and thermal processing. The research also uses atomically-resolved electron
microscopy to probe the structure of these films. The knowledge generated from
this research allows for an enhanced control and understanding of the formation
of nanoscale crystalline materials that can be created on three dimensional
(non-planar) surfaces and impacts a wide variety of fields in nanoelectronics,
computing, photovoltaics, and nanoscale mechanical systems. This research
activity is integrated with a university thin film course, a hands-on equipment
laboratory, and an industrial outreach effort. Graduates typically find
employment in national laboratory or industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: This research elucidates the fundamental transformations that occur
during atomic layer deposition and annealing by utilizing in situ reflection
high energy electron diffraction (RHEED). Current atomic layer deposition (ALD)
processes are often limited in terms of the structural control that is available
due to precursor decomposition at high temperatures, which presents a
significant barrier to precisely controlled three dimensional epitaxial
architectures that are integral to next generation electronics. Therefore, this
work separates the precursor chemisorption steps (ALD component) that result in
amorphous layers from thermal processing that provides energy needed to induce
crystallization in the model material system gallium oxide. Importantly,
electron diffraction is probing in real time the structural transformations that
occur to reveal the effect of ambient atmosphere, substrate structure, and
orientation with adlayer thicknesses in the range of 0.5-10 nm. Analytical
electron microscopy is providing precise structural and compositional details of
the films and film-substrate interfaces including defect characteristics. This
research captures a slow-motion picture of the structural changes that occur
during many traditional thin film epitaxy techniques, and yields new
relationships that control crystallization of ultra-thin layers and thus impacts
the thin film/epitaxy communities. Undergraduate and graduate students are
trained during the research. Industrial engagements are pursued with the Lehigh
University Office of Economic Engagement. Mentorship and outreach are conducted
with Lehigh University's Clare Booth Scholarship Program, Mountaintop
Experience, and a local science center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.