* 1752769
* CAREER: Local Correlation Approaches for High-Level Density Functional Theory Simulations of Large Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2024
* Chen Huang, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 03/31/2024
* USD 454,740.00

Chen Huang of Florida State University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to develop new theoretical and computational methods for investigating
the electronic properties of large, complex molecules and materials. The ability
to model large systems at the electronic level is essential for the industrial
and technological design of molecules and materials for clean energy, efficient
batteries, and novel data storage devices. However, it is challenging to
investigate large systems with the most accurate electronic structure methods,
since computational cost grows exponentially with system size. Dr. Huang and his
group are developing new quantum mechanical embedding methods for determining
the electronic properties of large systems in a divide-and-conquer manner. The
methods are focused on accurately describing the microscopic interactions among
electrons---their quantum correlations---at scale. Finding new ways to address
this "electron correlation problem" is regarded as one of the grand challenges
of 21st century science. Dr. Huang's new algorithms and methods will be
implemented in state-of-the-art, open source quantum chemistry codes and made
available to the broader research community. Integrated with his research, Dr.
Huang is training a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate students from
engineering, chemistry, physics, and materials science to effectively utilize
electronic structure methods, through a new problems-based density functional
theory (DFT) course. The course lectures and YouTube tutorials are aimed at
lowering the barrier for students to integrate DFT simulations within their
research. Working with outreach programs at FSU, Dr. Huang is involving middle
school and high school students in his research to increase their interest in
pursuing STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
develop new quantum mechanical embedding methods to obtain accurate reaction
energies and electronic structures that scale to large chemical systems. The
basic idea of embedding methods is to utilize a high-level electronic structure
method within a region of interest, and to treat the rest of the system ("the
environment") with a low-level, computationally-efficient method. Dr. Huang and
his group are extending embedding methods in three new directions: (i)
generalizing density-matrix embedding to metallic systems using a
pseudopotential-like approach; (ii) extending the XCPP (exchange-correlation
potential patching) methodology to construct RPA (random phase approximation)
correlation energies and potentials in large systems in an atom-by-atom manner;
and (iii) accelerating the convergence of RPA energy differences calculated with
a stochastic sampling scheme by imposing appropriate moment constraints. The new
techniques are being applied to challenging problems of significant fundamental
and technological interest, including investigating the role of metallic copper
in methanol synthesis; charge transfer and magnetic coupling at
YBa2Cu3O7/La2/3Ca1/3MnO3 (superconducting/ferromagnetic) interface; and
transport, storage, and release of oxygen in ceria for heterogeneous catalysis.
The methodologies are being implemented as open source code in the ABINIT, Psi4,
and CP2K quantum chemistry packages. The educational plan is focused on
developing a problems-based DFT course including YouTube tutorials, to enable
students to develop expertise in this widely-used tool of contemporary molecular
and materials modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.