* 1752636
* CAREER: Using Irradiation to Understand Intergranular Fracture Mechanisms of Anisotropically-Bonded Solute Segregants
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Janelle Wharry, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 07/31/2024
* USD 560,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The economic impact of
materials' fracture in the United States is $119 billion/year in 1983 dollars,
underscoring the critical societal need for fracture mitigation strategies.
Intergranular fracture is a specific failure mode common in structural materials
throughout the automotive, aerospace, energy, and petrochemical industries. This
fracture mode is associated with segregation of elemental species to the area
that separates two orientations of crystals, referred to as a grain boundary
(GB). The directionality of the bonds formed by these segregated species are
believed to influence the fundamental manner in which the fracture occurs. We
will explore bonds that are parallel to the GB, perpendicular to the GB, or non-
directional, using segregation of elements such as chromium, molybdenum, or
sulfur, in iron. We can utilize novel, nano-sized mechanical testing techniques
to confirm this effect. However, reducing the mechanical test sample volume to
the nano-scale can itself alter the fracture mechanism. We can use irradiation
to maintain realistic and appropriate fracture mechanics. These results
potentially establish irradiation as a means to alleviate fracture between
grains and reduce the impact of materials' fracture across numerous industries.
We will also create a research and educational partnership with a local
community college in order to boost community college student transfer and
retention rates, and fill a STEM workforce need. We will give a lesson and
interactive assignment on the societal importance of fracture in a pre-
engineering community college course. Community college students will also
participate directly in this research through an 11-week summer research
internship. Best practices from this program will be shared via the PI's service
in professional societies, and this model for a university-community college
partnership can be extended to other
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intergranular fracture is a common failure
pathway in structural alloys and recycled steels, especially those subject to
high temperature operation or cyclic loading, in a multitude of industries.
Recent advancements in computational materials science have provided tremendous
insight into grain boundary embrittlement and intergranular fracture of metallic
alloys. However, experimental approaches have not advanced correspondingly,
preventing validation of mechanisms and hence limiting our ability to mitigate
this crucial fracture path. Intergranular fracture is associated with solute
segregation to grain boundaries (GBs), which is believed to increase the GB
surface energy and decrease the GB cohesive energy, culminating in GB decohesion
or cleavage. But there is mounting theoretical evidence that for segregating
solutes exhibiting highly directional bonds with host atoms at/across the GB,
fracture is not attributed to simple bond-breaking arguments, but rather to the
inhibition of dislocation nucleation. These theories have not previously been
verified because the direct observation of dislocation nucleation during crack
propagation is extremely difficult. While the recent development of transmission
electron microscopic (TEM) in situ mechanical testing enables such observations,
reduced specimen volumes inhibit realistic fracture mechanisms. However,
irradiation produces a sufficient defect density so as to reduce the
characteristic length of the specimen, enabling bulk-like fracture mechanisms.
Irradiation also drives solute segregation to GBs. Hence, we utilize irradiation
to enable direct observation of GB separation and/or dislocation nucleation in
real time with TEM in situ fracture testing. These results will validate
cohesive finite element method (CFEM) models to develop predictive capabilities
for intergranular fracture based on bonding anisotropies. Success of this
project can lead to transformational irradiation-based approaches for mitigating
GB embrittlement. We also develop a model for a university-community college
research and education partnership to enhance community college student efficacy
and build a diverse workforce having a breadth of skills, abilities, and
education levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.