* 1752047
* CAREER: Novel Diamond Surface Functionalization and Nanoscale Surface Spectroscopy for Quantum Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Nathalie de Leon, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 05/31/2023
* USD 550,000.00

Nontechnical description: Diamond crystals often contain imperfections, known as
"color center defects", that are the size of a few atoms. These defects are
known to be highly sensitive to the presence of single molecules in their
vicinity, and may therefore be used to study the structure and function of
molecules inside living cells. In order to accomplish this, color center defects
must be placed very close to the molecules they will sense. This research
project aims to construct a new instrument that enables completely new forms of
probing and manipulating color center defects at the surface of diamond
crystals. The development of small, sensitive sensors based this approach has
the potential to impact diverse fields, ranging from ultrahigh-resolution
biomedical imaging applications akin to MRI, to the discovery of new materials
for future quantum computers. This research activity is integrated with advanced
training for the next generation of scientists and engineers. The educational
component of the project includes long-term research experience for
undergraduates in partnership with Wellesley College, in which students
participate in leading-edge research at Princeton University, with close
mentorship during the academic year. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: This project aims to gain control over the surface of diamond at
the level of single atomic defects. Diamond hosts numerous isolated point
defects that may be optically addressed. One such defect, the nitrogen vacancy
(NV) center, exhibits excellent spin coherence at room temperature, allowing it
to act as a highly sensitive magnetic sensor with sub-nanometer resolution. NV
centers placed close to the surface can have strong interactions with other
materials and molecules, but uncontrolled surface defects give rise to noise
that obscures the signal of interest. This project develops new methods for
controlling and spectroscopically probing the diamond surface. Central to this
effort is the construction of an ultrahigh vacuum cluster tool to perform
surface chemistry and traditional surface spectroscopy in tandem with quantum
spectroscopy using single NV centers. The realization of shallow, coherent NV
centers paves the way for numerous applications: imaging structure and dynamics
of single proteins in ambient conditions, non-invasive sensors for materials
characterization, and quantum information processing. This project provides
advanced, interdisciplinary training to students and postdocs in optics,
materials science, and quantum science. The research is also integrated with
education, including a partnership between Princeton and Wellesley on a "20
Month REU" with research experiences at both institutions, and the development
of a public demonstration on material properties of diamond, in collaboration
with Element Six.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.