* 1752623
* CAREER: Controlling two-dimensional heterointerface in layered oxides for electrodes with advanced electrochemical properties
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Ekaterina Pomerantseva, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This CAREER project aims to create a completely new
class of ceramic oxide materials with advanced charge storage capabilities,
opening a door to next-generation batteries with higher energy density, faster
charging and a much longer lifetime. These new materials are two-dimensional
(2D) oxide-based structures that are built by alternating oxide layers and
electronically conductive layers, such as graphene-based compounds or transition
metal carbides (MXenes). The resulting structures exhibit characteristics
important for battery electrodes: space that allows ion movement, and conductive
layers that enable fast transport of electrons. Combining layered metal oxides
and carbon-based compounds in high quality layer-by-layer architecture offers an
opportunity to discover and investigate new phenomena occurring at interfaces.
This fundamental understanding is important for the creation of batteries with
improved energy and power capabilities. The materials and methods developed in
this work are relevant to a wider range of applications, including energy
storage, electrochromics (responsible for reversible changes of colour),
sensing, actuation (or control of movement), and water treatment. The
interdisciplinary nature of this project attracts diverse undergraduate and
graduate students to research. The project integrates synthesis and properties
of 2D structures into the engineering curriculum at the PI's institution and
enriches outreach programs through the creation of educational videos on
synthesis and electrochemical properties of materials. A variation on the
gameshow Family Feud focused on electrochemistry is being used to attract more
students to STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This research
is focused on understanding how face-to-face heterostructured interfaces can be
created and controlled in layered materials. The aim is to produce 2D oxide-
based heterostructures with high electron and ion transport leading to improved
energy storage capabilities in Li-ion, Na-ion and K-ion batteries. Layered
transition metal oxides show high redox activity in intercalation reactions and
relatively high working potentials, making them especially attractive for use as
cathodes in energy storage devices. However, the low electronic conductivity of
most oxides limits their performance. To overcome this limitation, layered
oxides are combined in unique heterostructured architectures with electronically
conductive 2D compounds by controllably alternating atomically thick layers of
different individual materials. The 2D heterostructure electrodes are
constructed using a sol-gel assisted transition metal oxide synthesis process
through (1) chemical pre-intercalation of organic molecules followed by
pyrolysis, or (2) addition of solid nanoflakes of conducting phases (graphene or
MXene) during the sol-gel process. The improved understanding of the transport
of ions and electrons and charge storage mechanisms in layered heterostructured
materials achieved in this work is expected to lead to better electrodes and
open exciting new research directions. The tailored 2D heterointerfaces make it
possible to design new ceramic materials with tunable structures and
compositions that exhibit high ion storage capability, rapid electron and ion
transport, and enhanced electrochemical stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.