* 1752366
* CAREER: Quantitative Tools to Measure the Spatiotemporal Dynamics of Protein Signaling Complexes
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Tamara Kinzer-Ursem, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 02/28/2023
* USD 549,167.00

Though more than 10 million people in the USA suffer from learning and memory
disorders, the underlying causes of many of these disorders are still not clear.
Most of these disorders arise due to disruptions in the regulation of protein
networks (called protein signaling complexes) that control the strength of the
connections (called synapses) that allow neurons to communicate with each other.
Using sophisticated computer modeling and super-resolution microscopes, this
project seeks to produce significant new molecular-level understanding of the
dynamic organization, in both time and space, of these critical protein
complexes. This understanding could lead to the design of new treatments for
learning and memory disorders. Furthermore, the research studies planned will
provide current and future biomedical engineering students with the
multidisciplinary training required to enter careers in the rapidly growing
fields of biotechnology and biomedical engineering. Student skills will be
enhanced by participation in cross-disciplinary engineering design teams,
expanded interdisciplinary research opportunities for undergraduates and
graduate students, and opportunities to engage in entrepreneurial activities.
The proposed educational curriculum and outreach activities are expected to
increase public awareness of the application of STEM disciplines to meet current
national health needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's objective is to
quantitatively describe the spatiotemporal dynamics of protein signaling
complexes that determine the strength of neuronal synaptic connections, which
are mediated by two glutamate-gated ion channels (AMPAR receptors and NMDA
receptors). The objective is driven by the rationale that elucidating the
mechanisms of protein signaling complex formation and regulation is an important
step toward identifying targets for pharmaceutical intervention in learning and
memory disorders. The Research Plan is organized around 3 aims: 1)
Experimentally measure protein-protein interaction dynamics of a large number of
interacting proteins through literature mining and developing a new method to
rapidly measure protein binding kinetics; 2) Construct computational models of
NMDAR and AMPAR regulation to quantify the impact of various mechanisms on NMDA
and AMPAR localization and identify parameters that need to be further
characterized; 3) Quantitatively measure protein complex formation using
labeling methods in conjunction with standard immune-labeling techniques to
image protein complexes with single molecule localization super-resolution
microscopy. The Educational Plan is organized around 2 aims: 1) Create a set of
inquiry-based learning modules to teach fundamental principles of transport to
K-12 students that will be presented to students in rural schools in Indiana and
Ohio and the urban Purdue Polytechnic High School; 2) Create a multidisciplinary
educational pathway for current and future Purdue students to obtain careers in
fields of biomolecular detection, biotechnology, and technology development by
designing and implementing new courses for undergraduate and graduate students
that focus on biomolecular engineering and transport phenomena with special
emphasis on the intersection of engineering, chemistry, and biology and
developing expanded research and entrepreneurship activities that provide
experiential learning opportunities that supplement skill
attainment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.