* 1752542
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Allomaternal care and early life development
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Ivy Pike, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2019
* USD 19,671.00

Humans differ from other primates in their use of extensive allomaternal care
(AMC), where someone other than the mother cares for an infant. This doctoral
dissertation project will investigate how differences in early exposure to
multiple caregivers influence a human infant's early communicative and cognitive
development. The researchers hypothesize that AMC plays a significant role in
shaping communicative and cognitive development by providing a rich and varied
learning environment. Identifying how exposure to AMC may influence cognitive
and communicative developmental trajectories will advance our understanding of
why extensive AMC developed and was maintained in the human species. This
project will support training and mentoring of graduate and undergraduate
students in STEM research, and a new partnership between the University of
Arizona's School of Anthropology and the Frances McClelland Institute for
Children, Youth, and Families. The outcomes of this research may also inform
educational programs to support communicative and cognitive development. To
share their findings with the public, the researchers will generate a website
and visit local mothers' support groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AMC is known to
supplement an infant's intense energy needs through nutritional provisioning,
but previous research has not fully investigated whether allomaternal care
benefits infants in other ways. This research enhances traditional perceptions
of AMC by hypothesizing that children gain important communicative and cognitive
benefits in addition to nutritional support when they receive frequent
allomaternal care during early development. The research represents an
interdisciplinary, holistic approach to exploring the potential effects of AMC
on early brain development before the age of two. Using a novel combination of
interdisciplinary methods, including questionnaires, daily diaries, interviews,
laboratory tasks, and clinical cognitive measures, this project will examine how
care impacts developmental outcomes in young children. Participants will include
infants aged 13 to 18 months and their mothers. The primary objective of this
study is to determine whether AMC improves early developmental outcomes, such
that infants exposed to high levels of AMC develop a more extensive set of
communicative and cognitive skills at a younger age than infants exposed to low
levels of AMC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.