* 1752477
* CAREER: Investigating the unrest and eruption potential of caldera forming volcanoes in the Aleutians
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Patricia Gregg, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 08/31/2023
* USD 485,063.00

Caldera-forming explosive volcanic eruptions that emplace tens to hundreds of
cubic kilometers of ash and lava are among the most devastating natural hazards
on Earth. The Aleutian Island Arc of North America has played host to more than
20 caldera-forming eruptions and currently has several active caldera volcanoes.
While some Aleutian calderas have erupted &lt; 20 km3, many formed in large
explosive events that emplaced 50-100 km3 of material. Impacts from these events
were wide reaching. For example, the eruption of Aniakchak 3,400 years ago was
associated with a regional tsunami and extensive ash dispersal across the arctic
region. If such an eruption were to occur today it would pose a significant
hazard not only to local communities but also to 50,000 airline passengers that
fly over Alaska each day. Understanding the conditions that promote the
development of catastrophic caldera forming eruptions is critical for evaluating
eruption precursors and assessing hazards at volcanic systems in Alaska and
worldwide. Working closely with collaborators at the Alaska Volcano Observatory,
the aim of this research is to develop a forecasting method to monitor active
volcanoes in the Aleutians and investigate the mechanisms that trigger their
eruption. The broader impacts of this CAREER grant include investigation of
efforts to improve recruitment and retention of students from underrepresented
groups in the Earth sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluating volcanic hazards
requires a multidisciplinary approach that links monitoring data with dynamic
models. This CAREER grant will support the development of volcano forecasting
methods to monitor current unrest at Aleutian caldera systems and investigate
previous eruptions to determine triggering mechanisms. Sequential data
assimilation methods will be adapted to provide a multi-data stream model-data
fusion forecasting framework. Specifically, geophysical observations of ground
deformation and seismicity patterns will be combined with thermomechanical
models to track the stress evolution of three active caldera systems in the
Aleutians: Okmok, Westdahl, and Veniaminof. These systems have comparable sizes
and eruptive products, but markedly different unrest and eruption histories. The
researchers will utilize statistical data assimilation to take advantage of the
extensive monitoring data sets available in the Aleutians to conduct a series of
numerical experiments to investigate the relationship between magma chamber
size, volume flux, and overpressurization, and how these parameters link to
predictions of eruption size and frequency. Precursory signals will be
investigated to better understand what mechanisms catalyze volcanic eruption.
Model and data limitations will be analyzed to inform future investigations and
data collection efforts. As the three target volcanoes have past records of
caldera-forming eruptions, the researchers will investigate the potential for
future caldera forming eruptions and the factors that impact the evolution of a
volcano causing it to transition from frequent small eruptions to large
catastrophic eruptions. The development of a data synthesis framework for
handling the disparate datasets collected at active volcanic systems in the
Aleutians will have broad community impact and transferability to monitoring
volcanic unrest worldwide. In additional to investigating the mechanics of
triggering volcanic eruptions, this work will provide the necessary first steps
towards a community volcano-forecasting framework. Through the WIDER (Widening
Implementation and Demonstration of Evidence Based Reforms) program the
principal investigator will track cohorts of students over time to develop
strategies that have a long-term effect on both recruitment and retention of
women and minorities in the Earth sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.