* 1752147
* CAREER: Fundamental Investigation of Thin-Film Evaporation Using Crystalline Porous Inverse Opals
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2024
* Yoonjin Won, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 03/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Dissipating extreme heat through phase change processes (e.g. evaporation) is a
daunting challenge for various applications ranging from modern electronic
devices to power plant cooling. For this purpose, nanoscale structures have
drawn significant interest due to their large surface area and ability to
deliver working fluid to evaporating surfaces. However, to date it has been
challenging to identify the role of the nanostructures in phase change processes
owing to their complex structures. To address this problem, this CAREER project
will employ extremely regular porous media to investigate thin-film evaporation
physics. The structural regularity of such porous media will allow new
relationships to be developed between the form of the material and the
evaporation heat transfer. The research outcomes from this project will be
integrated into educational and outreach activities to promote public interest
in thermal transport phenomena and train the next generation of researchers. The
integrated educational and outreach plan will be addressed through new sensory
learning educational tools, research and mentoring programs, and a new graduate
course on nanoscale phase change heat transfer topics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific objective of this CAREER project is to find new discoveries in
structure-related evaporation phase change physics utilizing new classes of
well-ordered porous media. The specific tasks of this project include (1)
demonstrating hydrophilic inverse opals with desired transport properties; (2)
studying local thin-film evaporation at the pore-level (with the aim of
understanding the role of the spherical concave shape of such pores on thin-film
evaporation); and (3) examining heat transfer performance in the devices. The
tasks can be accomplished by studying the self-assembly and metallization of the
opal template with surface engineering, multiscale computational models, and
high-fidelity measurements to validate understanding of evaporation performance.
The new discoveries about the transport physics through porous media will
provide a big step forward for the design of next-generation thermal management
devices such as microfluidic channels, flexible coolers, and heat pipes that
leverage emerging porous materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.