* 1752400
* CAREER: Unveiling the Governing Mechanisms of Fatigue Failure in Additively Manufactured Aluminum
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Ashley Spear, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 08/31/2024
* USD 559,733.00

Additive manufacturing (AM), often referred to as 3D printing, is an exciting
technology that can offer more flexibility and efficiency in the production of
complex metal parts compared to conventional manufacturing. However, the path to
AM as a viable and safe alternative in applications where structural components
must carry loads (in some cases, where components must sustain repetitive
loading over long periods of time) is at a critical junction. The widespread
incorporation of this transformative manufacturing technology is hampered by the
fact that it is currently not possible to predict when and why an additively
manufactured metal component might fail, and to design the component accordingly
to mitigate risk of failure. This presents a major problem for many industries
that are looking to use AM to produce metal load-bearing components. This
Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award supports fundamental
research to address this pressing need and to enable the expanded, yet safe, use
of metal AM in many industries, including aerospace, automotive, biomedical,
manufacturing, and national defense. The research is closely integrated with a
unique outreach program that will engage students across different age levels
and backgrounds, including middle-school students from rural locations in
Utah.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported by this CAREER award is a
fundamental step toward expanding the use of AM to fatigue-critical applications
through the discovery of 3D, microstructure-sensitive, fatigue-crack driving
mechanisms in additively manufactured aluminum. Two parallel research thrusts
will be carried out. One thrust will focus on experimentally characterizing the
microstructural features in 3D neighborhoods of fatigue cracks observed in
aluminum specimens produced by laser powder bed fusion. The second thrust will
focus on numerically characterizing the local micromechanical fields that evolve
in 3D as a function of underlying, manufacturing-induced microstructure and
defect distribution, with particular focus on residual-stress incompatibility,
porosity, and surface roughness. Data-driven approaches will be leveraged across
the experimental and numerical data sets to provide new insights into the
mechanisms responsible for fatigue failure among the specimens. While the
research focuses on aluminum alloys, it is anticipated that the findings
regarding the relative importance of geometrical defects, like pores and surface
roughness, versus intrinsic material defects on fatigue failure of additively
manufactured parts could be broadly applicable to other metals as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.