* 1752601
* CAREER: Fundamental Investigation of Biofilm Mechanical Properties in Drinking Water Distribution Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Srijan Aggarwal, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 507,986.00

Drinking water distribution systems (DWDSs) store and transport treated drinking
water to millions of customers across the country. Bacteria colonize and coat
the inside pipe surfaces in DWDSs to form biofilms that are responsible for a
multitude of problems, including corrosion, taste and odor issues, formation of
carcinogenic disinfection-by-products (DBPs), loss of the chlorine residual that
protects the water from pathogenic microorganisms. All of these problems have
serious financial and public health ramifications for the United States. This
project aims to develop a fundamental mechanistic understanding of how biofilms
attach to pipes, how strong they are, and how easily they can become detached
from the pipe surfaces. This research will be used to develop strategies for
removal of biofilms from the DWDSs to address the national goal of ensuring safe
drinking water to the citizenry. The broader impacts of this research for
society include the development of new technological solutions for water
utilities and water plant operators. The project also aims to engage Alaska
Native undergraduate students in engineering research, with the long-term goal
of increasing the number and broadening the participation of Alaska Native
students and graduates in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of
this CAREER project is to enhance the understanding of biofilm mechanical
properties, with specific application to biofilms in drinking water distribution
systems (DWDSs). To meet this overall goal, the proposal has three objectives:
(1) investigate the correlation between the biofilm exopolymeric substance (EPS)
matrix components and biofilm strength in the DWDS; (2) test novel biofilm
weakening strategies and examine the impact of these weakening strategies on the
contribution of biofilms to DBP formation in the DWDS; and (3) evaluate the
impact of distribution system hydraulics and disinfection on biofilm detachment,
biofilm cluster formation and reattachment in the DWDS. A primary educational
objective of this project is to involve Alaska Native undergraduate students in
engineering research. Biofilms will be grown in special bench-scale biofilm
growth reactors that provide controlled and well-defined environmental
conditions simulating distribution systems. Advanced microscopic and
spectroscopic techniques (e.g., nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy,
fluorescence spectroscopy, confocal scanning laser microscopy and atomic force
microscopy) and biofilm-specific micro-cantilever methods will be employed for
determination of EPS compositional analysis and mechanical properties. The PI
will also investigate a novel strategy for biofilm weakening by targeting the
biofilm EPS, instead of the traditional approach of inactivating biofilm
bacteria by using biocides. For that purpose, a suite of strength modifiers and
detachment promoting agents for biofilms in DWDSs will be evaluated. The
mechanistic study of biofilm cohesive strength will identify the role of various
EPS macromolecules in providing strength and structure to biofilms, which will
be helpful in designing effective strategies for biofilm control. The insights
into the mechanistic basis of biofilm strength and detachment will increase our
ability to control and manipulate biofilms in various environmental systems
(e.g., biofilters, wastewater treatment, DWDSs) and beyond (e.g., medical
biofilms). Understanding biofilm dynamics and detachment in DWDSs will help
design better strategies to provide improved drinking water quality,
significantly benefitting public health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.