* 1752773
* EAGER: A Wastewater-Based-Epidemiology System for Early Detection of Viral Outbreaks in Detroit, MI
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Irene Xagoraraki, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2019
* USD 150,000.00

Infectious disease outbreaks due to waterborne pathogens present a widespread
health hazard, particularly in densely populated urban areas and among
vulnerable populations. Viruses are among the most hazardous of these pathogens
because of their ability to mutate and their high survivability in water and
waste. Traditionally, disease detection and management has been accomplished
through analysis of clinical samples from affected individuals who have sought
medical treatment. Such detection may be slow, allowing an epidemic to emerge
before effective public health measures can be taken. The objective of this
EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project is to determine
whether wastewater sampling for viral and other biomarkers provides effective
prediction for water-related disease outbreaks. The research will provide the
basis for a transformative new paradigm for early detection and prediction of
disease outbreaks through smart monitoring of wastewater at a community level.
This approach has the potential to be much faster than an approach based on
clinical diagnostics alone, which is inherently limited to an after analysis of
an outbreak. The project will provide opportunities for engineering students to
develop research capabilities in addressing important public health issues

The research objective will be accomplished by integrating viral load and
metabolic biomarker measurements from community wastewater samples with public
health monitoring of disease. Data from a community wastewater treatment
facility will be used to characterize the spatiotemporal distribution of viruses
and other biomarkers within the sewer pipe network. Data from the county public
health departments will be analyzed using epidemiological modeling to predict
clinical cases of disease. These predictions, along with the high-dimensional
raw data, will be used to create a nonlinear learning model to investigate the
complex relationships among variables and to identify significant explanatory
variables in order to improve the ability to predict disease outbreaks before
they reach a critical stage.