* 1752921
* CAREER:Functional contributions of lateral parietal cortex to episodic memory
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Brice Kuhl, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 12/31/2022
* USD 758,000.00

It is a remarkable feature of human memory that people can vividly re-experience
events from the past by bringing these experiences back to mind on command. Over
the past two decades, neuroimaging studies have consistently found that the
parietal cortex plays a role in this ability to re-experience the past. However,
the specific way in which parietal cortex contributes to human memory remains a
topic of substantial debate. With the support of this CAREER award, Dr. Kuhl
will use a combination of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI),
electroencephalography (EEG), and advanced statistical approaches to determine
how memories are encoded in distributed patterns of activity in parietal cortex.
Studies will determine how parietal representations of memories are shaped by
behavioral goals, how these representations evolve over time, and how parietal
cortex interacts with other brain regions during acts of remembering. The
research will culminate in a computational understanding of the role of parietal
cortex in memory. This will critically inform theories of human memory and will
be relevant to understanding how and why memory function is impaired.
Additionally, research findings and analysis approaches from these studies will
be used to generate a novel, project-based math curriculum for a local middle
school, helping to raise interest in and awareness of STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Human fMRI studies will be used to
identify how memory representations are encoded in distributed patterns of
activity in parietal cortex. Forward encoding models will be used to predict the
activity pattern that a given stimulus will elicit in parietal cortex. These
models will be based on the semantic properties of that stimulus (i.e., stimulus
content) and the "memory status" of that stimulus (i.e., whether the stimulus is
remembered from a past experience). Dr. Kuhl will then test how parietal memory
representations are influenced by top-down behavioral goals. It is predicted
that compared to representations in sensory cortex, parietal representations
will be more sensitive to behavioral goals. This prediction is motivated by a
theoretical perspective wherein parietal cortex functions as an interface
between sensory cortex and prefrontal cortex. Related to this prediction, EEG
decoding studies will track the timing with which memory representations emerge
in parietal cortex. It is expected that parietal representations will temporally
lag those in sensory areas, and will exhibit coherence with prefrontal
representations leading up to behavioral decisions. The overarching goal is to
develop a new theoretical account of how parietal cortex contributes to memory
via internal computations and interactions with other brain regions. The
research activities will also provide insight into how parietal cortex
contributes to cognitive processes more generally.