* 1752876
* CAREER: Hybrid Borane Platforms for the Activation of Small Molecules of Energy Consequence
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* William Harman, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 02/29/2024
* USD 678,500.00

The large-scale storage of electricity from intermittent sources such as solar
and wind power is a key challenge in the development of renewable energy. One
promising approach to this challenge is the use renewable electricity to produce
energy-rich chemical fuels that can be stored, transported, and used whenever
necessary. This approach requires catalysts that are capable of efficiently
converting inert molecules such as water and carbon dioxide into chemical fuels
like hydrogen and methanol. Currently, such catalysts are typically derived from
expensive, rare metals such as platinum. To make the electrochemical production
of fuels more economically feasible new catalysts that are based on inexpensive
and abundant elements are needed. In this project supported by the Chemical
Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. William Harman, Chemistry
Department, University of California - Riverside, is exploring platforms based
on carbon and boron that mimic many of the important features of commonly used
metals catalysts. Their ability to reduce carbon dioxide to fuels and fuel
precursors is being developed and inexpensive catalysts are being designed. In
addition to providing a vehicle for the training of graduate and undergraduate
students at UCR, this research program incorporates outreach to community
colleges in the inland southern California area with a focus on promoting
opportunities for study in STEM fields among underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Due to their intrinsic redox activity and unique
modes of reactivity, transition metals have dominated the field of
electrochemical small molecule activation. Recently, materials based on
graphitic carbon, often doped with heteroatoms, have emerged for applications in
electrocatalysis. This project is preparing carbene-supported and zwitterionic
diboraanthrancenes and diboraanthracenes with tethered metal ions. These species
are redox active and are capable of coupling electron transfer and small
molecule activation. Based on this behavior, catalysts are designed for the
electrochemical synthesis of energy rich species, such as methanol, from small
molecules, such as carbon dioxide. This research program incorporates a summer
research experience for undergraduates at local community colleges as well as
outreach to this community regarding opportunities for advanced study in
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.