* 1752011
* CAREER: Understanding the Molecular and Structural Composition of Aggressive Cancers using Deep Ultraviolet Spectroscopy and Imaging
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Francisco Robles, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Metastasis is considered the principal event leading to death in individuals
with cancer. Unfortunately, our ability to assess the relative risk of
metastasis based on indicators from primary tumors is extremely poor. The goal
of this proposal is to develop and apply a new method to understand the
molecular and structural composition of primary tumors that metastasize to
improve cancer prognosis. The PI will develop an optical microscopy technique,
ultraviolet hyperspectral interferometric microscopy, that probes the absorptive
and scattering properties of cells and tissues in the deep ultraviolet region of
the spectrum. The data from this method will yield unprecedented insight into
understanding the dispersive and absorptive properties of molecules that are
disrupted in cancers. The initial focus is on melanoma but the approach can be
used to improve prognosis of all cancers. This work has the potential to save
many lives and reduce patient morbidity and healthcare
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will leverage the concept that phenotypical
"common-denominators," including changes in metabolites, nuclear morphology, and
nano-architecture, can provide a consistent set of markers across different
patients that uniquely identify aggressive disease. To gain access to these
phenotypes, they will develop a novel optical microscopy technique called
ultraviolet hyperspectral interferometric (UHI) microscopy, which yields access
to unique endogenous dispersive, absorptive and scattering properties of cells
and tissues in the deep ultraviolet region of the spectrum (200 nm - 400 nm).
This region of the spectrum combined with the interferometric approach offers
unprecedented insight into a wide number of phenotypes, including molecular
makeup, subcellular morphology, and nanometer-scaled structures. Different
configurations of UHI microscopy will be tested to optimize the signal-to-noise
ratio, imaging speeds, and sensitivity. Then the method will be used to gain a
better understanding of the dispersive and absorptive properties of endogenous
molecules that are disrupted in cancers. In-vitro cells, and animal and human
tissue biopsies samples will be analyzed to identify biomarkers of aggressive
disease. Results from this work will help pave the way for a new approach that
improves tumor staging, and thus clinical outcome. In addition, the systems and
methods developed here can be applicable to other areas of biology and medicine,
and become fundamental tools for biologists and medical researchers to test
novel hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.