* 1752997
* CAREER: Approaching the 1D transport limit in van der Waals nanoribbons
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Jiang Wei, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 573,255.00

Non-technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Increasingly powerful and sophisticated
devices are needed in an ever-smaller package. Ultimately, a transistor of a
size of a single molecule, would truly break the current limits of integration.
The progress in this direction of research is slowed by lack of promising
molecularly thin wire materials, which are required for both stability and
functionality. This work focuses on creating chemically stable and
electronically functional molecular wires from so-called van der Waals crystals
and studying their fundamental properties. Using this approach, the team aims to
reveal new transport behavior in one-dimensional material systems and to explore
the possibilities of creating electronic devices for the application. Research
activities are seamlessly integrated into science education at various levels,
including high school, undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels,
emphasizing on scientific professional development on local underrepresented
groups. The PI also builds a comprehensive mentoring system to train
undergraduates and graduate students to be the future generations of leaders in
science literacy and research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates one-dimensional (1D) transport properties
in van der Waals (vdW) nanowire to address critical open questions about
transport physics in the 1D limit. VdW nanowires are a new category of 1D
material platforms. Their highly anisotropic 1D nature makes them a perfect fit
for the study of 1D physics. Fundamental questions to be answered are: 1) How is
the power law of conductance manifested in strictly 1D confining vdW
nanoribbons? 2) Can the transition between Tomonaga Luttinger liquid (TLL) and
1D Mott insulator be realized in vdW nanoribbons? 3) How does spin-orbit
coupling (SOC) modify the transport behavior of TLLs in vdW nanoribbons? 4) Can
the temperature range of the Majorana bound state be increased using SOC-
enhanced vdW nanoribbons? To address these questions, the research team is
conducting the following experiments, centered on vdW nanoribbons: 1) tunneling
transport measurements on suspended nanoribbon, 2) momentum resolved
spectroscopy on parallel nanoribbons, and 3) detection of the Majorana bound
state in semiconducting vdW nanoribbons. This project establishes a new frontier
in low-dimensional material research. The pure 1D nature of vdW nanoribbons
enables experimental studies in the 1D limit of the single molecular chain. The
exploration of critical aspects of 1D electron transport helps to advance the
understanding of electron behavior in strictly 1D systems and benefits the
theoretical development of 1D transport physics. The measurement methodology
proposed in this study applies directly to devices using other novel 1D
materials and inspires device research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.