* 1752882
* CAREER: Carbon storage in widespread low-saturation gas hydrate systems
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Ann Cook, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 615,848.00

Natural gas hydrates are minerals that look like ice, but contain a highly
concentrated amount of methane, also known as natural gas. Natural gas hydrates
form on the seafloor and in marine sediments beneath the seafloor when water
depths exceed ~500 m. Worldwide, marine methane gas hydrates are estimated to
store 20% to 50% of Earth?s mobile carbon. Perturbations to temperature and
pressure cause gas hydrates to dissociate into methane gas and water. Due to the
large reservoir of carbon in methane gas hydrates, the metastability of these
minerals, and the fact that methane is a strong greenhouse gas, many scientists
have theorized that methane liberated from natural gas hydrates may be a key
player in many of Earth?s large global warming events. However, the amount of
gas hydrate locked in marine sediments is not well known, with present estimates
varying by four orders of magnitude. This research uses well logs from publicly
accessible academic and industry geophysical information and well logs from
cores drilled into marine sediments in conjunction with new mathematical
approaches to evaluate, model, and estimate the amount of methane gas hydrates
in a broad spectrum of different marine settings. This information is then used
to provide crucial, first-time information on the occurrence, distribution,
amount of naturally occurring methane gas hydrates in the seafloor, worldwide.
Broader impacts of the work include information that can be used by the
petroleum and natural gas industry in discovering and assessing economically
feasible natural gas occurrences; the integration of research and education
involving large numbers of students who will be involved in the data analysis
and interpretation parts of the project; will complement previous gas hydrate
assessments in the Gulf of Mexico; and complements a pending research cruise
funded by the National Science Foundation- supported International Ocean
Discovery Program. The research will help support an investigator whose
demographic is underrepresented in the sciences, will support the development of
video field trips, and provide important information to students on careers in
geology outside of academia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The assessments and estimates
of natural methane gas hydrates are based on already existing data from
petroleum industry geophysical well logs from offshore locations worldwide that
already exists, but has not been systematically analyzed for natural gas
hydrate. As a matter of course in exploration studies, the petroleum industry
collects well log data in the shallow interval that coincides with gas hydrate
stability, but often ignores it because their interest in in deeper seated major
liquid petroleum plays, not gas hydrate occurrences. Up to now, scientists have
not exploited this vast treasure trove of data. This research project focuses on
these valuable, but underutilized data. Research will involve the investigator,
her graduate students, and her Borehole Geophysics class. They will examine and
analyze well logs from the north Atlantic, the North Sea, offshore Western
Australia, and the Gulf of Mexico using novel mathematical and conceptual tools
that combine the petrophysical analysis of petroleum industry well logs with
numerical modeling and geochemistry measurements to help constrain and
understand the distribution and saturation of natural gas hydrates worldwide.
The resulting information will be used to inform global climate models and
provide accurate information on the influence of gas hydrate on global climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.