* 1752393
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Variation in neuroanatomy and gene expression of the primate brain
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2018,08/31/2019
* James Higham, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2019
* USD 25,071.00

Human males and females exhibit differences in the prevalence of certain
neurological disorders, which may be influenced by differences in neuroanatomy
and brain gene expression. This doctoral dissertation project uses a non-human
primate model to investigate male and female variation in brain anatomy and gene
expression and to consider selective pressures that may have led to this
variation. This fundamental research has the potential to inform developing
treatments for neurobehavioral disorders in humans, particularly given that the
non-human primate model is likely to be more relevant than murine models for
understanding social behavior. Funding for this project will support the
research of a minority female graduate student who will also serve as an
educator and mentor. She will conduct science outreach through her participation
in multiple after-school and summer programs, all of which offer mentorship
and/or research experience to underrepresented and underserved students
interested in science.

Sexual selection is an evolutionary process whereby certain traits are under
selective pressure related to competition over access to mates or selection of
preferred mates. These mechanisms differ across species, and have resulted in
sex differences in non-neurological traits (e.g. body size, hair color). Limited
evidence suggests that sexual selection may also influence brain evolution and
that these selective pressures may have been particularly strong on the brain
during human evolution. The researchers will collect new neurobiological data in
female and male primate brains to characterize species-specific sex differences
in brain region volumes, sulcal morphology, and gene expression using
phylogenetic comparative methods and differential expression analyses. They will
then test for correlates of within-species variation in brain sex differences
using two large datasets, including chimpanzee sulcal morphology and rhesus
macaque brain gene expression, which also contain matching behavioral data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.