* 1752378
* CAREER: Scalable Manufacturing of Hierarchical Nanostructures by Acoustically Modulated Emulsion Technique for Next Generation Renewable Energy Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Shan Hu, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Assembling nano building blocks into hierarchical structures can produce novel
materials with unprecedented performance and functionalities, especially for
next-generation renewable energy applications, including high-capacity batteries
and high-efficiency solar cells, thus securing the energy future and prosperity
of the nation. Existing methods to manufacture hierarchical nanostructures with
long-range order require the use of templates that are limited in terms of
fabrication scalability, cost, and time. They also lag behind on generating
controlled composition variations in three-dimensional structures. This award
supports fundamental research to produce needed knowledge for the study of a
facile process to generate scalable and reconfigurable three-dimensional
templates for the directed assembly of hierarchical nanostructures with
rationally designed structure, topology, composition, and long-range order. This
research promotes scientific understanding of the self-assembly process and
provides strategies to direct the assembly by engineering the environment. Since
assembly process is common in nature, e.g., living cells assemble into
functional organs following a hierarchical order, knowledge from this research
contributes to the understanding of life and life's engineering, which impacts
the NSF Big Idea of 'Understanding the Rules of Life'. The multi-disciplinary
research, involving acoustics, fluid dynamics, materials science and
manufacturing, provides unique training and research opportunities to
undergraduate and graduate students. The project involves community college
students, especially, those from under-represented minorities, in research and
help achieve academic success in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The assembly of hierarchical nanostructures
directed by acoustically-modulated emulsion can overcome several limitations
existing assembly methods have, including disordered structures in long range,
high cost, lengthy time, low scalability, and limited control of composition and
anisotropy. However, fundamental scientific barriers are yet to be overcome to
fully exploit the application potential of hierarchical nanostructures. This
research is to fill the knowledge gap on the dynamics of nanoparticles and
nanoparticle-loaded droplets in the Pickering emulsion system when subjected to
a standing acoustic field. The project performs multi-scale molecular dynamics
and finite element simulation, coupled with experimental validation, to
investigate the dynamics of nanoparticles and emulsion droplets and delineate
the effects of key process variables. Based on the fundamental studies,
acoustically-modulated emulsion systems are designed and developed to
manufacture a set of rationally designed metal oxide hierarchical nanostructures
with structural, topological and compositional anisotropy in both nano- and
micro- scales. Using titanium dioxide-based dye sensitized solar cell as a model
device, the correlation of nano- and micro- scale structural and compositional
anisotropy with the macroscale material properties and device performances are
established.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.