* 1752897
* RFE: Inclusion, exclusion, and socialization in engineering programs - Investigating key affective socio-psychological mechanisms in professional formation
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Jeremiah Sullins, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2021
* USD 537,482.00

The field of engineering needs to recruit and retain more diverse student
populations to be able to provide the broadly educated, technical workforce
necessary to address the global challenges facing society. Identifying and
addressing key barriers to students' access to and success in engineering have
presented vexing challenges for engineering educators and engineering programs
across the country. There is growing evidence that cultural characteristics of
engineering programs, such as high levels of competitiveness and increasing
performance pressures, might lead to exclusionary social dynamics that can
discourage some students from persisting in the field. This project draws on the
psychological concepts of affect in order to explore individual students'
responses to these exclusionary dynamics. More specifically, individual
responses to these social dynamics might be informed by a harsh, and often
unfounded, self-assessment relative to perceived social or performance
expectations. The study will collect and analyze data from students' experiences
in engineering programs to develop a foundational understanding of the
influences and dynamics that provide the context for experiences related to
perceiving a disconnection from engineering. The findings from this research
will be used to inform the design of more inclusive engineering learning
environments and to develop strategies for students to build resilience and
succeed in their engineering studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to develop a fundamental, theoretical understanding of the role of
particular forms of affect in engineering students' professional formation. Some
particular affective states related to professional formation may be defined as
a pervasive, strikingly painful experiential state related to an overly critical
evaluation of self, prompted by a comparison to socially constructed
expectations of conduct or performance in a particular cultural setting. This
project examines both individual experiences of, and responses to these
affective states and the social dynamics that provide the context and prompt the
self-evaluation. The research design combines interpretative phenomenological
analysis (IPA) to investigate the individual perspective and ethnographic
methods to explore the cultural context. More specifically, IPA comprises
interviews with engineering students that are analyzed for internal
psychological experiences of negative affect in professional formation. The
influences and dynamics of such affective states captured at the individual
level are used to elicit student experiences in semi-structured focus groups
discussion. These focus groups provide an understanding of the social patterns
that inform the cultural construction of norms and expectations in engineering
programs. The synthesis of both analyses will result in a comprehensive model of
how certain forms of affect accompany professional formation in the context of
engineering, as understood from both the embodied individual and the
sociocultural realities of engineering students. This understanding of these
affective states as socio-psychological phenomena provides insights into
exclusionary mechanisms and dynamics that may lie at the heart of issues of
underrepresentation and attrition in engineering programs.