* 1752724
* CAREER:  A change in the forecast: Ocean biogeochemistry over the next decade
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Nicole Lovenduski, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 05/31/2024
* USD 799,914.00

The pressing need for societally-relevant information about the physical climate
system in the near future (the coming years to decades) has generated extensive
research in the field of decadal climate prediction. Recent work highlights the
ability of climate models to predict such things as regional surface air
temperature, precipitation, Arctic sea ice extent, and ocean heat content with
several years lead time; such predictions are of great use to those who manage
infrastructure and resources. The use of models for predictions of regional
changes in ocean chemistry and biology on these timescales is much less common
but could also be very useful to managers, policy makers, and the scientific
enterprise. In this CAREER award, the investigator will use a model to make
regional predictions of changes in ocean chemistry and biology on one- to ten-
year timescales; these predictions will be tested against real-world
observations to assess and understand the skill of the predictions. The major
educational goal of this project is to prepare undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups for graduate study in the field of oceanography. This
will be achieved by partnering with the Summer Multicultural Access to Research
Training (SMART) program to provide five undergraduate students with
transformative learning and mentoring experiences that will expand their
pathways to competitive graduate programs. The SMART program has well-
established recruiting strategies and assessment protocols and has achieved
tremendous success in reducing the disparities between majority and minority PhD
recipients in STEM fields. It is anticipated that this project will give rise to
increased numbers of underrepresented students achieving doctoral degrees in
chemical and physical oceanography. The PI is strongly committed to moving
diverse undergraduate STEM students forward into graduate programs by providing
genuine research experiences and mentorship to these students and has a history
of successful student placement into graduate programs. The project leader is
strongly committed to moving diverse undergraduate STEM students forward into
graduate programs by providing genuine research experiences and mentorship to
these students and has a history of successful student placement into graduate
programs. The project will also support the education and training of a graduate
student and postdoctoral researcher. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team
proposes to analyze ocean biogeochemistry predictions using output from an Earth
System Model with fully resolved ocean biogeochemistry and observations from
satellite, hydrographic, and autonomous platforms. From annual to decadal
timescales, the team will quantify predictability and predictive skill in key
ocean biogeochemical parameters, including surface ocean pH, partial pressure
and air-sea flux of carbon dioxide, and upper-ocean aragonite saturation state,
net primary production, and oxygen concentration. The model-based predictability
study will probe the limits of skillful ocean biogeochemical prediction and
investigate the mechanisms involved. Detailed analysis of sustained ocean
biogeochemical events in the recent past will inform understanding of their
predictability in the coming decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.