* 1752197
* CAREER: Revealing the fundamental interactions of cell-penetrating nanoparticles in a complex model membrane
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Stephen Sarles, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 04/30/2024
* USD 540,093.00

This CAREER award supports a transformative research and education program to
understand how novel types of nano-scale particles penetrate cellular membranes
in a passive and seemingly nondestructive manner. Revealing these details will
unlock tremendous potential for developing useful cell penetrating agents in
biomedicine and agriculture and enable us to better discern the safety of
nanomaterials. To lay a foundation for lasting scientific contributions, the
research project will leverage new methods pioneered by the Principal
Investigator to assemble and characterize complex model membranes that better
mimic those found in cells. This research will generate new knowledge of how the
chemistry and patterning of nanoparticle surfaces enable their uptake in cells,
which will directly benefit the design, testing, and use of new generations of
nanomaterials. Closely tied to the research project, an educational and outreach
program entitled INTERFACE will enable a wider range of people to engage in and
interact with the research and technologies produced in the PI's lab as a result
of this project. INTERFACE includes public forums on the nature and context of
bio-active nanoparticles, hands-on research activities for K-12 and
undergraduate students, and support for STEM-focused journalism and improved
science communication activities. These activities support broader impacts by
generating interest in STEM, educating the public, improving scientific
journalism, increasing participation of underrepresented groups, and enriching
engineering curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports a
transformative research and education program to understand how novel types of
amphiphilic monolayer-protected nanoparticles passively, and seemingly
nondestructively, penetrate cellular membranes. Revealing these mechanisms will
unlock tremendous potential for cell penetrating agents in biomedicine and
enable us to better discern the safety of nanomaterials. To lay a foundation for
lasting contributions, the proposed project will leverage new methods pioneered
by the PI to assemble complex lipid bilayers that better mimic membranes in
cells and characterize in situ both their structural and transport properties.
The research project seeks to: 1) develop transformative tools for manipulating,
characterizing, and imaging complex model membranes; 2) quantify the effects of
amphiphilic nanoparticle adsorption, insertion, and translocation on membrane
structure; 3) uncover the effects of lipid type and thermotropic phase on
nanoparticle activity; and 4) examine converse effects of nanoparticles on
lateral organization in membranes. The intellectual merit stems from the stated
objectives and expected outcomes to clearly understand how amphiphilic
nanoparticles penetrate membranes by linking their activities to membrane
capacitance, thickness, tension, intra-membrane potential, conductance, and
lateral organization of peptides. By studying homogeneous and heterogeneous
membranes that can be assembled to mimic a variety of cells, this work will
generate new information about which lipid domains are preferred and test
hypotheses that amphiphilic nanoparticles prefer defects, areas of higher
curvature, and cholesterol-lean regions. Closely tied to the research, an
educational and outreach program entitled INTERFACE will enable a wider range of
people to engage in and interact with the research and technologies produced in
the Principal Investigator's lab as a result of this project. INTERFACE includes
public forums on the nature and context of bioactive nanoparticles, hands-on
research activities for K-12 and undergraduate students, and support for STEM-
focused journalism and improved science communication
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.