* 1752063
* CAREER: Nanoparticle Non-Noble Metal Intermetallic Compounds as Tunable Catalysts for Selective Hydrogenation Reactions
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Siris Laursen, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 02/28/2023
* USD 500,080.00

The project will investigate new, low-cost materials for catalyzing important
chemical reactions associated with the refining of petroleum and bio-based
materials to produce fuels and a wide range of chemical products. In addition,
the project will explore the potential for improving the effectiveness of the
catalytic materials by synthesizing them as nanoparticles rather than
traditional micron-sized particles. The new materials can be formed through
combinations of many different elements, and the study will also develop methods
for predicting the best combinations of elements for specific chemical
reactions, thereby streamlining the catalyst discovery process and promoting
U.S. competitiveness in the fuels and chemicals manufacturing sectors. The
project will be linked to educational and outreach efforts that will train the
next generation of engineers, and increase public awareness of new energy-
efficient technologies such as fuel cells and
batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary efforts in the investigator's
laboratory have established a working understanding of how supported
nanoparticle intermetallic compounds (IMCs) may be synthesized with well-defined
bulk and surface compositions. The project will utilize those findings to enable
a systematic study of IMC surface chemistry as a function of constituent
elements in the selective hydrogenation of unsaturated aldehyde and nitro
compounds. Experimental and computational methods will be used to examine the
selectivity of C=C, C=O, and N-O activation, dissociation, and hydrogenation as
a function of IMC bulk and surface composition and electronic structure
information. Synthesis of oxide-supported non-noble metal nanoparticle IMCs will
focus on developing clear understanding of the physical phenomena that dictate
their bulk and surface composition as a function of element selection, oxide
choice, and preparation environment. Formation of the bulk crystal structure of
the nanoparticles will be investigated by ex- and in-situ x-ray diffraction and
neutron scattering. Complementary high-resolution energy-dispersive x-ray
spectroscopy will verify bulk composition and quantify elements not incorporated
into the IMC nanoparticles. Surface composition of the IMCs will be analyzed
using low energy ion scattering. Diffusion of constituent elements, particle
growth, and bulk crystal structure will be analyzed as a function of synthesis
variables to produce a complete picture of how well-defined nanoparticle IMCs
may be produced. Results of these studies will allow for a general procedure to
be developed for the synthesis, characterization, reactivity evaluation, and
stability analysis of the IMC catalysts. Beyond the targeted reactions, the
project will enable atomic- and electronic-level understanding of how
nanoparticle IMC catalysis can be controlled and widely utilized in chemical
transformations important to the field of heterogeneous catalysis. The
educational component of the proposed program will serve to develop a surface
and materials chemistry education program at the University of Tennessee,
Knoxville. In addition, a YouTube video series, focused on materials, surface,
and catalytic science, will be developed in a format accessible to the general
population to promote a greater understanding of the impact these sciences have
on everyday life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.