* 1752879
* CAREER: Photoacoustic Imaging Probes to Study the Biology of Metal Ions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Jefferson Chan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2023
* USD 625,000.00

In this CAREER project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp;
Mechanisms B Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Jefferson Chan of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign is
developing a new class of imaging agents that convert light into ultrasound for
the study metal ions in brain. Various disease (including a number of
neurological disorders) are triggered if the concentrations of these metals in
the body are changed. To understand the role of metals in the body under both
normal and diseased conditions, an effective determination of their
concentration is highly desirable. To achieve this goal, synthetic methods are
used to develop chemicals that produce a different sound signals upon
interacting with a metal. These sounds signals are used to non-invasively make
3D images of the brain (or other organs of interest). This project lies at the
interface of organic chemistry, inorganic chemistry, and chemical biology and
has impacts on human health, especially brain health. This research group is
well-positioned to provide the highest level of education and training for all
students including those underrepresented in science. The broader impacts this
project focus on providing research opportunities to underrepresented minority
students from five local community colleges. Undergraduate research experiences
have been shown to have a notable effect on maintaining interest in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Owing to the diverse and important roles of metal ions in
biology, nature has evolved sophisticated mechanisms to maintain metal ion
homeostasis, especially in the brain. However, various disease states can emerge
if this fine balance is perturbed leading to various neurological disorders. One
imaging technique that can be used to non-invasively image the brain is
photoacoustic imaging, which is a powerful new modality that utilizes light to
produce soundwaves in tissue. The soundwaves can then be detected by transducers
and converted into 3D images. Because sound scattering in tissue is low, this
technology can be used to obtain resolution in the micron range at centimeter
depths. The goal of this project is to elucidate the role of metal ions in the
brain through the development of metal ion-specific imaging agents for
photoacoustic imaging. Specifically, the proposed work in this application
focuses on studying copper and calcium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.