* 1752401
* CAREER: Exploiting Many-Particle Physics for Low-Energy Nanoelectronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2018,02/28/2021
* James Teherani, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 02/28/2021
* USD 424,656.00

The incredible advancements of the microelectronics industry over the past 40
years have transformed room-sized super computers of the past into pocket-sized
mobile devices of the present; however, the continuation of this incredible
progress has slowed significantly as the ultimate limits of the metal-oxide-
semiconductor field-effect transistor -- the workhorse of modern computing,
storage, and communication systems -- are reached. Of particular importance is
the inability for further energy reduction due to the fundamental physics of how
conventional transistors operate. Novel ultra-low-energy transistors could
empower a range of new applications -- from long-lasting 'micro-dust' sensors
and implantable bioelectronics to cell phones that last a month on a single
charge -- driving a new wave of technological innovation. The use of ultra-low-
energy transistors in existing applications will decrease energy consumption
providing significant economic benefits to society. As part of this work, an
online series of short, engaging videos centered on current nanotechnology
research will be created to promote science and engineering education to the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work seeks to experimentally
demonstrate a new type of transistor based on the many-particle physics of Auger
generation to overcome the energy limitations of conventional transistors. This
'Auger FET' operates through gate modulation of Auger generation across a
semiconductor heterojunction. The scope of the project includes (i) the
fabrication of a van der Waals heterostructure comprised of layered two-
dimensional materials due to their ability to form super-thin defect-free abrupt
heterojunctions that enhance Auger generation and (ii) a theoretical effort to
investigate how the geometry and doping of the device structure can be
engineered to improve the Auger generation rate. The development of the Auger
FET will expand multiple areas of significant scientific research by
establishing the foundational physics for an innovative device concept. In doing
so, the work will expand understanding of Auger generation and recombination
processes in quantum structures, which is critical for improving efficiency in
LEDs, lasers, and photodetectors since Auger phenomena decrease their
performance.