* 1752517
* CAREER: Imaging and Understanding the Kinetic Pathways in Shape-Anisotropic Nanoparticle Self-Assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Qian Chen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 02/28/2023
* USD 533,604.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An emerging theme in materials
science is to understand and design artificial materials exhibiting the features
of living organisms: adaptive and evolving functional behaviors. Examples
include patterned ultra-small antennas that modulate local electromagnetic field
strengths upon different sun positions, or automotive "skins" that optimize the
aerodynamics of vehicles in varying environments. With support from the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program, the Principal Investigator's NSF CAREER
grant is focused on deciphering the rules upon which nanometer-sized building
blocks self-organize and reorganize into such adaptive materials. These building
blocks are chosen due to the unique potential for miniaturization and the
collective properties determined by the structures they organize into. The key
enabling innovations of this project are two-fold. First, a novel imaging tool
will be used to trace and videotape the building block motions on the fly at up
to atomic resolution. Second, the obtained motions will be analyzed to interpret
the crosstalk among these building blocks. The obtained fundamental
understanding can also be applied to other systems composed of tiny elementary
objects such as biological molecules which are critical for human health, or to
create new materials that can achieve cheap and clean renewable energy. The
project provides training to both undergraduate and graduate students. A "tri-M
lab" including Modular lab demos, a Mobile game app, and Movies is utilized as a
platform for broad dissemination to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Principal Investigator's long-term goal is to transmute inanimate materials into
animate ones, capable of reconfiguring their structure and property on demand.
The key challenge in designing reconfigurable materials from nanoscale building
blocks lies in understanding the kinetic pathways of their self-assembly. These
pathways define how building blocks interact and assemble into targeted
structures, i.e. the building block nanoscale interaction-targeted structure
relationship. However, the kinetic pathways are associated with how building
blocks continuously diffuse and tumble in a solvent, which is both
spatiotemporally varying and nanoscopic in nature. Thus, fully understanding
these pathways requires real-space, in-situ characterization with high
spatiotemporal resolution, which is not offered by existing ex-situ and ensemble
methods. The research objective of this CAREER proposal is thus to address this
challenge and to quantify the interactions and kinetic pathways governing self-
assembly and structural reconfiguration in model systems of anisotropic gold
nanoparticles (NPs). The proposed approach is to combine the emergent liquid-
phase transmission electron microscopy (TEM) with automated movie analysis
methods developed in the PI's group to quantify the dynamics of NP self-
assembly. Specifically, this research will (i) capture the self-assembly
trajectories of representative anisotropic NPs using low-dose liquid-phase TEM
with nanometer and millisecond resolution, (ii) extract from these trajectories
hitherto physical parameters, such as NP-NP interaction potentials and self-
assembly kinetic pathways, based on high-throughput statistical analysis of
these trajectories, and (iii) quantify how diverse stimuli, such as temperature
and solvent polarity, affect phase transition dynamics in systems of NPs with
reconfigurable polymer coronas, moving towards systems that adapt their
structure and functions entirely from the bottom-up. This approach will help
establish a quantitative building block-nanoscale interaction-targeted structure
relationship for predictive materials design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.