* 1752738
* CAREER:  Earth-Abundant Transition Metal Photosensitizers Using Ligand-to-Metal Charge Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Carsten Milsmann, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2024
* USD 649,364.00

In this CAREER project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp;
Mechanism B Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Carsten Milsmann of the
Department of Chemistry at West Virginia University is investigating a new class
of early transition metal complexes that are promising candidates for the
development of molecular photosensitizers due to their interesting optical and
electrochemical characteristics. Molecular photosensitizers find application in
a wide variety of solar energy applications including photovoltaics, solar fuel
production, and photocatalysis. The goal of these research efforts is to provide
access to photoactive compounds based on readily-available, earth-abundant
metals that can improve upon and/or replace currently available technology based
on precious metals. This will further the development of more cost-efficient
solar energy applications for which scalability is not hindered by the limited
availability of the metal component. The project requires expertise in the
fields of inorganic, physical, and organic chemistry and is ideally suited for
the training and education of highly qualified scientists at all levels.
Outreach activities aimed at middle school students in rural areas of West
Virginia will be conducted in collaboration with the West Virginia University
Center for Excellence in Science Education and support efforts to train the next
generation of science teachers in the state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The electron-
deficient nature of early transition metals requires new approaches to initial
charge separation via absorption of a photon compared to the well-established
functional principles of electron-rich precious metal photosensitizers. This
project investigates ligand-to-metal charge transfer processes to convert light
energy into chemical potentials. Through a combination of synthetic chemistry,
spectroscopic studies, and quantum-chemical calculations this project are
answering the following questions: 1)What are the fundamental design principles
to generate long-lived excited states in early transition metal complexes? 2)How
can systematic modifications of the supporting ligand framework be used to fine-
tune the optical and electron transfer properties of the complexes? 3)Can the
photo-induced electron transfer properties of early transition metal complexes
be utilized to enable transformations requiring highly reducing conditions (e.g.
dinitrogen reduction)?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.