* 1752736
* CAREER: Understanding and Modeling the Mysterious Dropout of Radiation Belt Electrons
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2024
* Weichao Tu, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 04/30/2024
* USD 657,665.00

This project focuses modeling of the relativistic electron population dynamics
in Earth's Radiation Belts. Without fully understanding the mysterious dropout
of electrons, a full understanding and prediction of radiation belt dynamics
cannot be reached. This is of considerable practical importance due to the
hazards to space-borne systems. Many communications satellites and national
security assets reside in this radiation environment and their lifetime depends
on its dynamics. Advancing the science supports improvement of the predictive
models and fits directly into the goals of the National Space Weather Strategy
and Action Plan, which was released in 2015. The project supports a female
faculty member and will train and educate graduate and undergraduate students in
both research and outreach activities. The learning module will provide an
unprecedented informal learning opportunity on space science to West Virginia
K-12 schools. It is expected to increase the awareness and interest of middle
school students in the STEM programs in the state, and inspire them to pursue
STEM careers, especially the underrepresented female and lower socioeconomic
status students. The opportunities to develop and deliver the learning module
will also provide valuable educational and outreach experience for undergraduate
and graduate students and enhance their science literacy and communication
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the launch of NASA Van Allen Probes in 2012,
significant progress has been achieved in understanding the strong enhancement
of relativistic electrons. However, the fast and dramatic dropout of radiation
belt electrons (orders of magnitudes in a few hours) remains unsolved. The open
question exists: Where do the electrons go during the dropout? This award is to
develop a new and comprehensive dropout model, named Relativistic Electron
Dropout (RED), with physical and event-specific inputs to simulate the electron
dropout and understand the governing processes. RED will include not only the
traditional loss processes (pitch angle diffusion, magnetopause shadowing, and
outward radial diffusion), but also the new mechanism called Drift Orbit
Bifurcation (DOB). Physical quantification of these processes will be achieved
based on realistic field and particle conditions. With these inputs, RED will
simulate both the electron dropout observed at high altitudes and the electron
precipitation observed at low altitudes to resolve the governing mechanisms. The
wealth of energetic electron and wave measurements from Van Allen Probes,
THEMIS, and MMS spacecraft that cover the region from the outer belt to the
magnetopause and the multiple POES satellites at low altitudes will provide an
excellent test base for the RED model. This model will be the first to
incorporate all the major loss mechanisms during the dropout, including the new
DOB process. It is capable of simulating both electron dropout at high altitudes
and precipitation at low altitudes, which will make a significant contribution
in understanding the governing processes during the dropout and resolving their
relative importance. The physical and event-specific quantification of the
magnetopause shadowing, DOB, and radial diffusion processes is new and critical
for understanding the fast electron dropout as well as the overall radiation
belt dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.