* 1752713
* CAREER: Excitons, electron-hole plasmas, and electron-hole liquids in the time domain
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Alexander Kemper, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
and computational research and education in a new type of phase transition found
in two-dimensional materials. Phase transitions are commonly found around us;
for example, in the boiling of water, or in the reverse process of condensing
water vapor into rain. In some semiconducting materials, a remarkably similar
phase transition may occur. When exposed to the energy a continuous laser beam,
electrons in the material get excited from their normal quantum state into
another. However, the excited electron in its new state feels an effective
attraction to the "hole" it left behind, i.e. the place where it used to be. If
enough electrons get pumped into the excited state, they - and their hole
counterparts - can undergo a gas-to-liquid-type phase transition. This phase
transition, although its constituents are electrons and holes, has
characteristics similar to the one found in water. However, a significant
difference is that this happens on ultrafast time-scales (nanoseconds), and it
involves a driving laser. Importantly, because the constituents are manifestly
quantum objects, a host of exciting and interesting properties
arise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The materials in question form two-dimensional
sheets, which means they may be incorporated into flexible electronics. On top
of this, there is now the possibility of switching their behavior within
nanoseconds from being a straightforward semiconductor (which are typically
transparent materials) to being an object that is metallic and reflecting. This
has promising applications for solar-light harvesting and for bypassing Moore's
law through photonics. The project involves substantial development of
algorithms and software, which will be disseminated to the community as open-
source code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the research, this CAREER award
will support the improvement of STEM education in the U.S. by partnering with
the American Association of Physics Teachers (AAPT) to turn their successful
"Bootstrap for Computational Modeling in Physics First" workshop into a
distance-learning course. The workshop integrates computational modeling into
8th and 9th grade physics courses, and is typically attended in person. The
development of a distance-learning version will enable reaching a much larger
set of participants, in particular from rural areas which may not have ready
access to long in-person workshops. Since computation is playing an increasingly
larger role in the STEM workplace, earlier preparation and exposure will improve
students' overall capabilities. This version of the workshop will initially be
deployed in North Carolina, and will be further disseminated through AAPT across
the country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research and education
in theoretical and computational investigations of ultrafast out-of-equilibrium
phase transitions. The research team will study the transition into an electron-
hole liquid (EHL) that occurs at room temperature upon high photoexcitation in
transition-metal dichalcogenides. Due to the ultrafast nature of the phase
transition, time-domain approaches are critical. This project will determine the
conditions for creating and sustaining the EHL, its response to external stimuli
and proximity-coupled emergent orders, its tunability, and its transport and
transfer dynamics. This understanding will enable the use of the electron-hole
liquid in novel devices, and, in particular, in applications for solar-light
harvesting and for bypassing Moore's law through
photonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project exploits an opportunity for high-
impact science through theoretical study and computational method development
for nonequilibrium science. One essential aspect of the problem is that it must
be tackled in the time domain, rather than resorting to the usual equilibrium
analytic techniques. The PI will address this challenge through nonequilibrium
many-body theory and through collaboration with the experimental community. The
research team will consider the concept of a nonequilibrium phase transition
without reliance on ergodicity by performing self-consistent calculations in the
broken-symmetry states in the time domain. Through these approaches, the
research team will re-evaluate how we think about nonequilibrium processes and
phase transitions in quantum materials, and break the reliance on equilibrium
concepts. The algorithms and software created throughout the project will be
disseminated to the community as open-source code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to the research, this CAREER award will support the improvement of STEM
education in the U.S. by partnering with the American Association of Physics
Teachers (AAPT) to turn their successful "Bootstrap for Computational Modeling
in Physics First" workshop into a distance-learning course. The workshop
integrates computational modeling into 8th and 9th grade physics courses, and is
typically attended in person. The development of a distance-learning version
will enable reaching a much larger set of participants, in particular from rural
areas which may not have ready access to long in-person workshops. Since
computation is playing an increasingly larger role in the STEM workplace,
earlier preparation and exposure will improve students' overall capabilities.
This version of the workshop will initially be deployed in North Carolina, and
will be further disseminated through AAPT across the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.