* 1752123
* CAREER: Integrated Research and Education on Self-Activated, Transparent  Harmonics-Based Wireless Sensing Systems Using Graphene Bioelectronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Pai-Yen Chen, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 01/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

The internet-of-things has recently gained popularity in the cost-effective and
long-term health monitoring, enabled by collecting and analyzing biological
information from wearable micro- and nano-scale sensors. Although battery-free
micro-sensors can achieve inexpensive, long-lived and maintenance-free
operation, these miniature sensors usually suffer from unwanted electromagnetic
interferences, such as clutters, echoes, and multipath fading, which greatly
reduce the signal-to-noise ratio and the wireless interrogation range. To
surmount these challenges, this research project will investigate a new class of
self-powered, chemically-tuned harmonic transponders as wireless biosensors. The
harmonic biosensor consists of all-graphene antenna and integrated circuit
(graphene is, basically, a single atomic layer of graphite), which can be made
transparent, light-weight, flexible, and biocompatible for medical applications,
thus making possible a contact lens sensor for low-cost, portable, and
continuous diagnosis of pathogen bacteria, proteins, and versatile biomolecular
markers. The proposed wireless bio-sensing technology may lead to various
applications, such as detection of viral eye infections, ocular surface tumors,
and intraocular pressure. In addition, the project will also integrate the
research into the new courses and outreach activities in Wayne State University
(e.g., ReBUILDetroit Program, Richard Barber Interdisciplinary Research Program,
and WSU STEM Days) for recruiting under-represented and K-12 students in the
Detroit metropolitan area and promoting their interest in pursuing a career in
radio-frequency (RF) engineering and biomedical electronics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research project is to investigate the
low-noise, energy-efficient wireless micro-sensor system based on all-graphene
RF- and bio-electronics. The key scientific advance of this research lies in the
harmonics-based bio-sensing technique, which uses a fully passive and chemically
reconfigurable transponder as a harmonic biosensor to achieve real-time and
long-range wireless bio-sensing. Fundamentally different from conventional
backscatter sensors, the harmonic biosensor, launching and detecting signals of
orthogonal frequencies, can enable longer detection range against
electromagnetic interferences and human-body backscatter clutters. The harmonic
biosensor can be realized with a simple graphene-based bioelectronic circuit
which combines functions of a biosensor and a frequency multiplier into a single
module, based on the unique ambipolar and tunable electronic properties of
graphene transistors. Moreover, this bio-sensitive RF transponder can be
connected to a transparent, dual-band graphene antenna placed onto the flexible
biocompatible substrate. The selective binding of biomolecules, such as
infectious or bio-threat agents, on the graphene harmonic biosensor can be
wirelessly monitored by launching a monotone RF signal and detecting the
strength of the backscattered second harmonic, as the frequency conversion
efficiency is altered by the biomolecular concentration. If successful, the
compact and transparent graphene harmonic biosensor can be integrated on the
soft contact lens to sensitively detect targeted pathogen bacteria, infectious
agents, diseases, or metabolic changes of interest, and wirelessly transmit data
without any power source or sophisticated circuit. With further development, the
proposed wireless biosensors can have broad impacts in healthcare
monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.