* 1752904
* RAPID: Addressing the Challenges of Increasing Interest in Computing at the Undergraduate Level through Institutional Transformation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2017,02/28/2018
* Thomas Cortina, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 02/28/2018
* USD 199,722.00

Carnegie-Mellon University proposes to engage leaders in computer science (CS)
education in re-imagining the way CS is taught in response to 21st Century
Challenges. Many CS departments are currently facing significant increases in
undergraduate enrollment and much of the growth may be attributable to students
who are interested not just in CS, but in CS combined with other computing-
enabled disciplines. This trend could well accelerate as the national effort to
increase access to computing and computational thinking in grades K-12 gains
traction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project includes a 2-day workshop
that will bring together 100 CS education experts from various colleges
including research universities, liberal arts and minority-serving colleges, and
community colleges, along with professional computing organizations and leading
industry partners. It will focus on a number of key questions that seek to
understand growing enrollment pressures in various types of colleges and
regions, the need to continue efforts to increase diversity in computing, the
readiness of the computing education community to embrace institutional changes
that might, for example, provide multiple and/or multi-disciplinary pathways
through their programs, and whether it is time for a larger summit of CS
education leaders to start to develop a roadmap for broad and sustained change
at the undergraduate level.