* 1752203
* Career: The Effects of Public Policy on Families with Children: New Evidence from Multiple Large-Scale Data Sets
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Maya Rossin-Slater, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 04/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Millions of families face challenges of work-family balance, single parenthood,
and poverty. Public policies could improve the lives of families dealing with
these issues, but the intended impacts of these policies may not be achieved if
families respond to policies in unpredictable ways. Moreover, policies with
overlapping goals that are targeted at the same families could either work
together to benefit these families or work against each other. Understanding how
these policies comprehensively affect families---working independently or
together---is essential for informing government spending decisions, and thereby
advancing national health, prosperity, and welfare. This CAREER research program
combines multiple large-scale data sets with experimental research methods to
better understand the effects of public policies on family outcomes and promote
the progress of economic science. Specifically, the research project will study
the effects of paid family leave, joint custody laws, and major U.S. social
safety net programs on family outcomes. This proposal's education plan centers
on training students---especially women, who are under-represented in the
economics profession---to shape the next generation of researchers who will be
involved in public policy. The results of this research project will have
profound influence on the conduct of public policy towards families, hence
increase the well-being of Americans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER research
project has four components. The first project uses population-level
administrative data to estimate the impacts of California's paid family leave
(PFL) benefits on leave duration, labor market outcomes, and repeat leave-taking
among new parents with a regression kink research design. This project provides
some of the first estimates of the effects of the PFL benefit amount, holding
other policies constant. The second project will identify the causal effects of
joint legal custody, which grants both parents the right to make key decisions
about their children's welfare and is increasingly promoted by legislation in
the developed world, on family outcomes. This project will use Danish
administrative data on custody court cases linked to four other administrative
data sets to track the economic, family formation, and mental and physical
health outcomes of the parents and children in each case. To identify causality,
the project will leverage random assignment of custody cases to judges, who
differ in their propensity to grant joint legal custody. The third project will
analyze the long-term effects of U.S. safety net programs with data on millions
of current adults, focusing on two questions: (i) Do safety net programs
ameliorate adverse long-term consequences of early childhood economic shocks?
(ii) Do these programs complement or substitute each other in their long-term
impacts on adult outcomes? The analysis will use difference-in-difference and
event-study designs, exploiting variation from the county-by-county rollout of
major programs, and variation in local labor demand. The fourth component is a
mentoring workshop that connects female economics PhD students with mentors who
are in the early stages of their careers both within and outside
academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.