* 1752771
* CAREER: Zwitterionic Metal-Organic Frameworks with Multi-Stimulus-Responsive Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Mario Wriedt, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 02/29/2024
* USD 604,486.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project is an integrated research,
education, and outreach program funded by the Solid-State and Materials
Chemistry program of the Division of Materials Research. The overall goal of the
research plan is to devise strategies that enable the synthesis of a new class
of advanced porous materials composed of charge-separated molecular building
blocks. These charges can perform a desired function to attract specific guest
molecules within the material's pores. In one line of research, the ability of
light to interact with these charges will be explored to trigger the release of
guest molecules to determine if the material can be regenerated to its original
state. This feature would be particularly useful for a multitude of
environmental applications that seek the adsorption or separation of gases, such
as hydrogen storage and carbon capture respectively with the general objective
to counteract global warming. Leveraging the research activities is the
educational plan that will allow Clarkson University to offer a stronger, ACS-
approved chemistry program, the foundation for a broad, rigorous chemistry
education that provides students with the intellectual, experimental, and
communication skills to become effective professionals. The outreach program is
hands-on and incorporates state-of-the-art crystallography instrumentation to
significantly strengthen and expand the high school to college pipeline for
students from the rural North Country of New York State by increasing their
exposure to and interest in STEM fields and careers. An X-ray diffraction
workshop will provide participants with the training to understand and
appropriately utilize the most precise method of determining crystal structures,
thus allowing the analysis of fundamental structure-property
relationship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research plan addresses fundamental questions essential to the advancement of
functional porous materials with multi-stimulus-responsive adsorption properties
and rapid controllable release of guest molecules. Proposed is the use of
zwitterionic metal-organic framework (ZW MOF) building blocks whose molecular
surfaces show well-separated intramolecular charges with tunable electric field
gradients. These gradients present potential multi-point adsorption sites that
can be designed at a molecular level within the zwitterionic ligands prior to
MOF self-assembly. Once zwitterions are incorporated into MOFs, their electric
field gradients yield charged organic surfaces (COSs) within the pores, which in
turn polarize guest molecules, resulting in defined adsorption properties. The
most important feature of zwitterions is their sensitivity to external stimuli
(e.g. light or electrochemical), resulting in switchable COSs that enable
significant control and tunability of adsorption properties. Specific approaches
are to: (1) Design and investigate ZW ligands as a new, simple, and controllable
means to introduce COSs into pore linings to create MOFs with defined host-guest
interactions; (2) Explore post-synthetic modification reactions as alternative
routes for introducing ZW functionalities into MOFs; and (3) Demonstrate and
optimize the multi-stimulus-responsive tunability of COSs by controllable
release of guest molecules from MOF pores. These experiments will ultimately
provide a powerful tool to tailor MOFs with tunable host-guest interactions and
will generate fundamental knowledge on a novel type of multi-stimulus-responsive
material with distinct adsorption and desorption
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.