* 1752607
* CAREER: Leveraging flow modulation to transform volatile organic compound measurement
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Katelynn Perrault, Chaminade University of Honolulu
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 05/31/2024
* USD 633,668.00

This project is jointly funded by the Division of Chemistry in the Directorate
for Mathematical and Physical Sciences and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR). The principal investigator is Katelynn Perrault
of Chaminade University of Honolulu. She is developing analytical approaches for
measuring volatile organic compounds (VOCs), a class of chemicals most commonly
associated with odor analysis. A comprehensive technique that permits two
independent methods of separation is used to analyze mixtures of volatiles. In
addition, statistical procedures are defined to verify the accurate selection of
marker compounds given various levels of sample complexity. These approaches may
improve future studies on VOCs in forensic science, defense, and other natural
science applications. Through the integration of this research with teaching
practices and community outreach, Dr. Perrault contributes to the redressing of
educational and career access disparities for Native Hawaiian and Pacific
Islanders (NHPIs) and other underserved minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project focuses on leveraging a reverse fill/flush (RFF) flow modulator with
comprehensive two-dimensional gas chromatography - mass spectrometry (GCxGC-MS)
as a tool for improving VOC characterization from complex samples. Chemical
measurement of complex VOC matrices is analytically challenging because they are
comprised of numerous compounds from different chemical classes, are highly
varied in concentration, and have low matrix specificity. The specific aims of
this study include the development of procedures for VOC method translation from
a GC-MS instrument to a GCxGC-MS instrument using modulation retrofitting. The
research team also investigates GCxGC-MS chemometric feature selections on a
reference VOC collection with simulated challenges and demonstrates the
developed approach on real samples exhibiting high inter-sample VOC variation.
Finally, the team conducts the first interdisciplinary study on interpretation
of multidimensional chromatographic output by non-specialists to improve
communication of data to broader audiences and stakeholders. This program
provides a strong analytical basis for the chemical measurement of VOC profiles
using GCxGC-MS with RFF to be used in chemical applications. The educational
objective of this work is to implement professional development programs that
promote career readiness and growth opportunities for students entering the
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) workforce. These
programs include undergraduate research experiences, course-based research
experiences, communication-based curriculum development in quantitative
subjects, implementation of active learning strategies, and interactive
community events to promote student service learning while increasing engagement
of Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders in
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.