* 1752972
* CAREER: Supramolecular engineering of hydrogel forming triblock copolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Alshakim Nelson, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2023
* USD 596,200.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrogels are soft materials that are
largely comprised of water, and as such, have found extensive utility in
hygiene, contact lens, medical implants, and wound care products (a 27 billion
dollar industry by 2022). Despite the importance of this class of materials,
molecular-level strategies to design new hydrogels are not well understood. The
objective of this work is to develop a set of molecular design principles that
can govern and control the physical properties of hydrogels. Triblock copolymers
with geometrically defined end-groups will be synthesized. These polymers are
expected to spontaneously self-assemble in water to afford hydrogel
compositions. The nano- and micro-structure of the hydrogels will be
characterized and correlated to the physical properties of the hydrogels. This
interdisciplinary research program lies at the interface between the fields of
polymer science and supramolecular chemistry, and aims to train the next
generation of scientists in these fields. The broader impacts of this proposal
include stimulating pre-college and college students to become interested in
polymer science, and increasing the diversity of scientists, particularly from
societally and economically disadvantaged backgrounds. The Principal
Investigator will emphasize teacher training to maximize the effectiveness of
the broader impacts of this project. The program outlined includes the creation
of educational modules that introduce polymer science to students in K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate stages of their learning careers, as well as the
engagement of disadvantaged and under-represented groups in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wholly
synthetic sequence-specific polymers are challenging to synthesize, and the
design rules that govern the self-assembly of these polymers is incredibly
complex. Accordingly, there is a need to develop a strategy to afford
hierarchically self-assembled synthetic polymers that does not rely on precise
monomer sequences. The primary objective of this work is to develop a platform
that supramolecularly engineers block copolymers by introducing supramolecular
functionalities at precise locations of a polymer chain--such as at the polymer
termini or at the interface between polymer blocks--in order to control the
assembly of these macromolecules into larger, well-defined ensembles in aqueous
media. The central hypothesis is that geometrically defined hydrogen bonding
systems can self-assemble into linear arrays or rosettes within the hydrophobic
domain of a hydrogel-forming triblock copolymer, as long as the glass transition
temperature of the respective block is far below room temperature. Triblock
copolymers with the composition, poly(alkylglycidyl ether)-b-poly(ethylene
glycol)-b-poly(alkylglycidyl ether), will be synthesized and functionalized at
the chain ends with array-forming hydrogen bonding motifs such as ureas. These
triblock copolymers will hierarchically self-assemble in aqueous solution to
afford hydrogels. The viscoelastic properties of these materials will be
characterized by rheometry and the nano- and microstructure of the hydrogels
will be determined by small and wide-angle x-ray scattering. This fundamental
study will afford new hierarchically assembling hydrogels for use in bioprinting
for tissue engineering and drug delivery, wherein the physical properties of the
hydrogel can ultimately be controlled at the molecular
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.