* 1752797
* CAREER: Van der Waals-mediated epitaxy of Heusler compounds through properties-selective, atomically thin barriers
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Jason Kawasaki, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2023
* USD 750,000.00

Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Modern electronics rely on precisely
controlled interfaces between crystalline semiconducting materials. Achieving
this remains a challenge. This project, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research, researches
fundamentally new ways to fabricate such interfaces of magnetic materials and
control them at the smallest length scale possible (atomic resolution). Focusing
on a class of materials called Heusler compounds, the project explores the
mechanisms for single-crystalline growth on atomically thin barrier materials.
Application of these materials in energy-efficient magnetic and thermoelectric
devices is also tested. The research efforts are integrated with an after-school
workshop for middle-school students. "From atoms to iPhone: the science of
materials and their applications in everyday life." is a workshop that engages
young students in materials science and engineering topics through the lens of a
common application, the smartphone. The principle investigator and his group
carry out work with the SCIENCountErs program at the Boys and Girls Club of Dane
County on this. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research and aims to
uncover and develop fundamentally new ways to control the transmission of ions,
charge, and spins across Heusler interfaces. Heusler compounds have long been
proposed as ideal materials for semiconductor spintronics and a platform for
discovery and manipulation of topological quantum states of matter. However,
interdiffusion across the Heusler/semiconductor interface has inhibited these
realizations, since atomically sharp and stable epitaxial interfaces are
required. This project addresses these challenges through the use atomically
thin barrier materials such as graphene, where the barrier material serves as
(1) a diffusion barrier, (2) a transparent decoupling layer for epitaxial
alignment between film and substrate, and (3) a tunnel barrier for efficient
charge and spin transport across the interface. By pairing highly controlled
Heusler synthesis by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) with in-situ spectroscopic
tools, model experiments are being used to reveal the mechanisms for Van der
Waals-mediated epitaxy and develop methods for the atomically controlled
fabrication of Heusler interfaces. Fundamental insights from the research
component are integrated into real life demonstrations for the "Atoms to iPhone"
workshop and integrated into undergraduate and graduate courses taught by the
principle investigator. First hand research experiences for undergraduate and
graduate students provide a training ground for careers in STEM and related
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.