* 1752791
* CAREER: Hydrophilic and Hydrophobic Polymers from Boron-Containing Polyolefins
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2023
* Rebekka Klausen, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 01/31/2023
* USD 675,000.00

Professor Rebekka Klausen of Johns Hopkins University is supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) program of the Division
of Chemistry to develop a chemical strategy that can turn a hydrophobic (water-
hating) polymer into a hydrophilic (water-loving) polymer. This method enables
the preparation of structures that contain both hydrophobic and hydrophilic
segments in precisely controlled amounts and sequences. Polymers are versatile
commodity chemicals commonly found in plastics. The ability to control and
change the solvent compatibility of a given plastic has profound implications
for its applications. Fundamental insights arising from this project include
novel synthetic methods yielding well-defined functional polymers and insights
into the relationship of chemical structure and water solubility. The materials
prepared under this project are useful in applications in which hydrophobic and
hydrophilic materials are combined, such as the efficient recovery of crude oil
from oil spills in marine environments or as durable and solvent-resistant
adhesives. This research program provides valuable training to undergraduate and
graduate students in the preparation and design of industrially relevant
materials and supports the integration of academic and industrial scientific
relationships through an educational initiative that brings professional
chemists to a university setting to discuss their current research and career
trajectories. Additional aspects of the educational initiative focus on the
recruitment and retention of talented students from diverse backgrounds into
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to control the
hydrophobicity of organic polymers by replacing one or more carbon-carbon (CC)
bonds with the isosteric, isoelectronic, and polar boron-nitrogen (BN) bond. A
novel azaborine vinyl monomer is prepared and its homo- and copolymerization is
studied. Reflecting the central role of organoborane chemistry in organic
synthesis, postpolymerization functionalization converts the pendant C-B bond to
a C-OH bond. In the course of this work, fundamental research into the reactive
intermediate chemistry of unconventional aromatic structures is pursued, novel
functional polyolefins are prepared, and structure-dependent properties are
elucidated. The methods to be used include organic synthesis, polymerization
chemistry, and tools for the characterization of physical properties. The
project integrates research and educational endeavors by supporting: (1) a
career and professional development seminar series in Baltimore, (2) promoting
training and learning in industrially-relevant polymer science, and (3)
broadening the participation of underrepresented groups through a summer
undergraduate research stipend.