* 1752226
* CAREER: Physical Regulation of Cell Migration by the Glycocalyx
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Matthew Paszek, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project will investigate
how cells migrate in narrow spaces. All cells are coated in a sugar-rich coating
of long molecules called a glycocalyx. The glycocalyx changes dramatically in
many lethal diseases, but little is known about how changes in this cell coating
make a disease better or worse. This project will create new tools for precision
engineering of the mechanical properties of the glycocalyx. They will be used to
determine the role of glycocalyx in cell migration. Cell migration is crucial in
how many diseases progress. For example, the results of the project could lead
to new approaches to preventing the spread of metastatic cancer cells. The tools
for glycocalyx engineering are expected to be applied broadly in biotechnology
to generate protective and anti-adhesive coatings on cells for diverse
applications, including cell-based therapies and cellular production systems for
bio-manufacturing. Therefore, results from this research will be important
beyond basic research. The project will also include a comprehensive education
and outreach program that introduces middle and high school students to physical
biology with the goal of increasing participation of economically disadvantaged
and other under-represented groups in science, technology, engineering, and math
(STEM) subjects&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Physical forces generated by and acting on
cells directly influence tissue homeostasis and progression to disease states.
Recent studies emphasize that cells can migrate independent of integrins in 3D
environments, where the glycocalyx is believed to provide traction against the
extracellular matrix (ECM) for propulsion. Despite the growing appreciation for
the role of the glycocalyx in cell migration and mechanotransduction, our
overall physical understanding of the structure and its precise mechanisms of
action in cell motility remain primitive. The research will address this
challenge through development of a new toolkit for precision engineering of the
glycocalyx and application of the toolkit, along with nanoscale imaging
approaches, to understand the physical function of the glycocalyx in cell
migration. The research will test the specific hypothesis that the glycocalyx
provides physical cues that direct acquisition of specific migration phenotypes
in confined 3D environments. The tools and fundamental knowledge developed will
be broadly relevant in understanding the function of the glycocalyx in normal
physiology and disease-specific contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.