* 1752302
* CAREER: Efficient Predictive Modeling for Infrastructure Systems Using Polynomial Approximation
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Hadi Meidani, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Healthy and optimal operation of infrastructure systems will advance the health,
prosperity and welfare of the society. It is however challenging to maintain the
optimal condition given various uncertainties involved in these systems.
Advances in computing and sensing technologies can potentially enable a paradigm
shift in the management of infrastructure systems by realistically capturing the
uncertainties involved. The main challenge is still the high computational cost
that would entail, mainly due to large size of infrastructure networks. This
Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award aims to enable the next
generation of fast uncertainty quantification (UQ) methodologies that can
significantly reduce simulation time and are particularly tailored for large
infrastructure networks. This award will analyze the case of interdependent
transportation-energy systems that involves the integration of electric
vehicles. The project will also establish an integrated education and outreach
plan to prepare the next generation of civil engineers with improved programming
and computational skills. This is done through development of a new graduate-
level course, mentoring of undergraduate researchers, partnership with
educational physiologists to enhance educational plans, and also outreach to the
broader civil engineering student population, K-12 students, and decision
makers. The new methods will promote progress of science in UQ and
infrastructure modeling, and together with the educational and outreach
activities can collectively lead to improved infrastructure operations and
promote the economic competitiveness of our society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will use stochastic simulations to realistically capture the
complexities. The approaches will build upon and enrich current UQ machinery.
These advanced UQ methods will aim to (1) intelligently identify the
redundancies in the flow models of infrastructure systems, (2) use topology
characteristics of these networks towards model reduction, (3) build an
effective online training framework that use streaming sensor data, and (4) take
advantage of the availability of flow models at various fidelity levels to
produce multifidelity predictions. Specifically, the approaches include advanced
compressive sampling methods in polynomial chaos expansion for effective removal
of uncertainties related to network redundancies; a topology-based dimension
reduction algorithm integrated with compressive sampling approach to exploit the
topology information of infrastructure networks; a block-wise recursive least
square approach to enable an effective online learning for polynomial surrogates
with quantified modeling errors; and a multifidelity regression framework for
building surrogates using results of simulations at various fidelity levels. If
successful, these advances will collectively contribute to the transformation of
infrastructure engineering where simulation-based data-intensive design suites
that can assist decision makers will be increasingly
used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.