* 1752827
* CAREER: Toward Understanding Solar Wind Turbulence in the Inner Heliosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2024
* Jean Perez, Florida Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 03/31/2024
* USD 747,359.00

Determining the exact mechanisms that heat the corona and accelerate the solar
wind are two of the most important problems in solar-heliospheric physics, as
well as one of the top priority goals of the Parker Solar Probe (PSP) mission.
This mission, which is scheduled to launch in the summer of 2018, will visit the
near-Sun regions never explored before by any spacecraft, providing
groundbreaking in-situ and close-by remote sensing measurements of the inner
heliosphere between 9.5 and 55 solar radii (measured from the center of the
Sun), reaching up to six times closer than the Helios mission. This five-year
CAREER project is aimed at improving present understanding of the evolution and
structure of turbulence close to the Sun. The project will also help elucidate
how energy is transported from the solar surface to its upper atmosphere and how
this energy is dissipated to heat the solar corona and accelerate the solar
wind. One of the main broader impacts of this project is that it will enhance
the scientific return of the PSP mission by laying the theoretical foundations
for interpretation of PSP measurements, which will have repercussions in a
number of other outstanding questions in heliospheric physics. The project team
will introduce a novel and user friendly software tool that will allow students
to use numerical simulations, with minimal knowledge of scientific computing, to
enhance learning of introductory space plasma physics. The role that numerical
simulations will play in the introductory courses will closely mirror the role
that simulations play in modern plasma research, i.e., to facilitate
understanding of the underlying physics when analytical progress is no longer
possible. The software interface will allow students to quickly solve numerical
problems to gain intuition from the numerical solution to help reinforce
understanding of the underlying concepts. Another main broader impact of this
project is that, at its conclusion, a fully tested and working version of this
tool will be made available online under the GNU open-source license, to allow
for the expansion of its plasma physics problems base and use in other research
institutions. This software tool will also be adapted to disseminate with the
general public the research outcomes of this project, and inform them on the
relevance of space plasma research and the revolutionary discoveries that the
PSP will enable in the decades to come. The research and EPO agenda of this
CAREER project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery,
learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER is expected to provide an improved understanding of the origin and
evolution of turbulence in the near-Sun environment, from the Alfven waves
observed in the low corona to turbulent fluctuations in the upper corona and the
solar wind. This investigation will combine theory, high-resolution numerical
simulations and existing observations to lay the groundwork for the
interpretation of the unprecedented measurements by the PSP. The project aims to
accomplish the following specific science goals: (i) Investigate how turbulence
evolves from AW motions in the solar corona to fully developed AW turbulence at
larger heliocentric distances; (ii) identify scaling laws governing the
inertial-range power spectrum, the role of cross- helicity and residual energy
in the turbulence and how such properties depend on the heliocentric distance;
(iii) investigate the role that this turbulence plays in power laws of the
magnetic energy spectrum of fluctuations observed by Helios measurements between
0.3 AU and 0.4 AU; and, (iv) establish predictions of the properties of
turbulent fluctuations that the PSP will measure. This CAREER investigation is
also timely, because it will lay the theoretical and numerical framework needed
for interpretation of the PSP signals before the first measurements become
available at the end of 2018. The outcome of this research combined with the
future PSP observations will not only contribute to expand our knowledge of the
fundamentals of Alfvenic turbulence in this region, but will lead to
transformative advances towards determining the viability of Alfvenic turbulence
as a major mechanism for the heating of the corona and the acceleration of the
solar wind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.