* 1752994
* CAREER: CDS&amp;E: One- and Two-Dimensional Fourier Transform Approaches for Characterizing Nano-Assemblies with Ion Mobility-Mass Spectrometry
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* James Prell, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 02/29/2024
* USD 575,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor James Prell at the University of Oregon is developing
analytical methods for accurately determining the composition of mixtures of
large polymers and/or molecular assemblies using mass spectrometry. Mass
spectrometry is a tool for chemical analysis conventionally used to measure the
mass and determine the structure of many types of molecules. Complex mixtures
are a major target of research in industrial and biochemical applications as
well as from the perspective of fundamental science. These mixtures can have
properties that depend strongly on the relative amounts of their different
constituents as well as how they are assembled. From synthetic chemicals to
models of biological membranes, such systems can be extremely challenging to
characterize using mass spectrometry or any other technique. Dr. Prell and his
group are developing new approaches for these characterization challenges,
ultimately seeking to facilitate precise control of physical and chemical
properties. The project combines state-of-the-art mass spectrometry with
advanced mathematical and signal processing tools. Publicly available, open-
source software created as part of this project will be made available for
researchers around the world to use in analyzing these types of samples. At the
same time, Dr. Prell seeks to increase the participation of undergraduates from
diverse backgrounds in STEM research through a research-based workshop course.
Students in this course are learning and implementing strategies for
communicating science research to audiences ranging from middle school through
professional colleagues at regional and national STEM
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Prell is establishing a vigorous,
integrated program of research and education to simplify the analysis of
nanoscale chemical assemblies using mass spectrometry, and to increase the
retention and research participation of STEM undergraduates from
underrepresented groups. There are three specific aims: 1) to establish Fourier
Transform-based methodology for analyzing extremely congested electrospray mass
spectra of mixed-subunit nanoassemblies, including copolymers and lipoprotein
assemblies; 2) to introduce two-dimensional Fourier Transform-based measurement
tools for signal isolation in extremely congested electrospray mass spectra of
nanoassemblies for which prior ion mobility separation or ordinary Fourier
Transform are insufficient; and 3) to increase undergraduate participation in
and communication of scientific research. Measurement tools target
characterization of subunit interactions, assembly shape and size, and assembly
kinetics in a wide variety of applications related to the study of
nanoassemblies. Software being developed is open-source and publicly available,
allowing rapid implementation and adaptation by other research groups.
Educational goals are being addressed by implementing a 1-credit workshop course
for undergraduates at the University of Oregon using themes drawn from this
research as prototypes. Students in the course develop "elevator talks" for
delivery to a UO STEM bridge program; local middle- and high school outreach
modules; and a research presentation abstract for submission to a regional or
national scientific conference. These efforts build off of the PI's expertise in
mass spectrometry and experience supporting URM student representation and
inclusion in science as a faculty sponsor of UO's chapter of the Society for the
Advancement of Chicanos/Hispanics and Native Americans in
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.