* 1752096
* EAGER:Identifying and Disseminating Transformative Professional Development of Engineering Undergraduates Who Perform Outreach
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Michael Alley, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 09/30/2020
* USD 299,999.00

Undergraduates in science, technology, engineering, and math not only need to
enter the workforce with strong technical skills, but also with strong
professional skills such as writing, presenting, and working in teams.
Unfortunately, many leaders in industry report that the professional skills of
these students are not strong enough. Therefore, colleges and universities are
looking for new ways to strengthen these skills. Adding additional course
content to existing courses or creating new courses to teach this content is
often not feasible due to already crowded curricula. Outside of courses, one
opportunity for undergraduates in technical fields to learn professional skills
is through outreach activities. In these activities, undergraduates reach out to
younger students in elementary, middle, and high schools and communicate what
occurs in their respective fields. For example, outreach could include hosting a
summer camp for middle school students on robotics or visiting a high school to
give an electrical engineering demonstration. Not only do undergraduates receive
training for these outreach activities, but they have the opportunity to
practice what was learned multiple times. Recently, one outreach program, the
Engineering Ambassadors Network, discovered that one of their particular
training-and-practice sequences led the participating undergraduates to
dramatically improve their presentation skills. Because scores of outreach
programs exist around the country, the question arises: Do other outreach
programs have training-and-practice sequences that lead undergraduates to
greatly improve other professional skills?

This project seeks to determine which outreach programs in the United States
provide the most transformative professional development of the participating
undergraduates from engineering. To accomplish this goal, we have identified
four tasks: (i) perform a systematic review of existing outreach programs
involving engineering undergraduates; (ii) convene a workshop with outreach
advisors to establish a network and thematic strands of common practices; (iii)
synthesize the data obtained from the workshops to identify transformative
practices of professional development; and (iv) convene two national training
workshops to disseminate the practices to engineering undergraduates who perform
outreach. An advisory board, composed of a number of stakeholders, provides
guidance for this project. To disseminate the project's results, we are using a
number of venues and a range of communication methods. In particular, we are
targeting the many programs that conduct organized outreach performed by
engineering undergraduates. Specifically, dissemination is occurring through the
two national workshops mentioned above, academic papers, an online report
targeting a wide audience, and online tutorials for the transformative practices
of professional development.