* 1752513
* CAREER: Investigating Injury Mechanism and Prevention Strategies of Neonatal Brachial Plexus Palsy
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Anita Singh, Widener University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 08/31/2024
* USD 549,214.00

The brachial plexus is a group of nerves traveling from the spinal cord in the
neck down to the arm. During childbirth, this group of nerves can be injured by
mechanical forces, like stretching and pulling. Such a stretch injury to the
brachial plexus is called neonatal brachial plexus palsy and can result in
varying degrees of paralysis. Though neonatal brachial plexus palsy can be quite
detrimental to mobility, there is little data describing how stretching neonatal
tissue contributes to injury or how to prevent it, particularly while under the
oxygen-starved conditions associated with difficult births. This study will
define injury thresholds, i.e., the point at which the tissue structure is
irreparably changed by stretching, using animal models. The tissue property data
will be used to develop a computational model capable of predicting human-like
injury thresholds, which can be used to advance the science of obstetrical care
through training and education. The study will test hypotheses relating
anatomical location, structural composition, and magnitude of forces exerted on
the tissue to the effects on tissue failure and rate of recovery. Research and
education are integrated through undergraduate and graduate laboratory-based
research, development of a new graduate-level course on integration of
biomedical engineering with clinical need, and promoting biomedical engineering
in underserved schools of the Philadelphia region with hands-on activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Singh's long-term career goal is to minimize the
occurrence of neonatal brachial plexus palsy by providing a detailed
understanding of the injury mechanism and to develop prevention and treatment
strategies based on fundamental knowledge. Toward this goal, Dr. Singh's
research objectives are to: (1) provide a detailed understanding of the
biomechanical, physiological, and histological properties of both the normal and
hypoxic neonatal brachial plexus in neonatal piglets; and (2) utilize the animal
model data to train a computational model to investigate the effects of the
birth process on the brachial plexus. Specific hypotheses that will be tested
include: (1) neonatal brachial plexus tissue will fail at the root/trunk
segment; (2) tissue strain rate corresponds to rate of injury recovery; and (3)
the extent of stretch directly affects histological outcome. In vivo
biomechanical testing will be conducted using large animal surrogates.
Experiments will evaluate the effects of stretch and strain using high-speed
cameras, neurophysiological recordings, and histological assessments. The
computational model development, starting from an existing framework, will focus
on incorporating the parameters for neonatal brachial plexus mechanical
properties. The insights gained from these studies will bridge a current
knowledge gap, connecting the functional response of the neonatal brachial
plexus with injury threshold for permanent damage. The research will culminate
with a promising clinical translational tool aimed at reducing the prevalence of
human injury at birth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.