* 1752522
* CAREER: Enhancing urban sustainability: an integrative approach toward synergistic solutions to reduce urban temperatures, air pollution, and water use in a changing climate
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2024
* Kelly Sanders, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2024
* USD 509,822.00

This CAREER project tackles three critical urban sustainability challenges:
urban warming and extreme heat, air pollution, and water conservation. The
central themes are to (1) investigate how air pollution dynamics are impacted by
both the urban heat island effect and global climate change, (2) quantify how
the urban heat island effect and air pollution dynamics are modulated by drought
conditions, (3) explore solutions to synergistically reduce urban warming, air
pollution, and water use, and (4) disseminate research results using integrated
education and outreach. The research aims to strike a balance between advancing
fundamental engineering and science knowledge, and achieving practical research
conclusions that can be used to solve environmental problems, allowing the
conclusions to inform public policy and education. Such knowledge is critical to
give cities a sound engineering and science basis for developing policies to
synergistically mitigate extreme heat, improve air quality, and reduce water
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Themes (1) and (2) will be investigated using advanced
physicochemical modeling, measurement data-driven approaches, and a newly
proposed technique to quantify urban air pollution futures under uncertainty in
climate change. Theme (3) will make use of scientific advances under themes (1)
and (2) to enable the quantitative investigation of several policy-relevant
research questions. These questions focus on the potential benefits and
unintended consequences on air pollution of solutions intended to reduce urban
temperatures and/or urban water use. Research, education, and outreach will be
integrated and assessed by: (a) communicating research results to policy makers,
utilities, and other stakeholders on a project advisory board, providing
pathways for developing environmental policies, and receiving feedback on the
research to ensure that it can translate to the real world; (b) carrying out
K-12 outreach by creating a research-based science module for underprivileged
middle school students; (c) continuing pursuit of an immersive and visceral
approach for inspiring students and citizens to live sustainable lives by
creating and performing music that gives them a greater connection with their
environment; and (d) training graduate students and incorporating research
results into the PI's graduate course at USC.