* 1752900
* CAREER: Understanding the Coupling between Clouds and Midlatitude Dynamics at Synoptic and Global Scales
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Kevin Grise, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2024
* USD 505,812.00

The typical pattern of clouds around a mid-latitude cyclone features high clouds
east of the center and along the trailing cold front, and low clouds in the cold
sector to the west. This general pattern has been known since the 1920s but the
role of the clouds in cyclone evolution, and the effects of the cloud pattern on
atmospheric circulation and climate, are still under study. The topic is of
practical as well as scientific interest as clouds can only be represented in
approximate form in current weather and climate models, and cloud errors limit
the quality of simulations and forecasts. Results of the work have direct
bearing on the quality of weather forecasts and climate projections used to
provide guidance to decision makers and the public. In addition, the educational
activities supported under this CAREER award advance science teaching at the
high school, college, and graduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
focuses specifically on cloud radiative effects (CREs), meaning the cooling
caused by clouds as they reflect shortwave solar radiation back to space and the
warming effect when they intercept outgoing longwave radiation emitted by the
earth. In the deep clouds found in the eastern sector the longwave and shortwave
effects show large cancellation, while shortwave cooling dominates in the low
clouds on the western side. Preliminary work by the PI shows that, at least in
the Southern Hemisphere, CRE evolves over the lifecycle of the cyclone, forming
a north-south dipole during the decay phase with warming on the equatorward
side. The north-south CRE dipole in the decaying stage could affect the
meridional temperature gradient along the SH storm track, possibly helping to
reestablish the meridional temperature contrast after cyclone passage and thus
promoting further cyclone activity or influencing the latitude of the upper-
level jet stream. The radiative effect of clouds around cyclones could also
influence the behavior of low-frequency climate variability and secular climate
change, both of which involve latitudinal shifts of jet streams and storm
tracks. The work considers the dynamic and thermodynamic controls on the clouds
as well as the influence of clouds on the midlatitude circulation. It is
conducted through a combination of observational analysis and model
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational component of the project
includes efforts at the high school, college, and graduate level. At the high
school level, the PI works with education experts at the Center for Teaching
Excellence on the UVA campus, the Environmental Studies Academy (ESA) at Western
Albermarle High School, and the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research
(UCAR). The goal is to develop a teaching module to introduce high school
students to the role of clouds in the climate system. The module will be
disseminated nationally through the web portal at UCAR. Undergraduate education
is promoted through the development of a course on climate modeling and
analysis. One issue addressed by the course is the lack of computer skills
commonly found among undergraduates, which limits their ability to engage in
scientific research. The course involves training in the use of data analysis
software and hands-on projects conducted by groups of two to three students.
Students from the class are recruited to conduct research in the summers, with
emphasis on the recruitment and retention of underrepresented minorities. On the
graduate level, the project supports two students who, in addition to their
research and classwork, serve as mentors for undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.