* 1752912
* CAREER: Fostering Innovative Scientists Through Development of Biomimetic Catalysts for Discovery of New Medicines.
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Benjamin Gorske, Bowdoin College
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 03/31/2024
* USD 512,044.00

Life is one of the most powerful forces shaping our planet. Thus, mimicking the
molecules of life (one of the NSF "Grand Challenges" for 21st century science)
presents an opportunity to controllably harness this power to benefit humanity.
Currently, many medicines are adaptations of molecules produced by living
organisms. By constructing artificial analogs of the enzymes that Nature uses to
build molecules, new potential medicines may be discovered. In this project, Dr.
Gorske is developing enzyme mimics to accomplish this goal. The design of these
enzyme mimics is allowing undergraduates to construct them with minimal
training. This is enabling students to gain experience conducting meaningful
research prior to choosing a major. Such early access to these research
experiences, which include both summer research internships and course-related
laboratories, is stimulating interest in pursuing science as a career.
Especially, underprepared and underrepresented students and groups are being
exposed to STEM fields. In the process, students are contributing directly to
the development of new technology for facilitating the discovery of urgently
needed medicines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Chemical
Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Gorske of Bowdoin College is
developing biomimetic catalysts for nucleophilic trifluoromethylations that
deliver enantiopure alpha-trifluoromethyl alcohol and beta-trifluoromethyl
carbonyl subunits for construction of new biological probes and medicines. These
studies are elucidating the structural design parameters of peptidomimetic
catalysts that maintain their competency in polar solvents and facilitate
nucleophilic trifluoromethylation reactions. In turn, the results of these
investigations are informing iterative cycles of catalyst design and structure-
activity relationship analysis that aim to produce highly enantio- and regio-
selective nucleophilic trifluoromethylation catalysts with wide substrate scope.
More broadly, a new class of structured catalyst scaffolds designed to be
generally applicable to a wide range of reactions is being realized, while
simultaneously providing early but authentic research experiences for
undergraduates. These experiences are specifically designed to enhance learning
outcomes and enthusiasm for pursuit of STEM careers, especially among members of
underrepresented groups in STEM fields that are identified through partnerships
with both internal and local external organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.