* 1752079
* CAREER: Tissue Engineering Better Cell Therapies for Wound Healing.
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2018,02/28/2021
* Ronke Olabisi, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 02/28/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Chronic wounds are skin injuries that recur or fail to heal by 6 weeks. These
wounds affect 6.5 million patients in the US and this number is growing rapidly
due to a drastic increase in the number of diabetics, the obese, and the elderly
--all populations in which wound healing is impaired. Mesenchymal stem cells
(commonly known as adult stem cells) and insulin applied to wound surfaces have
each shown promise in healing otherwise unhealable wounds. Mesenchymal stem
cells assist wound healing by secreting factors that promote actions critical to
wound healing, such as new blood vessel formation, increases in the production
of skin components, and recruitment of cells that clean wounds and form scar
tissue. Insulin assists wound healing by recruiting mesenchymal stem cells and
skin cells to the wound area. Motivated by the recent observation that wounds
treated with a combination of mesenchymal stem cells and insulin-producing cells
healed faster than normal and without scarring, the objective of this project is
to identify the type of insulin needed to achieve the observed accelerated
healing and reduced scarring and to uncover the wound healing pathways that are
recruited. Research results have the potential to transform wound care by
enabling rapid healing that would avert the morbidity and mortality associated
with chronic wounds and to enhance reconstructive and plastic surgery outcomes
by reducing or eliminating scar formation. The project's long-term educational
goal is to present future engineers with tissue engineering research in
unfamiliar contexts, like aviation, to inspire innovative thinking for future
careers in biomedical engineering. In pursuit of this goal, this project's
educational objective is to apply research principles to teaching and to develop
tissue engineering research modules that integrate research, teaching,
mentorship, and learning for use in biomedical engineering course-based
undergraduate research experiences (CUREs). The educational and outreach
approach is to recruit female students, group them in teams and provide hands-on
research activities with wound healing models that will enable them to formulate
hypotheses and models, and to propose, conduct, and present experiments that
will further their understanding of research. The women will be required to
present their research in scientific meetings and to K-12 graders in an aviation
science club.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's research focus is on
investigating the impact of mesynchymal stem cells (MSCs) and insulin producing
cells (IPCs), both individually and coencapsulated, on wound healing and its
pathways, and on identifying how cell-cell vs. cell-wound interactions govern
the secretome of encapsulated cells. The project is motivated by recent studies
from the PI's lab that achieved dramatically accelerated (14 vs 40 days), scar-
free wound healing after combining these cells. The research plan has four
specific aims. Aim 1 is to dissect, via in vitro studies, the role of IPCs vs
insulin in survival and function of the coencapsulated cells, i.e., whether it
is insulin itself, the presence of the IPCs or the hormone release that improves
survival and function. Aim 2 is to dissect, via in vivo studies in mice, the
role of IPCs vs insulin in the accelerated wound healing, i. e, whether insulin-
producing fibroblasts have the same effect as commercially available IPCs
(RIN-5F and RIN-14B) that secrete additional products. Aim 3 is to determine the
extent, via in vitro studies, that coencapsulation promotes MSC factor release
in comparison to MSC factor release elicited by wound environments, i.e.,
whether the Akt signaling pathway, which is critical to MSC survival, is
activated more strongly in MSCs coencapsulated with IPCs or in MSCs delivered
singly to wounds. Aim 4 is to determine the extent that IPCs+MSCs reduce scar
formation, i.e., to extend the work to a limited study in pigs, which have an
epidermis and dermis similar to human skin and heal at a comparable rate. In
summary, this project will examine the metabolic pathways involved in IPC+MSC
wound healing, the interplay between the two cells and the wound environment,
and whether lessons learned can be applied to other cell
therapies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.