* 1752170
* CAREER:Feedback-Controlled Microfluidic Chips with Integrated Sensor Networks for Blood Analysis
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Ali Fatih Sarioglu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Efficient exchange of metabolic signals with other tissues turns the blood into
an opportunity to monitor and diagnose physiological and pathological
conditions. Among the constituents of blood, white blood cells represent a
particularly rich source of information due to their active involvement in the
immune response of the body. As such, technologies that can rapidly characterize
blood samples and extract reliable information are in ever-increasing demand for
both clinical and basic research applications. The proposed work aims to develop
smart microchips that can reliably analyze white blood cells from small blood
samples without any sample preparation. These microchips will be low-cost,
disposable, and will include built-in electrodes that can convert the chemical
information from white blood cells into electrical signals to be interpreted by
a smartphone and transmitted to the healthcare provider. The proposed research
therefore has the potential to revolutionize healthcare delivery by enabling
people to self-administer blood tests at home or in mobile settings. Besides his
research, the PI is fully committed to the educational aspects of his profession
and aspires to be a role model for next-generation engineers. The PI's
educational goal is to create application-focused multidisciplinary courses,
research opportunities and learning experiences for students. To this end, the
PI proposes (1) to organize innovation tournaments to develop
micro/nanotechnologies for solving biomedical challenges, (2) to implement a
laboratory module in the graduate- and undergraduate-level courses, (3) to
involve and mentor undergraduate and graduate students in conducting the
research activities of this proposal, (4) to mentor high school teachers to
attract K-12 and High School Students and underrepresented groups to science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite being highly effective in manipulating
cells, microfluidic devices lack native sensing schemes and hence often act as
upstream sample preparation elements before quantitative measurements typically
performed with a laboratory instrument. The disconnect between microfluidic
manipulation and quantitative measurements is an important limitation that
hampers the widespread adoption of these tools outside of academic research
laboratories, for example in resource-limited or in point-of-care settings,
where they can be truly transformative in healthcare delivery. The PI's career
goal is to develop polymer-based lab-on-a-chip (LoC) platforms with built-in
sensor networks, whose purposely simple hardware will be augmented by complex
computational algorithms, to function as content-aware, autonomous microfluidic
devices for quantitative cell analysis. To achieve this goal, the PI will adopt
a highly multidisciplinary approach combining traditionally-distant disciplines
such as microsystem engineering, information theory, data science, and
biomedicine. This proposal will (1) design and fabricate plastic microfluidic
chips wired with networks of&lt;br/&gt;interconnected electrical micro-sensors,
each individually designed to produce a signature response that can be
recognized among others through computation, (2) develop computational
algorithms to process compressed data from the sensor network by utilizing both
model-based signal processing and machine learning approaches, (3) develop open-
and closed-loop controlled microfluidic systems, where a host
of&lt;br/&gt;actuators are combined with spatiotemporal data generated by
networked sensors to extract biological information from the sample under test,
(4) combine all of the developed concepts to create an autonomous and adaptive
microfluidic system that can analyze whole blood samples by label-free
immunophenotyping of white blood cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.