* 1752995
* CAREER: Dynamic water table controls on reactive solute transport near the groundwater-surface water interface
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Audrey Sawyer, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 547,612.00

Water table fluctuations influence the transport of nutrients and contaminants
between soils, groundwater, and surface water. The water table moves up and down
over short and long timespans, particularly near rivers. Water table
fluctuations introduce oxygen to shallow groundwater, which can react with
ecologically important dissolved substances like organic carbon, nitrate, iron
and manganese and have cascading effects on contaminants like arsenic. This
project aims to understand how groundwater chemistry evolves in response to
water table fluctuations over a range of timescales. Field observations,
controlled laboratory column experiments, and computer models will quantify the
movement of reactive solutes such as oxygen, nitrate, iron, and manganese
beneath a fluctuating water table. Results will improve our understanding of
dynamic changes in both groundwater and river water quality and the management
of these vital water resources. This project will also introduce a broad
audience of citizens and future scientists to dynamic surface water-groundwater
interactions through the creation of a hands-on outdoor laboratory facility and
museum exhibit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water table fluctuations play an important
role in reactive solute transport and water quality near rivers. When the water
table rises, entrapped soil air exchanges oxygen with surrounding pore water,
which travels downward when the water table falls. The enhanced supply of oxygen
stimulates aerobic respiration, nitrification-denitrification, and oxidation of
dissolved iron and manganese in groundwater. Water table fluctuations can
propagate tens to hundreds of meters into an aquifer in response to changes in
river stage. Yet the implications for reactive transport and water quality near
rivers remain poorly understood. The overarching goal of this project is to
quantify relationships between water table fluctuations, redox transformations,
and solute export from aquifers to rivers. This project leverages novel sensor
technology to observe the effects of water table fluctuations on groundwater
chemistry in controlled column experiments and natural riparian aquifers. The
four field sites in this study experience a range of water table fluctuations in
response to tides, storms, and seasons. Each site has unique properties that
influence reactive transport near the water table. However, pairs of sites also
have commonalities in climate, lithology, catchment scale, land use, and
geomorphology. Numerical fluid flow and reactive transport models will quantify
dynamics in biogeochemical transformation rates and solute fluxes in these
riparian aquifers. Observations and model results will be synthesized to
generate a quantitative understanding of the effects of water table fluctuations
on reactive solute transport in dynamic riparian
aquifers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.