* 1752848
* CAREER: Functional Brain Networks Mediating Positivity Bias in Healthy Aging
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2024
* Maital Neta, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 04/30/2024
* USD 766,508.00

Many significant social decisions are made in situations of high uncertainty.
One source of uncertainty is based on the fact that most of human communication
is nonverbal. As a result, people are faced with the task of understanding
nonverbal signals that could be interpreted in a variety of ways. As one
example, a silent pause in conversation can communicate discomfort, anger,
contentment, thoughtfulness, or empathy. Depending on the context (a job
interview, a first date, meeting with a teacher, or a medical exam), one's
ability to resolve such uncertainty can have profound consequences. Responses to
uncertainty can also reveal important individual differences in emotion
processing and coping strategies, and deficiencies in these skills can have
widespread effects on mental and social functioning. The practical and financial
costs to society, education, and employment are far-reaching. Yet, very little
is known about the processes that allow us to cope with and respond to
uncertainty. This CAREER project considers the ways in which different people
respond to these situations of extreme uncertainty. In comparison to younger
adults, older adults are more likely to be optimistic and to have more positive
interpretations of uncertainty. By integrating social psychology with
developmental science, cognitive neuroscience and network sciences, this project
seeks to better understand responses to uncertainty throughout development. It
focuses on how these situations are interpreted and on how brain function and
connectivity may promote a certain response. The negative thoughts and feelings
some individuals experience in response to uncertainty can have deleterious
outcomes on health, work performance, and relationships. This project lays the
foundation for developing interventions to disrupt these maladaptive processes
in favor of more productive responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this CAREER
project, brain function and brain connectivity are measured in younger adults to
characterize the source of individual differences in valence bias, or the extent
to which someone interprets uncertainty as having a positive or negative
emotional meaning. Network analytic tools are applied to establish a link
between the basic functional organization of the brain and valence bias, and to
provide information about variability in brain function as it relates to the
bias. Because older adults have a natural bias to interpret ambiguous cues as
positive, this research examines the same brain function and connectivity
measures in older adults to determine the mechanisms underlying this enhanced
positivity. The long-term goal is to explore the brain mechanisms that can
explain what makes one person experience a positive emotion when another person,
in response to the same event, experiences a negative emotion. The research
considers how people can learn to "do it better" to increase well-being and
resilience in response to potential threats. The findings will shed light on how
individuals with a more optimistic view learn, over time, to override a
fundamental default negativity and instead resolve uncertainty in a positive
light.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.