* 1752244
* CAREER: Novel Synthetic Applications of Poly(cationic) lambda-3 Iodanes
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Sarah Wengryniuk, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 03/31/2023
* USD 650,000.00

With this CAREER award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Chemistry
Division supports the research of Professor Sarah Wengryniuk in the Department
of Chemistry at Temple University. Professor Wengryniuk and her students develop
innovative approaches for the synthesis of medium-sized (7-10 atoms) oxygen-
containing ring compounds. These challenging molecular scaffolds often have
unique biological activities. The Wengryniuk lab develops novel methodology
based on a new class of environmentally friendly, low toxicity nitrogen ligands.
The first goal of this award is to develop new cyclization modes to access 5-8
membered rings. The second aim applies new methodology developed in the
Wengryniuk lab to the synthesis of the Heliannuols, enabling the development of
these medium-ring natural products as novel environmentally-benign herbicides.
This funding also supports the establishment of an all-female mentorship team
the Temple "OWLS" (Outstanding Women Leaders in Science) which will participate
in K-8 outreach, science fair mentorship, and summer research internships for
high school students. The team also sponsors an annual Women In Science
symposium to help young women to prepare to pursue advanced degrees and
leadership roles in science and engineering fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hypervalent iodine reagents (HVIs) are powerful tools in
organic synthesis due to their diverse reactivity, low toxicity, and low cost.
Professor Wengryniuk recently reported the first synthetic applications of
(poly)cationic lambda3-iodanes (N-HVIs), an underutilized class of hypervalent
iodine reagents which display unique and divergent reactivity from traditional
hypervalent iodine reagents. This research leverages unique expertise and
ongoing efforts in the development of these powerful reagents as new methods for
total synthesis and umpolung approaches to carbon-hydrogen functionalization.
Specifically, this research develops novel approaches to the synthesis of
diverse oxygen heterocycles through umpolung activation of alcohol
functionalities. This team further leverages a novel ring-expansion methodology
discovered by Professor Wengryniuk for the synthesis of medium-ring benzoxepane
and benzoxecane natural products. Heliannuols are a new class of environmentally
benign herbicides. This funding also supports the establishment of an all-female
mentorship team the Temple "OWLS" (Outstanding Women Leaders in Science) which
participates in activities designed to help young women prepare for advanced
degrees and leadership roles in chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.