* 1752262
* CAREER: Trajectory Planning for Highly Dynamic Legged Robots in Complex Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Hae-Won Park, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 03/31/2020
* USD 111,619.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project will improve the
ability of legged robots to traverse complex environments. The ultimate
objective of the project is to rival the ability of animals to navigate daunting
obstacles in order to reach a desired goal. In contrast to standard quasi-static
approaches to robot path planning, these bio-inspired methods will allow highly
dynamic behavior -- that is, during its motion the robot will be able to pass
through positions that would be impossibly unbalanced if the robot was standing
still. This may occur as the robot makes a continuous series of jumps, without
pausing at the intermediate points. Numerical efficiency, provided by a
hierarchical decomposition into well-behaved subproblems, will allow the
trajectories to be computed as they are needed. First, solutions will be
generated based on a greatly simplified dynamic model, in terms of "global"
quantities that describe the translation and rotation of a robot-fixed reference
frame. Of particular interest are the force pulses generated during the instants
when the jumping robot is in contact with other objects. Possible solution
trajectories will be grouped by the number of hops required to reach the
destination and the foot locations on the obstacles. Finally a detailed solution
will incorporate the "shape" variables that describe the configuration of the
robot components with respect to the robot-fixed frame. The findings from this
study will help lead to the creation of legged robots for use in inhospitable or
dangerous real-world environments, including for disaster response, military
applications, and exploration of inaccessible or inhospitable locations. The
project will also build upon the appeal of agile legged robots for education and
outreach to high school, undergraduate, and graduate students, including
underrepresented minorities, to encourage the development of the next generation
of engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this study is to establish
close connections between the mathematical modeling of legged robot systems,
trajectory planning strategies, and the hardware design principles needed to
create highly dynamic legged robots navigating complex unstructured
environments. To realize the goal, this project will develop a hierarchical
understanding of the dynamic behavior of position variables (global position and
orientation) and shape variables (internal configuration) under the application
of contact forces. Based on this understanding, a multilevel process will be
sought for designing a collision-free feasible trajectory for the position
variables, and then deforming the trajectory while gradually taking into account
the effects of the shape variables. This will be achieved by (1) introducing
model structures for legged robot systems that provide a hierarchical
understanding and abstraction of complex dynamics, (2) establishing a
trajectory-planning framework that combines approaches from convex optimization
and numerical continuation methods by utilizing the newly obtained model
structures, and (3) exploring hardware design principles that are tightly
integrated with the trajectory-planning framework for rigorous validation and
demonstration of the methods using torque-controlled robotic quadrupeds.
Realization of these aims will lay the foundation for a new class of trajectory-
planning problems for the locomotion of highly dynamic legged robots navigating
complex environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.