* 1752673
* CAREER: Environmental Drivers of Life History Variation in Coastal Ecosystems
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Paul Harnik, Franklin and Marshall College
* Continuing Grant
* Dena Smith
* 09/30/2020
* USD 588,826.00

Differences in the availability of resources among regions and over time are
expected to lead to differences in life history traits in animal populations.
While life history variation has been investigated using experimental
approaches, it is poorly understood in natural systems. This study will
investigate the relationships between resource availability and the egg size of
bivalve molluscs in modern coastal ecosystems. The PI will compare modern
populations with historical populations to determine the rates at which
populations have responded to changes in resource availability. In addition,
this study aims to increase the diversity of students participating in Earth and
ocean sciences through the development of a pipeline for underrepresented
minority undergraduates at Franklin and Marshall College that involves early
engagement in field and laboratory research and an interdisciplinary outreach
program involving junior high school students and teachers in the Gulf
Coast.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will involve successive years of sampling
contemporary and historical bivalve populations along a primary production
gradient in the northern Gulf of Mexico with teams of undergraduate students.
Isotopic analyses of mollusk shells from contemporary populations in coastal
Louisiana, Alabama, and Florida will be used to calibrate the relationships
between present-day primary production, sea surface temperature, and larval
traits. Contemporary relationships between environmental conditions and life
history will be used to investigate environmental correlates of life history
variation in the northern Gulf of Mexico over past millennia. This study also
will work with existing museum collections to examine the associations between
life history traits and environmental gradients over broader spatial scales.
This study will include an integrated outreach program in coastal Alabama and
Louisiana that engages junior high school students and teachers in
reconstructing human-environmental history through the visual arts and the
historical lens provided by shells radiocarbon-dated as a part of the planned
research activities. Results will be disseminated through conference
presentations by undergraduate researchers and the PI, publications, public
databases, and exhibition of pre-college student environmental artwork at
collaborating Gulf Coast marine labs and other public
venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.