* 1752982
* CAREER: Coupled Hydrology and Mechanics of Fine-Grained Soils and Sedimentary Rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Ian Bourg, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 02/28/2023
* USD 400,000.00

Fine-grained rocks (shale, mudstone) exist as caprocks, host rocks, and source
rocks for a range of subsurface water, energy, and carbon resources. They also
represent a control on carbon capture and storage, high-level radioactive waste
storage, groundwater sources and storage and shale hydrocarbon extraction. Fine-
grained soils play an equally important role in agriculture and soil carbon
storage. This importance of clay-rich media derives largely from their distinct
hydrologic and mechanical properties (ultra-low permeability, swelling-shrinking
and cracking). These properties are of singular importance in controlling fluid
flow in the subsurface (where fine-grained rocks constitute roughly two-thirds
of the sedimentary rock mass), yet they remain a sparsely charted frontier
research area in groundwater hydrology.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop a general theory of the hydrologic properties of fine-
grained soils and sedimentary rocks. This goal requires understanding the
coupled hydrologic, mechanical, and chemical properties of porous media on
multiple scales, from the nanometer scale (where aggregation and swelling of
clay particles takes place) to the 10-100s of meters that control the bulk
mechanical and flow properties of the rock. The proposed research relies on a
combination of simulation methodologies adapted to each length scale of
interest, along with rigorous experimental validations at each scale. Key
projected outcomes include detailed fundamental understanding of the meso- and
nanoscale properties of fine-grained media and new constitutive relations
describing the coupled hydrologic-mechanical-chemical properties of these media.
The major education and outreach goal is to develop the use of molecular
dynamics simulations as a pedagogical tool that can illustrate the fundamental
basis of important scientific concepts and phenomena in an intuitive, and hands-
on manner. This tool will be developed for both first year of the Environmental
Engineering undergraduate curriculum and as part of a web-based interface (a
Science Gateway) that will enable the broader community (e.g., high school
students and teachers) to visualize and explore simulation results stored on the
high-performance data storage systems at the National Energy Research Scientific
Computing Center (NERSC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.