* 1752530
* CAREER: Controlling Austenite Stability and Response During Deformation of Advanced High Strength Steels
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Kester Clarke, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2023
* USD 555,000.00

Steels are ubiquitous as structural materials, and are found in nearly every
piece of transportation, shipping, construction, or mining equipment; in
buildings, roads, pipelines, appliances, and in many other applications. In the
past 15 years, driven by increasingly challenging fuel economy standards, sheet
steels used in automotive bodies have achieved strengths that are five times
those of previous alloys. Normally, increasing strength results in a compromise
in ductility - the ability for a material to stretch or bend without fracture -
but these new Advanced High Strength Steel (AHSS) sheets minimize the severity
of this compromise. The primary way this has been achieved is by designing the
microscopic structure of the steels to resist fracture, based on new
understanding of how to control this structure when manufacturing steels. This
Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) Award supports fundamental
scientific research to uncover the relationships between the processing of these
steels, the microscopic structure, and their properties and performance. A broad
range of deformation conditions will be studied to better understand the
material response and allow the design of steels with even better properties.
This will further improve the automobile structures and help meet stringent fuel
economy standards, and can also be translated to other sectors to improve the
efficiency and performance in many other steel
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will aim to close the design loop
to develop a fundamental understanding of austenite stability during
thermomechanical processing (TMP) of advanced high strength steel (AHSS) alloys
that use the Transformation Induced Plasticity (TRIP) mechanism to yield
exceptional combinations of strength and ductility. The ability for strain-
induced austenite-to-martensite transformation to suppress strain localization,
and thereby produce excellent properties, is dependent on the thermal and
mechanical stability of the austenite; if austenite is too stable, it will not
transform during deformation, and if austenite is unstable, it will not be
retained at room temperature. Current approaches to stabilize austenite focus on
increasing carbon content by performing precise thermal cycles that allow
diffusion of carbon from other phases to austenite. Here the research focuses on
the use of deformation conditions, including strain rate, strain state,
temperature, and stress state/pressure, to understand how to further control
austenite stability by performing focused mechanical testing of specifically
designed alloys. The understanding developed in this work will result in a
science-based understanding of austenite stability in AHSS that can be
incorporated into thermodynamic and mechanical materials models, and which will
enable the use of Integrated Computation Materials Engineering (ICME) and
Materials Genome Initiative (MGI) principles to realize advanced manufacturing
and further improve the exceptional properties that can be realized in these
low-alloy, low-cost materials that underpin our efforts for lightweight
structures in the transportation sector and beyond.Â &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.