* 1752436
* BRIGHT-CS: Building Student Retention through Individuated Guided coHort Training in Computer Science
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Ryoko Yamaguchi, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,195,708.00

BRIGHT-CS creates a comprehensive computer science and empowerment model for
girls of color in computing. Through deep engagement with select high schools,
universities, non-profit and community organizations, BRIGHT-CS builds and
assesses the strength of an ecosystem that supports girls of color. It
acknowledges the larger national effort to achieve gender equity in computing
and is intentional in building effective ecosystems to support that. In the
spirit of culturally responsive pedagogies, BRIGHT-CS builds on the premise that
girls need their identities to be affirmed coincident with their computing
skills being honed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is centered in two locations,
in Arlington, VA and in New York City. The targeted groups of students and
schools are selected to engage in educational experiences at the intersection of
formal and informal learning. They experience a comprehensive set of experiences
that begin with affirming their place in computing as young women and girls. The
critical partnerships developed in each location are central to testing the
proposed hypothesis that effective ecosystems are required for promoting and
fostering the sustained success of girls of color in computing.