* 1752612
* CAREER: Many-body expansions for strongly correlated systems
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Nicholas Mayhall, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 03/31/2024
* USD 575,305.00

Nicholas Mayhall, of Virginia Tech, is supported by an award from the Chemical
Theory, Models, and Computational Methods program in the Division of Chemistry
to develop new theoretical models and computer software capable of simulating,
so-called "strongly correlated' molecules, which have been difficult to study
with conventional quantum mechanical simulation approaches. These types of
molecules constitute a highly important class of systems due to their role in a
number of important processes, such as photosynthesis and homogeneous
transition-metal catalysis. Strongly correlated systems are difficult to model,
in part, due to the inability to divide up the molecule into small parts
("inseparability") to focus on only one part at a time. This requires
simulations to be performed on an entire system, which is usually far too
complicated for even the world's fastest supercomputers. Prof. Mayhall's
research is focused on studying the extent of this inseparability in different
types of molecular systems. This knowledge will then be used to design better
theories and software which start from a "separated" initial description,
reintroducing the effects of inseparability in a slow and controlled manner, to
avoid the large growth in computational complexity while maintaining accurate
results. This work has the potential to contribute to technologies involving
energy production and chemical catalysis. Prof. Mayhall's outreach program
involves developing two sets of educational modules targeting distinct
demographics. The first is focused on inmates in regional detention facilities,
and the second is directed toward female high-school students interested in STEM
fields. The latter work is done in collaboration with established activities at
Virginia Tech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goals of this project are two-fold,
1) obtain better understanding of inseparable systems, such as strongly-
correlated molecules and collective excited states in molecular aggregates and
materials, and 2) develop new computational methods capable of modeling these
systems in a way which exploits approximate separability to obtain computational
algorithms which can be effectively parallelized to run on large scale computing
resources. To achieve these goals, Prof. Mayhall's research group is pursuing
two distinct approaches. The first approach builds on recent work from the PI in
which an approximate tensor decomposition is used to model ground and excited
states in strongly correlated systems. The second approach draws on recent work
in the field based on quantum embedding theories, with direct applicability to
large scale parallelization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.