* 1752295
* CAREER: Epsilon-Near-Zero Conducting Oxide Metasurface Perfect Absorbers, Color Filters, and Beam Steering Devices with Gate-tunability
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2021
* Ho Wai Howard Lee, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 01/31/2021
* USD 500,326.00

Conventional optical components from lenses to filters are playing a critical
role in modern imaging and display technologies, such as an optical camera's
image sensor, the smartphone's display, and precise optical-imaging microscopy.
However, there is an ongoing pressure to shrink the size of optical systems.
Metasurfaces, which are ultrathin surfaces patterned with nanostructures,
provide a new method to control the phase and amplitude of transmitted,
reflected, and scattered light. Because of the virtually flat nature of
metasurfaces (typical thickness < 100 nm), they can enable novel ultrathin
optical components such as flat lenses, waveplates, and holography surfaces over
a broad range of the electromagnetic spectrum. However, the optical properties
for most metasurfaces are fixed upon their nanofabrication, restricting many
real-world applications. Therefore, there is a need to develop a tunable version
of an ultrathin metasurface. The first goal of this project is to establish
electronically-tunable conducting oxide metasurfaces that could be used for a
variety of next-generation imaging and display technologies (e.g. tunable
perfect absorber, color filter, beam steering device, etc.). The second goal of
this project is to utilize our nanophotonic research and infrastructure to
provide two-year technical college students, university undergraduate students,
and graduate students with the nanophotonic skills and knowledge necessary for
future academic and industrial careers. Furthermore, the project's events with
area schools and a local science museum will provide exciting opportunities to
introduce nanophotonic concepts to students and the general public in a fun and
informative way.

Technical description: Optical metasurfaces are single- or few-layer structures
with subwavelength thickness which produce abrupt changes in the phase,
amplitude, or polarization of light. They show promise for extraordinary light
manipulation and could enable novel ultrathin optical elements such as flat
lenses, holograms, and optical vortex generation/detection devices. While
metasurfaces hold considerable promise for future fundamental advances and novel
optical applications, the lack of efficient optical tunability and low optical
efficiency are key limiting issues for their use in a wide range of optical
applications. The long range goal of this project is to develop an integrated
program of research and education focused on developing efficient nanoscale
metasurface components and their applications in meta-devices. The objective of
this CAREER research is to establish an efficient and broadband electrical
management of the absorptivity, optical phase, and spectral response of
conducting oxide metasurfaces under an Epsilon-Near-Zero (ENZ) regime. To
achieve this objective, the PI will identify approaches which yield efficient
control of the carrier concentration of conducting oxide materials and the ENZ
frequency with field-effect tunable metasurface resonance and gradient-index ENZ
multilayer via atomic layer deposition. Establishing techniques to efficiently
exploit the voltage-tuned ENZ resonance in metasurfaces to manipulate optical
responses will enable development of tunable metasurface beam steering devices,
color filters, and perfect absorbers, opening the path to revolutionary nano-
optical imaging, display, and communication applications. Examples of novel
devices that would utilize the technology include high-resolution beam steering
devices for next generation visible LIDAR technology, perfect absorbers/spectrum
splitting elements for photo/thermal-voltaic applications, tunable color
filters/lenses for CMOS optical imaging and cutting-edge smartphone
microscopies/spectroscopies, and ultrafast spatial light modulators with
nanoscale pixels. The educational objective is to integrate research and
classroom activities based on advanced nanophotonic technology for training two-
year technical college students, university undergraduate students, and graduate
students with the nanophotonic skills and knowledge necessary for future
academic and industrial careers.