* 1752821
* CAREER: Mechanistic Study of Radical Initiations for Aromatic Functionalization
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Ryan Baxter, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2024
* USD 647,069.00

In this CAREER project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp;
Mechanisms B Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Ryan Baxter of the
Department of Chemistry &amp; Chemical Biology at the University of California,
Merced is developing new strategies for initiating radical reactions through
single-electron transfers. Because one electron reactions (radical reactions)
are traditionally viewed as highly reactive and difficult to control, the goal
of this research is to better understand fundamental properties of radical
initiations to engineer mild and user-friendly experimental protocols. Many
structures that can be accessed via radical chemistry are found in drugs,
vitamins, materials and polymers, and so new strategies for radical initiation
may have a positive impact on many fields of science that directly benefit
society. The project involves monitoring radical reactions in real-time to
understand chemical behavior. The resulting reaction data is used to develop
educational materials for undergraduate organic chemistry laboratory and lecture
courses. In addition, through industrial partnerships, volumes of authentic
reaction data is collected and refined to develop a repository of
undergraduate/graduate educational materials that are made available to
educators throughout the Nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arenes and heteroarenes
are common structures with many desirable materials. Strategies for their rapid
diversification are in demand. Radical carbon-hydrogen functionalization offers
the ability to directly modify aromatic carbon hydrogen bonds via either
nucleophilic or electrophilic processes, although uncontrolled reactivity is
common to intermolecular processes. This project involves two discrete aims to
study fundamental physical properties that affect rates of radical initiation
for synthetically important reactions. The first focuses on developing catalyst
systems that use silver ion, as an oxidant, and exogenous pyridine ligands in a
novel way to control the rates of radical initiation for intermolecular
nucleophilic functionalization of heteroarenes. Catalyst redox properties are
studied electrochemically, and this data is correlated with global reaction
rates to inform the development of optimum catalyst/oxidant systems. The second
aim involves the iron-catalyzed reduction of nitrogen-oxygen bonds to promote
intermolecular radical amination of arenes through an electrophilic process. The
electronic properties of various nitrogen-radical precursors are examined to
develop efficient strategies that combine mild initiation with reliable rates of
initiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.