* 1752392
* CAREER: Inspiring a New Paradigm in Geotechnical Design and Education Through an Understanding of Biomimetic Load Transfer in Soils
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Michelle Bernhardt, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 06/30/2024
* USD 516,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant will support
research that will advance the fundamental understanding of how loads are
transferred through soils, and how biological mechanisms and new construction
techniques can improve the use of soil as a building material. Many natural
materials have geometrical microstructures which make them stronger and tougher
than their base materials. This research will provide the needed knowledge so
that these mechanisms can be incorporated in soils using additive manufacturing
(i.e. 3D printing) techniques in which soils are "printed" into structural
components or cellular patterns to improve their load carrying ability. Bio-
inspired structures like the honeycomb have been studied for metals and other
solid materials; however, an understanding of the effectiveness of these load
transfer mechanisms in particulate materials like soils is lacking. Improving a
soil's ability to carry load will result in more sustainable and cost-effective
geotechnical practice by reducing the amounts of concrete and other materials
needed for a project. The fundamental understanding gained in this project will
also move additive manufacturing further towards becoming a viable option for
building shelters and other infrastructure in remote and underdeveloped
locations, and in disaster relief or war-torn areas. Additionally, this project
seeks to promote interdisciplinary education through a new course and the
participation and retention of diverse students through activities such as K-12
outreach focused on exploring engineering principles in nature, visual-spatial
workshops, and recruitment of high quality researchers through the University's
Engineering Career Awareness Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hierarchical
microstructures give many natural materials strengths which are orders of
magnitude greater than their constituents. The research goal of this CAREER
grant is to leverage these biomimicry concepts to advance the fundamental
understanding of load transfer mechanisms in soil. While researchers have
observed benefits for similar bio-inspired designs of metals and composites, a
fundamental understanding of the effectiveness of these load transfer mechanisms
in brittle particulate materials like soils is needed. Therefore, this grant
focuses on: (1) understanding the optimized load carrying mechanisms in nature
and mimicking these mechanisms in soils; (2) evaluating the behaviors of bio-
inspired soils across the length scales using experimental testing and discrete
element method (DEM) modeling; and, (3) investigating additive manufacturing as
a means to construct cellular soil fabrics and infrastructure at the field-
scale. In addition to the DEM simulations, a topology-based method for
optimizing the patterns for a given loading scenario and capturing the resulting
behavior is necessary to provide a solution for the many possible geotechnical
applications. Laboratory and mid-scale testing of bio-improved soils will also
be conducted to assess the feasibility of full-scale implementation of the
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.