* 1752924
* CAREER: Development of DNA polymerases capable of high fidelity modified DNA synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Aaron Leconte, Claremont McKenna College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 06/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

DNA is widely known as the material that encodes information in all life forms.
Besides this role, DNA is also one of the most valuable tools in modern
biotechnology. Foundational technologies, such as the polymerase chain reaction
and DNA sequencing, as well as emerging technologies, such as DNA-encoded drug
discovery, rely on the unique functions of DNA. However, the usefulness of DNA-
based tools is limited by DNA's susceptibility to destruction in a biological
environment. With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the
Chemistry Division is funding Dr. Aaron Leconte from the W. M. Keck Science
Department of Claremont McKenna, Pitzer, and Scripps Colleges to develop
proteins that can synthesize chemically-modified forms of DNA that are more
stable than natural DNA in a biological environment. Consequently, the modified
DNAs have the potential to expand the applications of DNA-based tools, such as
high throughput DNA sequencing and synthetic biology used in a number of
therapeutic and clinical diagnostics. Such research may benefit society by
improving human health. Professor Leconte integrates research experiences in
laboratory courses for undergraduate students to prepare these students for STEM
graduate studies and careers. He is also developing videos that document the
research experiences of current and former undergraduate students that can be
used to inspire and attract more students to STEM studies.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research project seeks to develop mutant DNA polymerases capable
of high fidelity synthesis of modified forms of DNA called M-DNA. This DNA is
resistant to nucleases. M-DNAs are generally not amplified by native DNA
polymerases. Mutant DNA polymerases capable of synthesizing long, modified DNAs
have been identified only recently. While these mutant DNA polymerases represent
an exciting step forward, these enzymes make frequent errors, limiting their
application. The research in the Leconte laboratory focuses on the
characterization and engineering of a recently discovered mutant DNA polymerase,
SFP1. Preliminary data suggest that this enzyme is capable of M-DNA synthesis
and that it makes far fewer errors than other previously characterized M-DNA
polymerases. The Leconte group develops high throughput sequencing methods that
can quantitatively evaluate M-DNA synthesis. The high-throughput sequencing data
obtained by these methods inform engineering efforts to produce DNA polymerases
that have a lower error frequency during M-DNA synthesis. The new polymerases
that can perform modified DNA synthesis with higher fidelity have the potential
to enable an array of applications in fields that range from clinical
diagnostics to synthetic biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.