* 1752727
* CAREER: Quantum Optimization, Glassiness and Localization
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Christopher Laumann, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 07/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

The theoretical discovery of quantum search algorithms demonstrated that quantum
computers could significantly outperform classical ones. For example, the
quantum Grover algorithm can find a marked item in a completely unordered list
-- the proverbial needle in a haystack -- provably faster than any classical
algorithm. Practical search problems, however, typically have more structure
than existing quantum algorithms exploit. It is an outstanding open question
exactly where speed ups can be found, and where they will be unachievable. This
research aims to address these questions by drawing inspiration from the physics
of disordered systems, where there are many known structural mechanisms which
produce slow, or 'glassy', dynamics. The project further aims to elucidate the
physical consequences of one of the most dramatic quantum mechanisms for slow
dynamics: many-body localization (MBL). Although first postulated over 50 years
ago, this mechanism has only recently come into sharp theoretical and
experimental focus as large-scale isolated quantum systems such as ultracold
atoms, ion traps, and superconducting qubit arrays have been built. It is
particularly intriguing as localization prevents the emergence of classical
behavior. From an quantum algorithmic point of view, the role localization plays
is thus unclear. On the one hand, it leads to very slow dynamics and presumably
very slow search behavior. On the other hand, one can only hope to achieve
quantum mechanical speed ups in systems which do not behave classically! This
suggests that one needs localization to obtain such speed ups. Whether this is
true and, if so, how to exploit it are crucial open
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thus, this CAREER award supports theoretical
research and educational activities on two interrelated foci: 1) the
computational complexity, typical structure and algorithmic approaches to
quantum optimization problems; and, 2) the phenomenology of many-body
localization (MBL) and its role in quantum computation and glassy dynamics.
Theoretical methods include the cavity method, random matrix theory, large-N and
many-body perturbation theory while numerical approaches include quantum Monte
Carlo, the density matrix renormalization group and large scale diagonalization.
Specifically, the PI proposes to investigate the phase diagram and transitions,
geometrization and clustering of the configuration space in quantum
satisfiability and related classical constraint satisfaction problems. The PI
expects this study to aid the development of heuristic quantum algorithms for
approximate optimization and landscape exploration. Many-body localization (MBL)
constitutes a fundamental breakdown of quantum statistical mechanics in the
presence of quenched disorder and protects quantum coherence out of equilibrium.
The project addresses foundational questions about the theory of the
delocalization transition and the influence of disorder versus quasiperiodic
modulation, dimensionality and the range of interactions on localization. It
also seeks to apply these ideas to understanding the behavior of quantum
annealing applied to NP-hard optimization problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by the Quantum Information Science (QIS) Program in
the Physics Division in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate, the
Condensed Matter and Materials Theory (CMMT) Program in the Division of
Materials Research in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate, and
the Algorithmic Foundations (AF) Program in the Computing and Communications
Foundations Division in the Computer and Information Science and Engineering
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.