* 1752339
* CAREER: Pericyte-Endothelial Cell Interactions via Extracellular Matrix Deposition Regulates Blood Vessel Formation and Function
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2023
* John Chappell, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 02/28/2023
* USD 556,271.00

Blood vessels bring oxygen to every tissue in the human body. Many diseases are
related to problems with the vascular system. Pericytes are special cells that
stabilize growing blood vessels and maintain vascular health. Illnesses like
diabetic retinopathy, Alzheimer's disease, and cancer become worse when
pericytes are disrupted. This project will increase fundamental understanding of
pericytes by developing experimental and computational models of their
involvement in blood vessel formation and function, with a specific focus on
their interactions with the protein scaffold in tissues known as the
extracellular matrix. The project will test the hypothesis that defects in the
production of certain components of the extracellular matrix have profoundly
negative consequences for pericyte behaviors and could therefore contribute to
their dysfunction in certain diseases. The educational component of this project
includes working with STEM education leaders to extend the research goals for
the development of activities and lessons for primary and secondary educators to
use as "cross-curricular" supplemental material. Training opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students will also be incorporated, advancing the
careers of students interested in gaining research experience and developing
independent projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on elucidating
the role of the extracellular matrix (ECM) in mediating pericyte(PC)-endothelial
cell (EC) interactions and their role in vascular development and maintenance of
blood vessel integrity. The Research Plan is designed to test the hypothesis
that proper vascular development and function depend critically on the precise
regulation of 1) EC production of collagen IV, and (2) PC synthesis of
vitronectin. More specifically, the Plan includes a) development of in vitro and
ex vivo platforms for imaging fixed and live PCs migrating along remodeling
extracellular networks, b) establishment of a primary PC cell line that has been
functionally validated in addition to standard gene expression profiling, 3)
establishment of a multi-scale computational modeling&lt;br/&gt;platform to
recapitulate PC migration along developing vessels in the context of a range of
collagen IV production rates from ECs and 4) use of other in vivo experimental
approaches to achieve two objectives: 1) Elucidate the effect of EC-derived
collagen IV on (i) PC migration and investment during vessel development and
(ii) PC retention along functional vasculature and 2) Determine the role of PC-
derived vitronectin in (i) vascular formation and (ii) maintaining the integrity
of mature blood vessels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.