* 1752729
* CAREER: Humans, Water, and Climate: Advancing Research and Education on Water Resource Sustainability in Managed Land-Water Systems using Integrated Hydrological Modeling Framework
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Yadu Pokhrel, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 499,971.00

A critical challenge in sustainable water resource management is to ensure
adequate supply of water to meet the rapidly growing demands for food, energy,
and water, while minimizing negative social, environmental, and ecological
impacts. Striking this balance requires a clear understanding of the human-
induced changes in freshwater flows and storages, agricultural systems, and
ecosystem services, as well as the complex interactions and feedback among
coupled natural and human systems. The goal of this project is to advance the
research and education of water resource sustainability in managed land-water
systems by using a novel numerical modeling framework and a wealth of data from
ground and satellite observations, climate models, and socio-economic analysis.
The framework, which comprises of a suite of hydrological, agricultural, and
ecological models, is used to identify ways to optimize the use of land and
water resources by systematically examining the trade-offs between upstream
basin management for food-energy production (e.g., hydropower, irrigation) and
downstream changes in river-floodplain dynamics and groundwater systems (e.g.,
reduction in sediment load, seawater intrusion). The project will provide new
insights about ways to best utilize the information on global change and
practices for local-regional water management through its integration into
coupled hydrological-agricultural-ecological models to develop adaptation
strategies for sustainable water resource management as well as achieving water
and food security. The research project integrates a substantive set of
educational initiatives for promoting knowledge about hydrology and water
resources among high school and community college students, motivating them to
pursue STEM education and inspiring them to study freshwater systems toward
addressing pressing societal challenges regarding food, energy, and water
security. The educational component involves an interactive web-based version of
the modeling system for classroom use in undergraduate and graduate teaching,
for educating high school and community college students, and as resource for
teachers especially in community colleges. The education program also includes
mentored international research and training through online initiatives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The modeling framework is based on the Community Land
Model (CLM) but includes critical enhancements made by incorporating advanced
schemes representing crop growth, irrigation, groundwater pumping, and river-
floodplain-reservoir routing. The strength of this novel framework lies in its
ability to explicitly resolve the coupled behavior of a range of natural
hydrologic and biophysical processes (e.g., surface hydrology, groundwater
dynamics, sediment transport, land use change, and crop growth), human land-
water management practices (irrigation, reservoir operation, groundwater
pumping), and ecological processes (seawater intrusion, floodplain-wetland
dynamics). The framework is designed to simulate large-scale water cycle
dynamics at regional to continental scales while also mechanistically resolving
fine-scale, topography-driven hydrologic-groundwater processes such as lateral
groundwater flow and river-floodplain-groundwater interactions. Thus, the study
will significantly advance our capability to simulate coupled surface water,
groundwater, and agricultural systems, which is critical for achieving food
security through better assessment and prediction of water resource. Since CLM
is a land component of an Earth System Model (ESM), the new framework and
insights gained from the study are expected to inform the development of the
next generation of ESMs through the incorporation of human components for the
holistic study of coupled natural-human systems, and to assess human-climate
interactions. The new framework will also enable us to better assess and predict
water resources in highly managed land-water system around the world including
the High Plains in the central US and Central Valley in California where
declining water supplies are likely to adversely impact regional, national, and
global food security in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.