* 1752083
* CAREER: Developing climate-smart irrigation strategies for rice agriculture in Arkansas
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Benjamin Runkle, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 03/31/2024
* USD 500,199.00

This research responds to the need to make rice growing more sustainable.
Globally rice is the staple food of over 3 billion people yet consumes
significant water resources and contributes 10% of anthropogenic methane to the
atmosphere. The PI has the long-term career goal to develop sustainable,
climate-smart irrigation strategies for rice production while significantly
contributing to the education of the next generation of scientists and
agricultural professionals. The research objective is to quantify the climate
impact of water-saving irrigation strategies, to test their potential
scalability, and to encourage more wide-spread implementation of these
practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The irrigation practices to be studied create
less frequent field inundation, thus they significantly reduce methane that
would be produced under flooded conditions (33-98% reductions in methane
emission). The research aims to integrate micrometeorological flux observations,
rice harvest data, and irrigation practice information to optimize (1) the net
reduction in greenhouse gas emissions over a growing season and (2) rice yields,
with net reduced costs. The education objective of this proposal is to advance
the Environmental and Spatial Technology (EAST) initiative, which is a
regionally important project-based, service learning program at middle and high
schools. The PI will work with three EAST school programs to collect data useful
to the research objectives and to generate a state map to model how changes in
land cover can impact groundwater levels and greenhouse gas emissions. This
program will help students engage with geospatial science, provide awareness of
food and agriculture-related careers and higher education opportunities, and
expand perceptions of the food-energy-water nexus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.