* 1752630
* CAREER: Analog and Digital Quantum Simulations with Fermionic Strontium
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Julio Barreiro Guerrero, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 613,085.00

Systems of particles with strong interactions and correlations lie at the heart
of many areas of the physical sciences, from atomic, molecular, optical, and
condensed-matter physics to quantum chemistry. In condensed matter, strong
interactions determine the formation of topological phases giving materials
unexpected physical properties that could revolutionize technology through
robustness to noise and disorder. In quantum chemistry, determining the
electronic structure of molecules is a problem of strongly correlated matter
that establishes the static, dynamic and interaction properties of molecules as
well as being key in tackling questions ranging from basic biology to
translational medicine. This project will tackle these problems through the
analog and digital simulation of their quintessential strongly-interacting
properties on an apparatus with ultracold neutral atoms in optical tweezers. In
the analog simulations, all the physics of the strongly correlated systems will
be simultaneously emulated or mimicked, while the digital version will use a
stroboscopic approach. The breadth and depth of this project, both in
experimental tools and novel theoretical developments, will provide a rich
educational environment for students at all levels and from all backgrounds, and
inspire them to purse creative scientific careers in industry and academia. This
environment will reach far beyond the research through a program for middle and
high school students, the Young Physicist Program, by bringing the students to
the University of California - San Diego labs and facilities to learn about
fundamental topics in the quantifiable world via simplified college-level
laboratories and interactive
demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use ultracold
fermionic strontium atoms in polychromatic optical tweezers and beams to realize
an analog simulator of fractional Chern insulators and to demonstrate the
building blocks of a digital simulator of many-body fermionic open systems. The
simulation of the topological insulating state will follow an optical flux
approach, which engineers the lattice in reciprocal space through polychromatic
beams driving a manifold of Raman transitions, and will benefit from ultracold
strontium's low temperatures and reduced heating by spontaneous emission. The
digital simulator, on the other hand, uses a stroboscopic approximation of the
many-body Hamiltonian, or Liouvillian for open systems, through a set of
elementary operations, much like a quantum computer, but with fermions instead
of qubits, and arbitrary hopping and interactions between fermionic modes,
instead of qubit gates. Polychromatic and mobile tweezers will exquisitely trap
and precisely transport strontium atoms, both tasks achieved selectively for
atoms in their ground or long-lived excited states. The prospects of exquisitely
controlling, manipulating and interacting single fermions would exceed by far
that achieved over the last two decades of doing the same with
qubits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.