* 1752506
* CAREER: A Quantitative Nanosensor to Measure Redox Potential in Living Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Daniel Heller, Sloan Kettering Institute For Cancer Research
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 01/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The oxidation-reduction (redox) reactions occurring in the cells and tissues of
our body are essential to their proper function and have implications in aging
and many diseases, including cancer. Many therapies and foods have anti-oxidant
properties, but researchers have an incomplete understanding of how they might
affect our cells and bodies. The aim of the project is to develop new
nanotechnologies to improve the measurement of redox phenomena in cells and
organisms to give a better picture of how they relate to health and disease. The
principal investigator's laboratory is developing these capabilities by studying
new materials with unique properties that may have big impact on many fields.
Scientists, students, entrepreneurs, and even artists will work together to
teach the public about these materials, make new discoveries about them, and to
make them available to more people than ever before. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
growing body of work in the field of cellular metabolism has shown that many
fundamental biological processes are under the control of redox chemistry.
Changes in redox phenomena are also implicated in many diseases, including
cancer. The role of reactive species in cancer cell signaling and survival is
not well-understood, however, including the roles of pro- and anti-oxidants. A
large effort has started to present the basic metabolic and energetic
abnormalities of cancer as a new hallmark which defines the disease. Still, the
understanding of the connections between the genetic alterations in signaling
pathways and the resulting complex phenotypic output of metabolism and
bioenergetic changes is cursory. &lt;br/&gt;Current options for making redox
measurements in biology fall short of the unique needs of the field. The
quantification of redox potentials in living tissues would allow for
measurements to be compared accurately between different laboratories. A tool
sensitive to redox potentials in the cellular environment across the wider
physiologic range would give researchers access to more testable hypothesis.
Many fields, including diagnostics, process engineering, chemical product
testing and safety, drug screening, and drug development could also benefit from
the ability to measure or transmit electrochemical signals optically.
&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI will develop a new class of optical reporters
to measure the full-range redox potential quantitatively in live cells and
organisms. The overall objective of this application is to translate the wide
intrinsic voltage sensitivity and emission response of photoluminescent carbon
nanotubes into biological systems. Nanotubes will be engineered for specific
sensitivity across the physiologic range using new covalent and non-covalent
functionalization methods to modulate nanotube emission. This approach will
develop new capabilities to understand and control the near-infrared optical
response of nanotubes within biological environments, as well as to modulate
biological interactions of these materials to target specific sub-cellular
compartments. These sensors will be used to interrogate redox landscapes in
normal and diseased states, including Kras-mutant tumors. &lt;br/&gt;To assist
with the development and dissemination of the research materials, and to teach
the public about these new materials and findings with them, several initiatives
are going to be implemented. The principal investigator designed a
bioengineering research project to be conducted in a STEM-focused charter high
school to develop methods to modulate the long-term biocompatibility of carbon
nanotube sensors. The principal investigator is also working with a resident
artist to use carbon nanotube-based 'nanopaints' to both educate the public and
improve the availability of research materials for the nano/bioscience/art
communities. A new undergraduate engineering summer program will be initiated to
give engineering students the experience of working in a cancer research setting
while giving faculty and trainees access to students with engineering
backgrounds.