* 1752475
* CAREER: Unraveling Excitation-Energy Transfer Processes in Excitonic Light-Harvesting Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2024
* Dorthe Eisele, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 04/30/2024
* USD 725,000.00

The light-harvesting complex found in plants is a complex assembly of molecules
that absorbs sunlight and funnels its energy to a central location where it is
converted into useable fuels. The efficiency of this solar antenna is
remarkable, and it is perhaps one of Nature's most spectacular molecular
architectures. While the light-harvesting complex has been studied extensively,
the origin of its high efficiency has remained a mystery. The problem is
challenging. The light-harvesting complex not only consists of many individual
molecules, but the structure is not rigid, and the molecular components are
continually moving. The role that this motion plays in facilitating (or
impeding) energy transport is unclear. Through support from the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry,
Professor Eisele at The City College of New York (CCNY) is studying bio-inspired
nanomaterials to elucidate Nature?s secret to efficient energy transport.
Working together, Professor Eisele and her students are synthesizing new
nanostructured molecular assemblies that mimic the features of the Nature's
light-harvesting complex. They then watch the flow of energy through the
assembly using sophisticated near-field scanning optical microscopies with the
goal of understanding how structural fluctuations affect energy transport. The
project could profoundly impact our understanding of natural photosynthetic
systems, and could pave the way towards the design of efficient artificial
systems for solar energy conversion applications. In addition, the project is
training the next generation of scientists in a broad range fields including
nanoscience, spectroscopy and optical microscopy. Through outreach activities,
Professor Eisele and her students are working with middle- and high-school
students, many from historically underrepresented minority groups, to produce
short videos that highlight the challenges and opportunities of nanoscience,
from everyday applications to the latest research in super-high resolution
nanoimaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conceptually, achieving a better understanding
of excitation energy transfer (EET) processes in bio-inspired nanomaterials
requires model systems that allow thorough testing of current theoretical models
of energy transport phenomena. To this end, Professor Eisele is synthesizing
well-defined model systems based on monomers such as amphiphilic cyanine dyes
and porphyrin dyes. In solution the monomers self-assemble into supramolecular
nanotubes that show collective optical properties (excitons) similar to the
optical properties found in natural light-harvesting complexes. The nanotube
assemblies are then encapsulated in transparent (non-excitonic) materials to
mimic the surrounding proteins of the natural light-harvesting complex. The
structural and optical properties of individual nanotubes are studied using near
field scanning optical microscopy (NSOM) techniques, and the EET process is
followed using femtosecond pump-probe techniques. The project is also
integrating the pump-probe spectroscopies with NSOM methods, to enable direct
observation of energy transport in an individual structure. The experimental
results are complemented with Monte Carlo computer simulations of the
supramolecular structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.