* 1752195
* CAREER: Modular Origami in Soft Robotic Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Cagdas Onal, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 548,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project studies new ways
to engineer specified mechanical properties into soft robots. Soft robots are
intelligent machines with a highly compliant physical structure -- that is, the
body of the soft robot will bend when relatively small forces are applied to it.
High compliance makes soft robots much safer around people than traditional
rigid robots, and also allows soft robots to attain a variety of shapes and to
move in many more ways than robots with only a small number of discrete joints.
Because structures that are easy to bend cannot carry large loads, a major
challenge in soft robotics is to create variable-stiffness structures that are
compliant only in certain directions, or only at specific times. This project
presents a new approach to engineering variable-stiffness soft robots, inspired
by the art and science of "origami," or paper folding. Origami-inspired soft
robots use thin sheets of relatively stiff materials that are made bendable
along designated fold lines; the folding pattern can be used to create very
precise and complex equivalent mechanical properties. This engineered
flexibility contrasts with soft robot structures made of materials such as
rubbers and foams, which are limited in their achievable strength by the
intrinsic softness of the material itself. In this project, origami-inspired
folding patterns are used to create modules with a specified compliant behavior.
Larger and more capable robots can then be built up by combining many such
modules. Examples of the potential of modular origami-inspired robots include
soft tentacle-like manipulation in confined spaces, whole-body and passive
conformal grasping, and controllable shape change. The results of the project
will advance the national health and prosperity, by enabling origami-inspired
soft robots to be used in homes, hospitals, and manufacturing sites, as care-
givers, co-workers, and self-morphing structures. Educational activities
integrated with this project will use origami-inspired robots as teaching tools
for students of all ages through outreach activities, high-school internships,
and undergraduate projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish
modular and scalable design and fabrication methods, characterize and model
mechanical properties, and test control algorithms for lightweight origami-
inspired modular continuum soft robots to intelligently perform manipulation,
grasping, and shape-change tasks. A comprehensive integrated research and
education plan will address (1) modular origami design, fabrication, and
modeling, to study the mapping between mechanical properties of origami-inspired
modules and their design/fabrication parameters, electrically addressable
actuation using distributed tendons, distributed soft sensing of 3-D deformation
and external forces, and computationally efficient clothoid formulation of
continuum section deformations under external loads for dynamic modeling; (2)
Control methods that endow soft robots with intelligence, to enable safe
force/position interaction with the environment, synergistically combining
motion planning and control at the state space, and hyper-redundancy of large
scale modular systems to morph into desired shapes with minimal actuation and
sensing requirements. Results will be evaluated through validation case studies
in continuum arm manipulation, whole-body wrapping and utilizing conformal
contact for grasping, and shape change and stiffness control by very large
degree-of-freedom origami actuation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.