* 1752100
* CAREER: Statistical Mechanics of Slender Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2023
* Andrej Kosmrlj, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2023
* USD 563,795.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
and computational research and education to advance understanding of mechanics
how mechanical devices work at microscopic length scales down to the scale of
nanostructures. Nature's fascinating ability to make nanomachines that can sense
and respond to their environment has motivated researchers to explore different
ways of miniaturizing functional devices. One of the strategies that was
successfully employed is to make patterned /composite atomic layers, which can
be prepared in a flat state and can subsequently transform their shapes in
response to external stimuli. By using ideas from the folding of paper origami,
researchers have produced functional self-folding origami micro-devices, which
can perform biopsies and deliver drugs. Similarly, the ideas from paper kirigami
and pop-up cards have led researchers to design micro-scale stretchable
electronics and extremely sensitive force sensors. Functional micro-rockets have
been employed for manipulation and isolation of cells and for diverse
environmental applications, including water monitoring, remediation and
detoxification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As devices are made smaller and smaller,
their mechanics will become increasingly sensitive to imperfections and random
fluctuations coming from the environment. For example, random imperfections
transform flat atomic layers into shapes reminiscent of crumpled paper, while
random thermal agitations can spontaneously crush spherical shells above some
critical temperature. These effects can defy intuition based on the mechanics of
macroscopic structures. This makes it challenging to design functional micro-
and nano-structures. The PI aims to develop a theoretical and computational
framework to investigate the mechanics of complex microscopic slender structures
in the presence of defects and random fluctuations. The research will illuminate
how biological structures function, to design novel electronic structures that
can be tuned mechanically, and the design of microscopic structures that are
prepared in a flat state and can subsequently self-fold to desired shapes with
potential for biomedical devices and diverse environmental and industrial
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed here will help educate
the next generation of interdisciplinary scientists whose expertise resides at
the intersection of continuum mechanics, statistical mechanics, and biology.
Moreover, courses in continuum mechanics are typically taught from an
engineering perspective and are very rarely attended by students with interests
in biology and statistical mechanics. To address this issue, the PI has
developed a new graduate course titled "Lessons from Biology for Engineering
Tiny Devices" and will add new topics to the required sophomore engineering
course on continuum mechanics. This award also supports educating, inspiring and
mentoring high school students from underrepresented and socioeconomically
disadvantaged populations in Trenton, NJ. The public will be reached with a new
educational blog that will cover topics at the interface of biology, physics,
mechanics and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports a theoretical and
computational study integrated with education of how thermal fluctuations,
nonequilibrium fluctuations, and disorder affect the mechanics of microscopic
slender structures. The research agenda is motivated by the importance of
biological microscopic shells and by recent experimental developments, where
atomically thin layers of materials of various shapes and compositions are now
routinely produced. Experimentalists can make highly stretchable graphene
kirigami devices and composite/patterned atomic layers which can transform their
shapes in response to external stimuli. However,, theory cannot describe the
mechanics of thermalized or disordered flat sheets beyond their linear response
to external forces. Less is known about the statistical mechanics of shells. The
goal of this project is to bridge the gap between theory and
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a theoretical
framework and simulation tools that will enable studies of the mechanics of
structures with complex geometries in the presence of thermal fluctuations,
nonequilibrium fluctuations, and quenched defects. The basis for the development
of coarse-grained finite-element molecular dynamics simulations, will be studies
of small elements of three different types: flat sheets, curved shells and
frustrated sheets. The effective static and dynamic stress-strain responses for
such patches due to combination of loading, such as bending, stretching,
shearing, in the presence of fluctuations will be studied by developing new
renormalization group calculations, with defects treated using the replica
approach. The PI will seek quantitative differences between the role of defects
and of thermal and nonequilibrium fluctuations, which could be reflected in
different universal exponents in the nonlinear regime of static stress-strain
curves, as well as in different rate-dependent responses to dynamic loads.
Mechanical properties are expected to depend critically on geometry, and three
different types of patches - flat sheets, curved shells, and frustrated sheets -
are expected to exhibit qualitatively different behaviors, for example
fluctuations can stabilize flat sheets, but they reduce the stability of shells.
Based on these studies the PI will develop coarse-grained simulation tools that
will enable studies of the statistical mechanics of structures with complex
geometries. The award will have direct implication for the mechanics of
biological structures, for the design of novel electronic structures that can be
tuned mechanically, and for the design of microscopic structures that are
prepared in a flat state and can subsequently self-fold to desired shapes with
potential for biomedical devices and diverse environmental and industrial
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed here will help educate
the next generation of interdisciplinary scientists whose expertise resides at
the intersection of continuum mechanics, statistical mechanics, and biology.
Moreover, courses in continuum mechanics are typically taught from an
engineering perspective and are very rarely attended by students with interests
in biology and statistical mechanics. To address this issue, the PI has
developed a new graduate course titled "Lessons from Biology for Engineering
Tiny Devices" and will add new topics to the required sophomore engineering
course on continuum mechanics. This award also supports educating, inspiring and
mentoring high school students from underrepresented and socioeconomically
disadvantaged populations in Trenton, NJ. The public will be reached with a new
educational blog that will cover topics at the interface of biology, physics,
mechanics and engineering.