* 1752106
* CAREER:  Probing the Physiochemical Regulators of Tumor Stroma Interactions Using Microfluidic Biomimicry
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Jonathan Song, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 03/31/2024
* USD 571,753.00

Solid tumors are composed of cancer cells and the tissue surrounding the cancer
cells, called the stroma. The stroma, which includes vascular cells,
inflammatory/immune cells, and connective tissues, has emerged as an important
determinant of tumor behavior. Therefore, a critical need exists for identifying
the tumor promoting properties of the stroma. This project will use micro-scale
engineering technology to construct a microfluidic model of the tumor stroma.
The model will include the cellular, extracellular matrix, and biomolecular
constituents of the tumor stroma. This novel model platform will be used to
precisely examine the mechanisms by which the cellular components of the tumor
stroma promote cancer progression. The successful outcome of this research will
remove technical barriers to studying the tumor microenvironment, and it will
provide a deeper understanding of the role of tumor stroma in cancer. The
research program will be closely coupled with the PI's educational mission of
increasing the pipeline of engineering students contributing to
interdisciplinary cancer research by promoting awareness of the opportunities
for engineering students towards this exciting academic career path at the
interface of engineering and cancer. This project will support this vision
through a combined education and outreach plan that is organized as a series of
initiatives that start at the middle and high school level and proceed to the
senior undergraduate level while also engaging the local community.
Collectively, the outreach efforts will leverage the strong appeal that cancer
research has as a top priority societal need with an emphasis on attracting,
retaining, and promoting resilience of female students, who are underrepresented
in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to advance understanding
of the physiochemical mechanisms by which stromal fibroblasts reprogram the
tumor microenvironment (TME) through autocrine, paracrine, and pericellular
matrix communication, with a particular focus on stroma activation that is
controlled by different isoforms of the chemokine CXCL12 (or SDF-1), a signaling
molecule that drives cancer metastasis in more than 23 different cancers. An
innovative approach, combining a) microscale engineering technologies that
precisely model the stromal cell-endothelial cell interactions within the TME,
b) quantitative microstructural analysis of the ECM, and c) molecular imaging
probes that detect changes in the local biomolecular microenvironment, will be
used to systematically investigate, with high degrees of fidelity and facile
experimental control, the pathogenesis of an activated stroma microenvironment.
The research aims are designed to test two hypotheses: 1)To quantify the effects
on fibroblast activation that are CXCL12 isoform specific, using the
microfluidic tumor stroma model combined with quantitative assessment of ECM
remodeling, to test the hypothesis that alterations to ECM content and
microstructure by stromal fibroblasts are important determinants in
distinguishing the potencies of different CXCL12 isoforms and 2) To distinguish
specific isoforms of CXCL12 on their angiogenesis and vascular permeability
promoting properties, using the PI's angiogenesis-on-a-chip (AoC) platform, to
test the hypothesis that the potency of different CXCL12 isoforms on
angiogenesis and vascular permeability is determined by changes to the ECM
content and microstructure. The studies will be performed in the context of
breast cancer, and mammary fibroblasts that selectively secrete three distinct
CXCL12-isoforms will be used as the model for stromal fibroblasts. Completion of
these aims will result in a significant advancement of our quantitative
understanding of reactive stroma responses mediated by CXCL12 regulatory
circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.