* 1752241
* CAREER:Bio-artificial Neuromorphic System Based on Synaptic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2023
* Duygu Kuzum, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 01/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Engineering seamless interfaces between the brain and electronics is becoming
increasingly important for advancing practical applications of new
neurotechnologies and medical devices. To-date most of the efforts for
interfacing with the brain have relied on microelectrode arrays. However, the
interface between conventional microelectrodes and biological tissue is highly
inefficient and unstable due to (i) Poor signal transduction between the tissue
and electronics, (ii) Limited information transfer capacity of microelectrode
arrays, and (iii) Severe foreign body response induced by invasive implantable
microelectrodes. To bridge the gap between the brain and electronics, an
interface technology, which can physically and functionally integrates with the
biological tissue is needed. The aim of the proposed research is to develop a
neuromorphic interface made of synthetic synaptic devices to form a stable,
long-term input/output interface to the brain. Such a technology can help
development of targeted and selective neuromodulation therapies for various
neurological disorders (epilepsy, depression, memory disorders, etc) affecting
one billion people worldwide. Long-term chronic studies enabled by this
technology can revolutionize the speed of progress in brain activity mapping.
The proposed interdisciplinary project will be integrated with educational and
outreach activities, including hands-on laboratory training for students,
rigorous training on fundamentals of bioelectronic devices for engineering
specialists and outreach activities towards underrepresented communities from
K-12 to graduate levels focusing on women and local Hispanic communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last decade, motivated partially by the race for
developing better performing computation systems, significant progress has been
made in developing neuromorphic devices and circuits that mimic biological
neurons and synapses. So far, research on synaptic devices has only focused on
increasing the efficiency of existing computational systems. This on-going
research on neuromorphic devices, when combined with emerging neurotechnologies,
offers unprecedented potential to engineer bio-artificial neuromorphic circuits,
which can address the shortcomings of the brain computer interfaces and bridge
the gap between the brain and electronics. The primary goal of the proposed
research is to develop to a neuromorphic interface, which will serve as a
translator adapting time, amplitude and shape characteristics of the electrical
stimuli transmitted to/from the brain. The challenges that will be addressed
during the course of the project include: (1) Development of biocompatible
plastic synaptic devices, (2) Enhancement of synaptic device-cell coupling and
effective signal transduction, and (3) Development of a platform for
construction of bio-artificial neuromorphic tissue. In vivo integration of the
neuromorphic tissue with the brain will also be investigated to demonstrate a
stable neural interface with natural signal processing capability. The proposed
work will build upon the PI's interdisciplinary expertise and experience in
neuromorphic devices and implantable neural interfaces. The bio-artificial
neuromorphic interface will be a key enabler to functionally transmit
information to/from the brain overcoming the biocompatibility and biostability
limitations of implantable devices.