* 1752303
* CAREER: Beyond the Code - Towards Next Generation Design for Deep Foundations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Anne Lemnitzer, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award will create a
synthesized, geo-structural, and risk-informed framework for deep foundation
engineering analysis and design. Recent events, both domestically and
internationally, have highlighted the critical nature of foundation resilience
in ensuring continued infrastructure function following natural disasters. The
framework to be developed will be capable of providing next-generation
resistance formulations for infrastructure foundations capable of reliably and
holistically assessing the behavior and response of deep foundations under
multiaxial loading. The framework will offer more accurate and parsimonious
design solutions which will reduce overdesign, and require less material. It
will spur the introduction and implementation of novel instrumentation
technologies and sustainable materials. In addition, research findings will
accelerate the transition to use of high-performance materials with permanently
integrated integrity assessment capabilities by providing a validated design
platform to accurately characterize foundation response behavior. This will
potentially result in substantial reductions in the cost of building
foundations. The CAREER educational objectives focus on stimulating
interdisciplinary curiosity and growth through diverse curricular efforts and
industry involvement in geo-structural undergraduate and graduate classroom
training. It will cater to the increasing demand for technical rigor and a
global mindset in engineering graduates. Professional career development
activities will supplement the technical educational activities to increase the
retention of diversity in geo-structural engineering in academia and industry,
and stimulate a lifelong interest in research and development. The latter part
of the educational plan will specifically target female engineers, and is
aligned with NSF INCLUDES.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core of the CAREER research
consists of executing well-coordinated, large-scale experimental- and risk-
informed numerical simulations to generate baseline knowledge that aids the
development of integrated, performance-based assessment metrics. Specifically,
this research will enable the (i) derivation of robust, next-generation loading-
response formulations; (ii) development of creative experimental tools to
holistically evaluate damage evolution; (iii) validation of models for design
and post-hazard integrity analyses, and (iv) risk-driven sensitivity studies to
connect all components into a unified decision-making framework. In addition,
the experimental studies will fill vital data gaps through prototype-scale
testing of soil-pile systems for which limited research has been performed,
i.e., specifically targeting piles with complex structural fixity conditions at
the pile head and pile tip. Another aspect of the research will develop
innovative experimental tools to improve our fundamental understanding of
complex three-dimensional (3D) soil-structure interaction (SSI) by extracting
volumetric measurements in deep foundation systems via 3D printed, cast in place
instrumentation technologies. The research program will benefit the profession
by implementing new understanding in software tools usable for individual
component and system analysis for a broad spectrum of infrastructure beyond deep
foundations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.