* 1752615
* CAREER: Tunable Isomorphic Architectures
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Morgan Stefik, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 02/29/2024
* USD 747,388.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a general method
for the controlled and predictable preparation of nanostructured materials via
self-organization molecular process. The ability to control feature sizes in
nanomaterials leads to significant performance improvements for a range of
practical applications including batteries, fuel cells, and solar cells.
Understanding these performance changes, however, has been hampered by a lack of
well-defined nanomaterials where each feature could be adjustable independently.
Most existing methods fail to deliver systematic control where one feature size
is held constant and another is adjusted step-by-step with precision. Access to
such nanomaterials can significantly accelerate the research and development of
improved energy technologies. Furthermore, the proposed methods are low-cost and
scalable to broadly support the industrial manufacturing of better energy
technologies that are affordable. An integrated education plan of this project
is designed to stimulate interest of broad audiences in advanced nanomaterials
and energy-related research. Parts of the activities include educational
outreach involving underrepresented students, economically disadvantaged
students, and first-generation college students. The project fosters student
interest in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) and includes
workforce development to address growing needs in advanced nanomaterials and
energy technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Few
aspects are as prevalent and important in energy conversion and storage as the
structure and dimensions of porous materials. Despite the fundamental and
distinct roles of material walls and pores, there remains a challenge for
systematic access to well-defined nano-architectures with independent control
over the pore and wall dimensions. The connectivity of these transport pathways
convolves additional effects, where ideal electrochemical studies require series
of systematic architectures with constant morphology symmetry (isomorphic). A
new class of programmable materials termed tunable isomorphic architectures
(TIA) will uniquely enable broad inquiries that isolate dimension-dependent
properties in electrochemical devices. The goal of this career proposal is to
establish a platform for the fabrication of TIAs where both the walls and pores
are independently tunable from 5 to 500 nm. These tailored nano-architectures
will support both fundamental research and the realization of nano-optimized
designs. This program uniquely advances kinetic entrapment to overcome the
fundamental limitations of equilibrating block copolymers. Here, kinetically-
trapped persistent micelle templates (PMT) maintain constant size during the
addition of material and thus decouple pore size control from wall-thickness
control. Kinetic control is historically difficult to reproduce, a challenge
that is now resolved with switchable micelle entrapment to yield reproducible
and homogeneous architectures that follow model predictions. The research
outcomes will not only advance nanomaterials research, but also generate new
knowledge in nanostructure-property relationships using a suite of targeted
materials and applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.