* 1752611
* CAREER: Directed Self-Assembly of 2D Plasmonic Nanoparticles in Block Copolymer Nanofibers to Form Hierarchical Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Guoliang (Greg) Liu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/29/2024
* USD 644,508.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymers containing two-
dimensional (2D) plasmonic nanoparticles could contribute to transformative
technologies such as waveguides, photovoltaics, sensors, actuators, and photo-
responsive adhesives. This CAREER project addresses the fundamental issue of
designing the interface between polymers and 2D plasmonic nanoparticles. The
solutions to this issue will lay the foundation for integrating 2D plasmonic
nanoparticles into polymeric materials and creating hybrid functional composites
with advanced optical, photo-thermal, and plasmonic properties. In particular,
fibers and filaments of polymers with hierarchically stacked 2D plasmonic
nanoparticles can be used as inks for additive manufacturing of plasmonic
functional constructs. The hybrid material can help design photovoltaics with
superior power conversion efficiencies, as well as other functional devices in
energy and environmental sciences that are of industrial and societal
importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational impacts involve the training of
underrepresented and first-generation college students in Appalachia. In
particular, a mini summer research camp for underrepresented students from
neighboring Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs)will be
developed, and the PI will serve as a senior fellow in the university's
Residential College to promote STEM and improve the success rate of
underrepresented and first-generation college students. In this way, the effort
presented here will train underrepresented local youth, especially first-
generation college students in isolated Appalachia, to become future polymer
scientists and engineers who will build and reshape the regional polymer
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fibers possess attractive properties that thin
films and bulk samples lack, for instance, large surface area, low density, high
strength, and peripherally confined self-assembly. The goal of the proposed
project is to exploit electrospinning and block copolymer directed self-assembly
to create hierarchical structures of block copolymers and 2D plasmonic
nanoparticles in fibers, which have fascinating structural and photo-thermal
properties. The main scopes are to understand the mechanism of polymer brush
formation on 2D plasmonic nanoparticles and design tailored polymer/nanoparticle
interfaces for creating hierarchical nanostructures in fibers. The central
hypothesis states that, by exploiting the unique plasmonic properties of 2D
plasmonic nanoparticles, the polymer brush formation mechanism will be
discovered, block copolymer/2D plasmonic nanoparticle interface for hierarchical
directed self-assembly in fibers will be prepared, and structural and
photothermal properties that are distinctive features of plasmonic polymers will
be understood. The proposed goal will be realized via three main tasks: 1)
employ 2D plasmonic nanoparticles to unveil the mechanism of polymer brush
formation, 2) utilize block copolymers to direct the self-assembly of 2D
plasmonic nanoparticles and form hierarchical structures in fibers, 3)
understand the domain spacing and photothermal properties of block copolymers
upon mixing with 2D plasmonic nanoparticles. The block copolymers are expected
to exhibit preferred domain orientation in the fibers, and the 2D nanoparticles
to form stacked layers with monolayers of 2D nanoparticles in each block
copolymer domain. The hierarchical nanostructures will bestow on polymers novel
plasmonic properties and be active candidates for applications in waveguides,
photovoltaics, adhesives, and 3D printing inks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.