* 1753125
* CAREER: Volatiles in the Deep Earth: Insights From Theory and Experiments
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2024
* Mainak Mookherjee, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2024
* USD 625,047.00

The Earth is the only planet in the solar system that has the right conditions
for habitability. A key ingredient that makes life possible is a vast reservoir
of water on the Earth's surface. However, the rocky interior of the Earth plays
an important role in sustaining this surface liquid water over geological time
scales. Liquid water facilitates weathering of surface rocks and minerals, and
in the process, produces minerals such as clays and other hydrous mineral phases
that can lock up the liquid water in their crystal structure. These hydrous
minerals are the ultimate sinks for storing water at surficial conditions. If
the weathering processes were to continue unhindered, all the liquid water on
the Earth's surface could be potentially stored in the crystalline hydrous
minerals in a time scale of a few billion years. The process of mantle
convection in the rocky interior of the Earth helps in circulating this water
stored in minerals back to the surface through dehydration and subsequent
volcanism. Water at depth plays an important role in reducing the melting
temperature of the rocks constituting the mantle. Water also gets incorporated
as hydrogen defects in mantle minerals and affects their elastic and transport
properties, including rheology and viscosity. This in turn facilitates mantle
convection process in the Earth. Owing to the importance of water in the deep
Earth processes, it is important to constrain how water is transported in to the
Earth's interior and to determine how much water is stored in the rocky interior
of the Earth. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award aims to
address these fundamental questions by integrating research, training, and
mentoring of the next generation of scientists and educators in the STEM fields
and by making them aware of the importance of Solid Earth research for society.
Undergraduate students through the Florida State University's Undergraduate
Research Opportunity Program (UROP) and high school students through the Young
Scholar Program (YSP) will be involved in this research. The PI will also reach
out to school students from underrepresented school districts, including Leon,
Gadsden, Jefferson, and Hamilton counties in Florida and Thomas County in
Georgia. The principal investigator (PI) will participate in educational and
outreach activities hosted by the Challenger Learning Center. The PI and his
team will present the outcomes from this project at international conferences,
including the Fall American Geophysical Union (AGU) meeting. They will also
participate in NSF-sponsored and community-driven workshops and conferences
funded by NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching theme of this study will be
to explore the high-pressure and temperature physical properties of hydrogen
bearing mineral phases. In particular, the PI will use a combination of
experiments and theoretical methods to examine the behavior of hydrogen and how
it influences- elastic and transport properties such as diffusion and electrical
conductivity of minerals at conditions relevant to the Earth's interior. The
properties of hydrous minerals will be explored using vibrational spectroscopy,
scattering and diffraction methods at both in house and international
facilities. High-temperature elasticity of hydrogen bearing minerals will be
examined using Resonant Ultrasound Spectroscopy. The experimental findings will
be supplemented with first principles simulations. The constraints on elasticity
and transport properties will be correlated with geophysical observations to put
better constraints on the transport of water into the Earth?s interior and also
the size of the water reservoir in the deep Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.