* 1753207
* CAREER: Modulating the Cybotactic Region Surrounding Colloidal Liposomes and Nanoparticles
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Luis Velarde, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 01/31/2024
* USD 665,291.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Luis Velarde at The State University of New York at
Buffalo is developing spectroscopic techniques to study properties and processes
on the curved surface of a nanoparticle in the local environment. The ability to
characterize the near-surface region of a nanoparticle becomes critically
important in defining how surface treatments and local fields affect a
particle's properties and function. Such particles find applications in chemical
sensing, catalysis, energy and biomedical research. In addition, Professor
Velarde works with students of diverse backgrounds. He is developing hands-on
experimentation kits that promote interdisciplinary approaches to building
educational sensors that involve the use of light, nanomaterials, and basic
electronics. This outreach activity is done in partnership with the Buffalo
Public School system where high school students and teachers are involved.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Velarde is developing methods for in-situ
spectroscopic measurements which selectively probe the interfacial region of the
suspended colloids. These methods are based on coherent nonlinear laser
scattering processes that exploit electronic sum frequency generation
techniques. He and his students use femtosecond pulses and ultra-broad bandwidth
multiplex approaches to directly obtain coupled vibrational and electronic
spectra of the colloidal surface with high quality spectral lineshapes. The new
spectroscopic data provides unique chemical insights into the effects of
electrolytes, pH, and the presence of specific ions on the colloid interfacial
structure and dynamics from both the particle and solvent perspective. This
research advances basic scientific understanding and expands the ability to
discover subtle processes that modulate the interfacial region of soft lipid
colloids and nanoparticles. Actively participating in community outreach,
Professor Velarde works with students from diverse backgrounds to train them in
spectroscopic analysis and in the design of complex experiments.