* 1753743
* Kith and kin in amoeba-bacteria cooperation
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Joan Strassmann, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,280,966.00

Understanding cooperation among microbes is vital. Pathogenic microbes sometimes
cooperate in ways that harm us. The bacteria comprising our gut microbiome can
cooperate in ways that benefit us. Microbes can cooperate both with members of
their own species and with other species. This project will show how within- and
between species cooperation are actually closely related. First, the two
processes often work together. Cooperation among microbial populations is
required for them to cooperate with a larger host organism. This study will
examine how favoring relatives affects cooperation with their host by using a
simple, understandable model system. Many Burkholderia bacteria inhabit an
amoeba host, conferring both helpful and harmful effects. The study will show
how the ability of bacteria to cooperate, especially among relatives, affects
host survival and reproduction. There are similarities between the theories of
within- and between-species cooperation. The investigators will construct
mathematical models for a more unified theory that will allow insights about one
type of cooperation to be applied to the other type. Finally, this study will
test these theories by putting the microbial partners together in the lab to see
what changes occur over time using experimental evolution. The results of this
work will explain microbial interactions far beyond this bacteria-amoeba system,
with potential insights for medicine and agriculture. The investigators will
develop active learning modules that allow students to manipulate models of
microbial interactions and see the consequences. They will also produce short
educational videos that will be widely
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cooperation occurs both within and
between species, but these two realms have been studied rather separately. This
study will bridge these research traditions in three ways, by studying the
importance of kin selection in an amoeba-bacteria mutualism, by developing kith
selection models of mutualism that are formally similar to kin selection models,
and by applying those models to an amoeba-bacteria mutualism. First, the
investigators will study the importance of within-species kin selection in a
between-species symbiosis, the amoeba-bacteria proto-farming system. They will
investigate relatedness of the bacteria, their kin recognition, and the effects
of these on host fitness. Second, they will model understudied aspects of kith
selection in which cooperators pay a direct fitness cost but can be compensated
by an indirect benefit from the other species, modeled by a regression
coefficient that is formally similar to genetic relatedness. Finally, the
investigators will evolve the participants under different interaction
circumstances in the amoeba-bacteria mutualism to apply and test the models.
They will determine the relative roles of direct selection, indirect selection
due to partners, and their interaction. The theory will help unify disparate
schools of thought and the empirical methods will be transferable to many other
systems. Furthermore, the investigators will develop educational modules on the
topic of their research, will involve undergraduates, and K12 students, and make
presentations to the public. They also will facilitate diversification of the
professoriate with informative pieces on academic success
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.