* 1753158
* CAREER: Scalar Transport at the Sediment Water Interface in Coastal Benthic Boundary Layers: Advancing Nearshore Processes Research and Education in Puerto Rico
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Sylvia Rodriguez-Abudo, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 513,296.00

This project provides an integrated approach to advance nearshore processes
research and education on the island of Puerto Rico. It focuses on advancing our
understanding of exchange processes of water and other constituents between the
seabed and the overlying water under the action of waves. A systematic
progression of experiments on flat, rippled and transitioning rippled bed
regimes will be carried out using non-invasive laser-based techniques to obtain
detailed observations of concentration and velocity fields with unprecedented
resolution. A new collaboration with a numerical modeling group will inform the
experiments, provide valuable data for cross-validation, and extend the research
into more complex physics. The research will provide parameterizations
describing ecological, biogeochemical and microbiological processes in the
coastal benthic boundary layer and it will advance women and minorities in the
fields of ocean sciences and engineering. The research program is integrated
into a robust education plan through a variety of efforts, including the
creation of a new course and enhancement of existing courses with unprecedented
flow visualization and quantification techniques; the development of interactive
modules on beach evolution and contamination; and the inception of a Graduate
Fellowship Workshop series to coach students during the fellowship application
process. This project will provide essential resources to advance the next
generation of ocean scientists and engineers in Puerto Rico, and provide
valuable role models for women and minorities.

This project examines the combined effect of complex roughness scales and
spatially varying mass sources on scalar transport across the sediment-water
interface under oscillating wave motion. It builds upon previous findings that
demonstrate a high variability of momentum fluxes across the ripple wavelengths,
and explores the effect of preferential organization of solutes on the overall
mass exchange. Through a combination of detailed laboratory experiments (using
PIV and PLIF), robust physics-based techniques for data reduction, and a new
numerical modeling collaboration, this project will provide fundamental
knowledge on the complex intra-ripple mixing structure resulting from a
combination of unsteady hydrodynamic forcing, bedform-induced coherent motions,
and nonuniform mass sources. Grounded on the PI's expertise in turbulent
oscillatory flow over mobile rippled beds, this study has the potential to
profoundly impact the way current deterministic models parameterize mass
transport in coastal benthic boundary layers including contaminants, nutrients,
and biogeochemical processes. The proposed research program will be integrated
into a strong educational plan through the development of new and enhanced
courses, outreach activities, and fellowship writing workshops.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.