* 1753174
* CAREER: CDS&amp;E: Developing Reaction-Diffusion Models of Non-Equilibrium Virion Assembly and Budding
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Margaret Johnson, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 06/30/2023
* USD 465,932.00

Professor Margaret E. Johnson of Johns Hopkins University is supported by an
award from the Chemistry of Life Processes and Chemical Theory, Models, and
Computational Methods programs in the Division of Chemistry to develop and apply
novel theoretical and computer simulation methods for studying virion formation,
budding, and membrane remodeling leading to virion release at the cell membrane.
Virions are the infective virus particles, and consist of viral DNA or RNA
enclosed by a protein shell. Dr. Johnson is investigating how retroviral Gag
(Group-specific Antigen) proteins perpetuate viral infection by assembling new
virions on the membranes of infected cells. A molecular understanding of this
critical step in the lifecycle of infectious virions can help identify targets
for therapeutic intervention against viral infection. The new reaction-diffusion
modeling software being developed by Dr. Johnson for this project provides the
missing link coupling short molecular length-scales (chemistry) with the slow
time-scales of cellular self-assembly and membrane budding (membrane mechanics).
The models are being tested and iteratively refined against live cell
experiments. The modeling software, graphical user interface, and rule-based
model definition framework are being disseminated as open-source software and
made compatible with other widely-used biophysical modeling tools, providing a
transformative new approach for understanding and controlling essential cellular
processes, including those involved in cell division or in viral infections. The
research is closely integrated with an educational outreach program designed to
improve diversity and therefore outcomes in STEM fields by teaching computer
programming to Baltimore City Elementary School students. The after-school
module introduces students to the power of computers in solving outstanding
problems in biology and chemistry, with the goal of promoting and encouraging
future careers in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
develop a rate-based computational model of virion formation in the cell, to
determine the mechanisms of recruitment and assembly of the central retroviral
Gag protein on the membrane. While the components of the final virion are known,
pathways of assembly are poorly understood because the dynamics is sensitive to
protein production, kinetics, membrane composition, and cellular co-factors. In
this project, computer simulations of the virion components are directly
compared with live-cell experiments to determine and describe the time- and
space- and structure-dependent mechanisms of Gag lattice assembly in vivo, and
provide a mechanism for iterative model refinement. The computational approach
is made possible by the implementation of new reaction-diffusion methods for
non-equilibrium assembly and membrane remodeling. The deepened understanding of
virion formation and mechanistic pathways has application to predictive control
over successful viral exit from infected cells, and informing strategies for
therapeutic intervention. This research is contributing to the ability of the
broader scientific community to study mechanisms of non-equilibrium dynamics of
the cell at unprecedented resolution through public access to the powerful new
methods and software being developed for the project. The research is integrated
with an educational outreach program to actively promote and encourage students
from diverse backgrounds in Baltimore city to consider futures in STEM by
teaching them computer programming and its applications in chemistry and
biology. By focusing on elementary school students, this research program will
help to foster, early on, interest in STEM fields, using Professor Johnson's
computational research program as a motivation and
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.