* 1753373
* CAREER: Bridging Theory and Observations of Habitable Worlds and Building a Bridge to Astronomy and Astrobiology for Underrepresented Middle-School Girls
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Aomawa Shields, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 07/31/2023
* USD 687,416.00

Many stars smaller and cooler than the Sun have planets; such stars are by far
the most numerous in our Galaxy. Because the stars are relatively dim and their
gravity relatively weak, detecting planets close enough to the star support life
is easier around these stars. The investigator will use theoretical modeling to
study the diversity of climates that may exist on extrasolar worlds. She will
produce a database of likely surface conditions, depending on whether the
surface of the planet is covered with water, soil, or salt. This database will
be of use to investigators studying newly discovered planets for signs of life.
She will expand upon a program, Rising Stargirls, that she has already created
to strengthen the interest of middle-school girls from underrepresented groups
in science. She will conduct monthly workshops for girls and help train
educators to facilitate workshops in their own
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program will incorporate
atmospheric science, orbital and climate dynamics, surface geology and
glaciology, and numerical modeling with the goal of building a qualitative
pathway to the most rigorous evaluations of candidates for habitable planets
beyond the Solar System. The major factors to be considered are surface albedo
(various proportions of water, water ice, land, and salt), atmospheric
composition, and planetary rotation rate. The PI will use two different Global
Climate Models to run the climate simulations. The systems of Proxima Centauri,
TRAPPIST-1e, and LHS-1140b will be used at testbeds to apply the methods
developed here to new planets discovered with TESS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.