* 1753829
* OPUS:  PRAIRIE DOG SOCIETIES: SYNTHESIS OF 45 YEARS OF RESEARCH ON BEHAVIORAL ECOLOGY
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* John Hoogland, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 186,869.00

This project will synthesize research on the ecology and social behavior of four
species of prairie dogs. The focus will be three factors that affect not only
prairie dogs, but also hundreds of other vertebrate social species: non-parental
infanticide, alarm calling, and polyandry (a single female mating with two or
more males). The synthesis will examine how these factors have influenced the
costs and benefits of social life within prairie dog colonies. Two products of
the research will result: a book that will present the synthesis to a wide
scientific audience and a website featuring decades of images, audio recordings,
videos, and datasets directed at high school students, undergraduates, and other
curious naturalists of all ages. Finally, the researcher will continue to
collaborate with four television companies - including National Geographic
Television - that have recently documented his research with prairie dogs. This
research provides insights into the evolution of common, but poorly understood,
social behaviors in mammals; the products will be of broad interest to
behavioral ecologists, wildlife managers, and conservation
biologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social species exhibit several initially
puzzling behaviors, and this project aims to pull together four decades of data
on prairie dog species to understand three such behaviors: non-parental
infanticide, alarm calling, and polyandry. Each of these behaviors seems
detrimental to fitness on the surface and hence requires focused investigation
to understand. This project will leverage long term data following the behavior
of individuals over their lifetime and their reproductive success to understand
these phenomena. In particular, the synthesis will include new analyses focused
on the role of colony density on the frequency of infanticide, the costs and
benefits to an individual that gives an alarm call, which may draw a predator's
attention, and the costs and benefits of multiple matings by females. This will
be the first study to elucidate the consistency and contingency of these
behaviors over a life time and the consequences for fitness. The analyses will
clarify the maintenance of coloniality despite these apparent
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.