* 1753060
* CAREER: Lipid Regulation of Receptor Tyrosine Kinases
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Adam Smith, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 12/31/2022
* USD 650,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Adam W. Smith from the University of Akron to
investigate lipid regulation of receptor tyrosine kinases. The surface of living
cells is composed of a lipid membrane embedded with thousands of protein
receptors. Dynamic associations between membrane proteins and lipids are
integral to function, but resolving these interactions has proven to be
extremely challenging. This project applies advanced fluorescence methods, and
single-molecule imaging to measure lipid-protein interactions in biological
membranes. The long-term goal is to develop a quantitative chemical model for
the interface between plasma membrane lipids and a class of membrane proteins
called receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs). RTKs are integral membrane proteins
that regulate cell growth and differentiation. The focus of this project is on
two RTKs, EphA2 and EGFR. Integral with these research objectives is an
education and broader impacts program that enhances STEM education at the
University of Akron and provides materials and curriculum for enhanced
laboratory instruction across the country. This includes the development of a
3D-printable, smartphone spectrometer (the SpecPhone) for implementation in
university laboratory courses. The low cost and simplicity of the SpecPhone also
make it accessible to K-12 students and citizens so that they can engage in
real-world science problems. The broader impacts work creates new curriculum and
teacher training workshops for K-12 STEM education, to participate in local
Maker Fairs, and to develop protocols for a transformative citizen science
project in the Lake Erie watershed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lipids solvate membrane
proteins and, in many cases, regulate their activity through direct, specific
contacts. Many lipid-protein interactions are inferred from static structures or
computer simulations; however, there is little experimental data to verify these
interactions in situ and determine their kinetic and thermodynamic stability.
This project uses advanced fluorescence methods, including pulsed-interleaved
excitation fluorescence cross-correlation spectroscopy (PIE-FCCS) and single-
molecule imaging to measure molecular associations in biological membranes. The
long-term goal is to develop a quantitative chemical model for the interface
between plasma membrane lipids and receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs). Both the
extracellular domain (ECD) and the intracellular domain (ICD) of RTKs associate
directly with the plasma membrane, but the chemical details of the associations
are not well-understood. This project focuses on two RTKs, EphA2 and EGFR. The
central hypothesis is that anionic lipids bind these proteins and regulate their
structure and activity. To test this hypothesis, we determine the affinity and
specificity of anionic lipid binding to EGFR in model supported lipid bilayers.
We also investigate the regulation of EphA2 structure and dynamics by anionic
lipids in model membranes. Finally, we resolve the functional role of anionic
lipid binding to EGFR. Achieving these objectives contributes to a systematic
understanding of how the lipid-protein interface is affected by parameters like
lipid charge, headgroup structure, solvent pH, and salt effects. The results
significantly advance our understanding of the chemical interactions that guide
cell communication. Integral with these research objectives is an education and
broader impacts program that enhances STEM education at the University of Akron
and provides materials and curriculum for enhanced laboratory instruction across
the country. This includes the development of a 3D-printable, smartphone
spectrometer (the SpecPhone) for implementation in university laboratory
courses. The low cost and simplicity of the SpecPhone also make it accessible to
K-12 students and citizens so that they can engage in real-world science
problems. The focus of the broader impacts work is to create new curriculum and
teacher training workshops for K-12 STEM education, to participate in local
Maker Fairs, and to develop protocols for a transformative citizen science
project in the Lake Erie watershed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.