* 1753218
* CAREER: Large-scale brain dynamics underlying visual perceptual awareness
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2023
* Biyu He, New York University Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 01/31/2023
* USD 770,203.00

Despite the enormous progress in neuroscience over the past century, the
neurobiological basis of our subjective awareness remains a mystery. Advances
over the past decades have now enabled one major component of this question to
be rigorously addressed by modern neuroscientific tools. That is, how does the
brain give rise to perceptual awareness of sensory stimuli? In particular, there
has been a concerted effort by neuroscientists and psychologists to unravel the
neural bases of visual perceptual awareness. Currently, one major open question
is whether regions in the human frontal cortex directly contribute to the
content of visual perceptual awareness or, alternatively, are only involved in
the maintenance and manipulation of perceptual information represented in
posterior visual cortices. With the support of this NSF CAREER award, Dr. Biyu
He will address this question and develop a framework for understanding large-
scale brain dynamics underlying visual perceptual awareness. To this end, the
project combines visual psychophysics, state-of-the-art multimodal human brain
imaging, noninvasive brain stimulation and computational modeling. The outcome
of this work will lead to a better understanding of the biological basis of
human perceptual awareness in both normative and clinical populations. The
educational activities supported by this award are intended to stimulate
scientific interest and enthusiasm in neuroscience in student populations, and
increase the use of computational neuroscience and state-of-the-art multimodal
imaging tools in human neuroscience research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
objective of this proposal is to tackle a central question in neuroscience: How
does the brain give rise to perceptual awareness of sensory stimuli? To
investigate this question, the research group will combine psychophysics, multi-
modal brain imaging, and noninvasive brain stimulation in humans, facilitated by
computational modeling, and use vision as the model system. Specifically, the
following questions are addressed: 1) Do neural activities in frontal regions
contribute to perceptual content when stimulus ambiguity must be resolved? 2) Do
neural activities in frontal regions contribute to gating the access to
awareness by a particular piece of visual information? The central hypothesis is
that large-scale brain activity during conscious visual perception exhibits
initial-state-dependent, robust, transient dynamics shaped by the interactions
between frontal and visual cortices. The experimental approach features
recording of brain activity at whole-brain and large-scale network levels using
a combination of ultra-high-field (7 Tesla) functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI), magnetoencephalography (MEG), and electrocorticography (ECoG) to
leverage the high spatial or high temporal resolution of each modality, and to
further manipulate brain activity using high-definition transcranial direct
current stimulation (HD-tDCS). These studies will have a major impact for
understanding how brain systems coordinate to generate perceptual awareness of
environmental input.