* 1753768
* How the Crowdsourced Spatial Data Revolution is Being Used to Complement Official Data
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2018,02/28/2019
* Patricia Solis, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2019
* USD 121,353.00

This research project focuses on societal aspects of emerging high-tech
technologies: crowdsourcing, remote sensing, and open mapping. The goal is to
advance understanding about the role of open, volunteered spatial data to
produce knowledge needed by public institutions responsible for provision of
services to all citizens. Despite that crowdsourced maps contain important
information for building resilient communities and infrastructure, rarely are
volunteered spatial data integrated into official cartographies. Local and
national public institutions may lack trust of data quality, adherence to
standards, and completeness. The researchers will closely examine the concepts
and practices of using crowdsourced data relative to official cartographies
within a small but representative set of national cases characterized by a range
of public access, technologies, and governance configurations, namely
Mesoamerica and the US Borderlands. This region of interest leverages experience
with participatory cross-border harmonization of official fundamental spatial
datasets in Panama, Costa Rica, Nicaragua, Honduras, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Belize, Mexico, and parts of neighboring Colombia and Texas. Findings will help
expand the base of knowledge about evidence-based decision-making. The project
will establish a foundation for building community across academic and
government sectors interested in sharing and co-creating knowledge on specific
applications, such as for hazards, development, and infrastructure services. The
research team will provide theoretical insights within Science, Technology, and
Society research as well as practical ideas to potentially harness the benefits
of the data revolution for the public good.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
aims are (a) to better understand the barriers and conditions for acceptance
when and where crowdsourced spatial data is available to be officially used in
Mesoamerica and the US Borderlands (blind spots); (b) to better understand the
impact of crowdsourced data when incorporated into official data sources; and
(c) to produce missing geospatial data on vulnerabilities by engaging volunteer
student mappers and official cartographers through participatory research (blank
spots). A mixed-method approach leverages the unique positions of the research
team as appointed authorities, commission chairs, and members of the PanAmerican
Institute for Geography and History, a specialized arm of the Organization of
American States. The researchers will empirically develop knowledge about the
needs, opportunities, obstacles, processes and practices of crowdsourcing
geospatial data relative to official cartographies. The project will use focus
groups, interviews, critical incident techniques, broadly distributed web-based
surveys, temporal comparative analysis, and participatory feedback to develop
peer-reviewed articles as well as publications of best practices for use by
informants, academics, and decision makers, in both English and Spanish. The
project will train and engage students in this research from Texas Tech, one of
only a few Hispanic Serving, Carnegie R1 Research Institutions in the US.
Students will improve their workforce readiness for high-demand geospatial
technologies careers. A final symposia at the OAS in Washington DC will provide
a forum for input to deliverables and for dissemination. Results will contribute
insight on NSF's Big Ideas, Harnessing the Data Revolution for 21st Century
Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.