* 1753552
* Political Violence and State Repression
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Andrew Walder, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 03/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

This project codes information from 18 book-length volumes of internal
investigation reports in a region that experienced one of the largest political
upheavals in the 20th century into a database. Insurgencies in collapsing
authoritarian regimes have been a repeated and major concern for the U.S. in
international affairs. This project capitalizes on the recent availability of
these unusually detailed and highly-classified internal investigation reports,
compiled by the government of a region that experienced some of the most severe
disorders and highest death tolls. The database that will contain close to 6,000
political events and associated casualties, for all 86 cities and counties in
the region, along with a range of economic, social, and political data about
each locality. The quality, level of detail, and comprehensive coverage of these
materials will permit the analysis of state collapse and political violence with
an unusual degree of precision and depth. The completed dataset and full
documentation will be widely shared and made publicly available at the end of
the project. This will contribute to efforts to understand the dynamics of
political violence and state repression, and the sources of instability and
conflict in highly centralized authoritarian regimes. Data and analysis
generated by this project will be valuable for the crafting of policy toward
such regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dataset compiled in this
project will permit the analysis of the endogenous formation of factional
identities during political upheavals, while at the same time gauging the impact
of exogenous structural features of localities and populations on levels of
political mobilization and collective violence. Three structural features of
particular interest are ethnic and sub-ethnic populations in an ethnically
diverse region, prior divisions within local political networks, and the degree
of party-state penetration across 86 rural counties and cities. The dataset will
permit the analysis of the factors that influenced the origins and evolution of
a highly complex upheaval over the course of several years (1966-1969) that
included the collapse of local civilian governments, a popular insurgency that
divided into two violently opposed armed factions, widespread and systematic
intervention by military units, and overwhelming levels of state repression in
order to rebuild local governments. The anticipated analyses will employ event
count models, event history analysis, and network analysis to analyze the
initial formation of factions and the subsequent evolution of collective
violence. The project will contribute to the understanding of violent
insurgencies, civil war, and state repression, especially as it pertains to
instability and upheavals in highly centralized repressive dictatorships that
suffer sudden collapse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.