* 1753735
* American Meteorological Society Summer Policy Colloquium 2018-2020; Washington, DC
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2021
* William Hooke, American Meteorological Society
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 03/31/2021
* USD 392,400.00

The goal of this project is to build knowledge, experience and leadership
capacity in the intersection of science and policy. The American Meteorological
Society (AMS) will conduct an annual Summer Policy Colloquium in Washington DC
that will enable interactions with agency leaders, policy makers and government
leaders in the legislative and executive branches. The unique set of instructors
in the Colloquium typically has interdisciplinary backgrounds in science,
policy, and law. The attendees are provided instruction to allow development of
skills and techniques for communicating science to policymakers and the public
in ways that encourage information sharing and collaboration. Additionally,
through instruction, examples, and exercises, attendees learn the legislative
process and the roles of science information in support of policy. As a result,
the national dialogue among scientists, policymakers, and the public will become
more efficient, clear, and solution-oriented. This benefits support of national
policy with respect to increased understanding and management of natural
resources critical to food, water, energy, resilience to hazards, and
environmental protection.

AMS will use funds provided by NSF to support the attendance of early career
scientists as well as faculty members from Historically Black Colleges and
Universities, and Minority Serving Institutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.