* 1753168
* CAREER: The Formation of Stars, Planets, and Moons: Applying Similar Physics to Different Systems and Enhancing Scientific Computing Literacy
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Zhaohuan Zhu, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 593,489.00

Astronomers are now convinced that many, if not most, stars are accompanied by
planets. They are interested in learning how planets form, and whether or not
the Solar System is representative of the Universe. It is believed that planets
formed from a disk of material around the young Sun; this disk is long gone for
our Solar System. In this project, the investigator will use computers and his
own computer code to model the properties of how such disks form and change
under the effects of radiation from the star and magnetic fields. He will
compare his models with observations obtained from space missions and ground-
based telescopes. He will work with educators at museums and supercomputer
centers to generate visualizations to help the public understand this work. He
will also develop courses and workshops in computational methods for junior
researchers and for students at his home institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed program uses the 3-D magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) code Athena++. The PI
will 1) Model the effects of radiation on the accretion process, 2) Construct
models of both non-ideal MHD effects and thermal dynamics on the structure of
protoplanetary disks, and 3) Carry out simulations of disks around protoplanets
that share similarities with the simulations described in 1 and 2. He will
compare his simulated models with observations from space missions such as
Spitzer and Herschel and ground-based telescopes such as ALMA, EVLA, VLT,
Subaru, and Gemini. Finally, he will make predictions for future observations in
the next decade with instruments such as the
TMT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.