* 1753436
* Collaborative Research: Biogeochemical drivers of interspecies electron transfer from iron reducers to methanogens
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Matthew Kirk, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 07/31/2022
* USD 196,330.00

Iron reduction and methanogenesis are two of the most common microbial reactions
in nature. During iron reduction, microorganisms respire ferric iron, the form
of iron in rust. During methanogenesis, microorganisms make methane, the primary
component of natural gas and a potent greenhouse gas. Some iron reducers and
methanogens, the microbes that drive the reactions, can cooperate with one
another by sharing energy resources through interspecies electron transfer
(IET). However, most predictive models assume that methanogens and iron reducers
do not coexist, due to competition for energy sources, and only allow methane
generation where ferric minerals have been depleted. Failure to account for both
IET and competition may introduce error in process-based estimates of methane
production. Moreover, environmental drivers of IET have not been identified,
limiting the ability of models to predict how methane fluxes vary with
environmental change. This study will create a new model for methanogenesis that
links competitive and cooperative interactions. The model will improve the
ability to predict methane generation and manage carbon budgets in natural and
engineered systems including soils, aquifers, landfills, and wastewater
treatment systems. The study will also provide training to undergraduate and
graduate students and increase involvement of underrepresented groups in science
through participation in the Kansas Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation summer research program and summer outreach events for middle-
school girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research goals of this study are to: 1)
identify environmental drivers that push interactions of methanogens and iron
reducers between competition and IET, 2) determine how changes in interactions
between methanogens and iron reducers affect methane generation, and 3) evaluate
the coupled role of enzyme properties and environmental chemistry in determining
the nature of interactions. To achieve these goals, the study will integrate the
results of bioreactor experiments with dynamic enzyme modeling. The bioreactor
experiments will examine how interactions and methane production vary with key
biogeochemical factors, including pH, ferric iron source, and the availability
of electron donors and ferrous iron. The modeling analysis will consider enzyme
kinetics and reaction energetics to simulate reactions at a
subcellular/enzymatic level, with experiment results providing a basis for
validation. Both competition and syntrophy between methanogens and iron reducers
will be possible in the experiments and simulations, allowing the study to
resolve how interactions and methane generation evolve with environmental
chemistry. Moreover, study findings will create a roadmap for evaluating the
environmental significance of IET between iron reducers and methanogens by
defining an environmental context for this interaction. In doing so, study
results will provide the tools needed to advance our understanding of ecological
underpinnings of the global methane cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.