* 1753808
* RUI:  Stimulus Characteristics Influencing Non-Cardinal Color Mechanisms
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Karen Gunther, Wabash College
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2023
* USD 200,749.00

For over 200 years it has been known that color vision begins with the three
cone types in the retina. More recently, vision scientists have determined that
the retina routes the cone signals into three "cardinal color" pathways: red vs.
green (RG), bluish vs. yellowish (BY), and black vs. white (BW). However, the
manner in which light is turned into colored perceptions is not fully understood
- in particular, how do people perceive colors beyond the six cardinal colors,
the "non-cardinal" colors? To investigate this, the researchers will test how
different spatial characteristics of the stimuli (e.g., size, striping,
contrast) affects the ability to perceive non-cardinal colors. The results may
allow vision scientists to understand more about the neural mechanisms behind
color perception. In addition, this project will provide research internships
for undergraduate college students, the next generation of scientists, as part
of NSF's mission to promote the progress of science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will use visual psychophysics to test the neural mechanisms underlying
our ability to perceive non-cardinal colors. Although there is ample evidence
that such mechanisms exist in the isoluminant plane of color space, there is
less strong evidence for the two planes with luminance input (red-
green/luminance and tritan/luminance). Thus, these latter two planes are a focus
of the proposed studies. Non-cardinal mechanisms will be measured by the ratio
of the contrast thresholds to detect the stimuli when embedded in aligned noise
(same color) versus when embedded in orthogonal noise (e.g., red/green stimuli
embedded in tritan noise). Stimulus attributes such as size, contrast, and
gratings vs. full-field will be manipulated. In addition, the effects of
perceptual learning on these non-cardinal mechanisms will be
examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.