* 1753357
* CAREER: Connecting Mathematical Models Across Scales
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2024
* Mark Transtrum, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2024
* USD 585,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical and
computational research aimed at developing simple models of complex systems.
Complex systems are made up of a large number of smaller components that
interact in ways that can lead to interesting collective behaviors where the
components act in concert. Examples of such systems include materials,
biological pathways, and neural networks as well as many engineered systems and
social networks. Complex systems are difficult to model. Usually, mathematical
models are most useful when they are sufficiently simple to capture the relevant
parts of the phenomenon of interest while ignoring irrelevant details. For
complex systems, it is difficult to know from the start which components are
relevant and which are irrelevant. Consequently, models of real-world systems
tend to be overly complicated, difficult to work with, and have limited
predictive power compared to more parsimonious representations.&lt;br/&gt;This
project leverages recent advances that combine the mathematical areas of
information theory with differential geometry and topology. The basic idea
utilizes a systematic method for pruning irrelevant complications from a model
of a complex system until a sufficiently simple model is obtained. By
enumerating all of the resulting approximations, the scientist has a roadmap
from the complicated, detailed representation of the physical system, through
various types of approximations and the system behaviors they describe. Put
another way, the process acts as a mathematical bridge across scales: connecting
microscopic mechanisms to systems-level phenomena. In this project, the PI will
apply these new mathematical and associated computational tools to three target
application areas: crystal structures of alloys, biochemical kinetics of
developmental pathways, and networks of neurons. By better understanding how
mathematical models reflect relevant physical details, models will be better at
predicting the behavior of complex systems and enable more sophisticated design
and control of complicated materials and processes. &lt;br/&gt;This work also
includes an educational component that will develop a pedagogy of
interdisciplinary science. This pedagogy will focus on university faculty in the
form of a seminar series; university students in the form of a multi-department,
special topics course; and high school teachers in the form of teaching
workshops and web resources for high school science
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award
supports theoretical and computational research aimed at developing simple
models of complex systems. Simple mathematical models have always played an
important role in scientific inquiry. For systems with separated scales or
symmetries, there are standard techniques for constructing parsimonious
representations from complicated, mechanistic descriptions. Recent advances
combining information theory and differential geometry and topology suggest new
methods for reasoning about the relationship between mechanisms and phenomena in
models of complex physical systems. &lt;br/&gt;For this research, the PI takes
the approach that the predictions of a multi-parameter model form a manifold
embedded in an abstract data space. It has been observed that typical model
manifolds are bounded and that simple, approximate models reside on the boundary
of the model manifold. The Manifold Boundary Approximation Method constructs a
sequence of limiting approximations, that is, "small parameters" that
corresponds to a sequence of simple, approximate models. This research will
extend these results to three target application areas: alloy crystal structure,
biochemical kinetics of developmental pathways, and networks of neurons. Within
these target application areas, the PI will develop a new approach to modeling
based on the concept of a "supremum model", that is, the minimal model that
simultaneously explains several behaviors. When combined with the Manifold
Boundary Approximation Method, the supremum model concept enables one to
bootstrap from several models of overlapping system components to models of much
larger systems, the direct exploration of which would be computationally
challenging or infeasible.&lt;br/&gt;This work also includes an educational
component that will develop a pedagogy of interdisciplinary science. This
pedagogy will target university faculty in the form of a seminar series;
university students in the form of a multi-department, special topics course;
and high school teachers in the form of teaching workshops and web resources for
high school science teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.