* 1753187
* CAREER: Stereoselective Carbene Cascade Cyclizations
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Indrajeet Sharma, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 04/30/2024
* USD 650,000.00

With this CAREER Award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Division of
Chemistry is supporting the research of Professor Indrajeet Sharma at the
University of Oklahoma. Professor Sharma is developing new synthetic methods for
the construction of the types of bioactive molecules that are frequently used in
efforts to identify drug leads for the treatment of cancer, infectious diseases,
and neurological disorders. The research described seeks to develop cascade
reactions that take advantage of a sequence of carefully timed steps to convert
inexpensive, readily accessible compounds into higher-value, complex molecules.
To accomplish this, the Sharma group is developing new reaction protocols that
involve the use of more than one metal at a time. This research is expected to
have broad application in the fields of chemical synthesis, medicinal chemistry,
and therapeutics development. Professor Sharma is also pioneering an outreach
program, the Synergistic Catalytic Cycle for Education Excellence (SC2E2), that
provides crucial hands-on science education for underrepresented students in the
State of Oklahoma. The SC2E2 program encourages an increase in school
enrollment, retention, and graduation rates of highly qualified STEM students
from low-income areas in the State of Oklahoma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite
dramatic advances in natural product-inspired drug discovery, many bioactive
scaffolds (spirocycles, medium-sized rings, and terpene furanolactones) remain
underexploited in drug discovery screening owing to the challenges associated
with their synthesis. To address these challenges, this research program will
utilize metal carbene cascade reactions for the efficient scalable synthesis of
such scaffolds. More specifically, this research focuses on the use of diazo-
derived metal-carbenes that are ambiphilic in nature in combination with a
second metal catalyst to trigger sequential reactions with a nucleophile and an
electrophile. The ensuing cascade reactions lead to the rapid generation of
molecular complexity. A comprehensive educational plan is also integrated with
the research goals to provide an inclusive scientific education experience for
students from underrepresented groups in the State of Oklahoma. The proposed
SC2E2 program is inspired from developed research involving synergistic
catalysis, in which two or more catalysts act simultaneously to improve the
efficiency of existing transformations. Likewise, SC2E2 builds upon inclusive
educational practices in a cyclic process by providing students training,
guidance and leadership opportunities, which ultimately help cultivate a new
generation of diverse STEM professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.