* 1753298
* A multidisciplinary study of early Homo sapiens and anatomical modernity
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Sheela Athreya, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2024
* USD 289,953.00

Most studies of human evolution have been based on fossils from Europe and
Africa. This project broadens the representation of understudied regions in
paleoanthropology by analyzing early humans from the Indian subcontinent.
Researchers will analyze burials from the UNESCO World Heritage site of
Bhimbetka in India, where painted rock shelters date back to approximately
40,000 years ago. They will analyze the skeletal remains, ancient DNA and stone
tools of these people to reconstruct their ancestry and establish their
relationship to other early human populations. Understanding human evolution in
this relatively poorly understood region will contribute to a greater awareness
of our biological and behavioral diversity, since our inception as a species.
The project will also support graduate student training and international
research collaborations, as well as diverse voices and regions in research on
modern human origins. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A multidisciplinary team of
paleoanthropologists, archaeologists and geneticists will examine the skeletal
and archaeological remains from Bhimbetka and another site in India, Jwalapuram
rock shelter in South India, where fragmentary and partially cremated remains
were excavated from securely-dated Late Pleistocene levels of a rock shelter.
This project will 1) directly date the remains and establish a solid
chronological framework for both hominins and Paleolithic artifacts; 2) analyze
the skeletal remains to determine whether they are most similar to
contemporaneous Asian, European, or African populations; 3) extract and analyze
ancient DNA from the specimens; and 4) correlate the genetic and morphological
data with the stone tool remains to determine what technology is associated with
early Homo sapiens in India. The results will help to clarify the evolutionary
processes that shaped the skeletal morphology, genomes and material culture in
South Asia in the Late Pleistocene. This integrative approach to understanding
human evolution in a relatively poorly understood region will contribute to a
greater awareness of the regionally variable patterns that characterized early
H. sapiens throughout the Old World.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.