* 1753367
* CAREER:Visualization and Control of Chiral Bound States and Ballistic Chiral Electrons in Two-Dimensional Material Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Jairo Velasco, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 606,749.00

Nontechnical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project is composed of a research
and outreach plan that addresses fundamental questions regarding the control of
very fast (Dirac) electrons in materials at the nanoscale. These exotic
particles provide an exciting new testbed for electron motion in materials
because their behavior across barriers is distinct from normal electrons. There
are many theoretical predictions for the behavior of Dirac electrons at these
interfaces, but it has not been possible to directly test them - until now. The
PI recently developed techniques to create ideal nanoscale barriers with
arbitrary shapes that enable the first imaging of confined Dirac electrons. Such
control and visualization of Dirac electron motion will generate deep
fundamental insights, paving the way toward entirely new electronic devices,
such as novel sensors and tunable nanoscale electronic lenses. The outreach
component of this CAREER project will increase Hispanic representation among
STEM majors by using this research project with an existing NSF Research
Experience for Undergraduates at the University of California Santa Cruz (UCSC).
Hispanic high school students and high achieving community college students from
Hispanic Serving Institutions from the local area will work and be mentored at
three phases in their educational development: pre-college, early-college, and
late-college. These stages will provide science career awareness to the pre-
college group, provide opportunities for research experiences within the PI's
research effort to the early-college group, and provide career-based mentoring
and networking opportunities to the late-college group. These outreach efforts
will benefit not only the participating students, but also students at UCSC, and
the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER project addresses fundamental questions regarding chiral bound states and
trajectories in graphene and bilayer graphene. The exotic quasiparticles-Dirac
fermions, hosted by these two-dimensional materials provide a new testbed for
electron motion because of their chiral nature and negative energy states. The
PI recently developed a versatile technique to create pristine nanoscale PN
junctions with arbitrary shapes, which enabled the first imaging of confined
Dirac fermions. This project investigates the role of the potential shape and
the differences in behavior between massless and massive Dirac fermions within
these confinement potentials. Because Dirac fermions exhibit Klein tunneling
(100% barrier transmission) and anti-Klein tunneling (100% barrier reflection),
the research carried out by this project reveals novel bound states not found
with Schr√∂dinger fermions. Moreover, steered Dirac fermion trajectories across
and in response to PN and graphene/superconductor junctions are mapped and
compared directly to microscopic models for barrier transmission and
superconductivity. Theoretical predictions for the behavior of Dirac fermions at
these interfaces are abundant, but it has not been possible to directly test
them - until now. Specifically, to reveal chiral bound states and trajectories
this CAREER project contains three main research efforts: (1) Visualize and
control chiral bound states in two-dimensional material heterostructures
composed of graphene and bilayer graphene. This study creates pristine nanoscale
PN junctions in two-dimensional material heterostructures and use scanning
tunneling microscopy to map quantum interference and confinement within these PN
junctions. Different junction shapes (circular vs. non-circular) and charge
carrier types (massless vs. massive Dirac fermions) are investigated; (2)
Visualize and control ballistic chiral electron trajectories in two-dimensional
material heterostructures. This study uses scanning gate microscopy in
conjunction with nanoscale PN junctions and magnetic fields to map and steer
ballistic trajectories of massless and massive Dirac fermions; (3) visualize and
control chiral trajectories at a graphene/superconductor interface. This study
uses scanning gate microscopy to map Dirac fermion reflections off a
superconductor's interface at the nanoscale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.