* 1753985
* Workshop: Methods in phonological data collection and analysis, San Diego, CA, Fall 2018
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Eric Bakovic, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 10/31/2019
* USD 16,448.00

This workshop will highlight the importance of experimental methods and corpora
to the study of linguistic sound systems (phonology). Theoretical research
results in phonology are often based on relatively sparse data from works that
are themselves based on impressionistic phonetic transcriptions of native
speaker utterances. Relatively recent technological advances, coupled with more
sophisticated experimental methods, provide more accurate, extensive, and
quantifiable information on the nature of sound systems. Phonologists are
increasingly employing these methods, and have also begun investigations with
large-scale corpora and databases. Such research has already had an impact on
the field, and it is imperative that graduate students be familiar with, if not
specifically trained in, a variety of such methods. To this end, the workshop
will feature talks, posters, and tutorials on the workshop theme, and presents a
unique opportunity to share methods, and insights into their use, among fellow
phonologists. For students, it is an opportunity to learn about these methods
from some of the top researchers in the field. Our emphasis on under-documented
and endangered languages, including signed languages, will highlight the
importance of diverse language communities and encourage students to become
involved in fieldwork. This not only has the benefit of contributions to the
study of diverse languages, but is also beneficial to the career prospects of
graduate students: many recent offers of tenure-track phonology positions have
been made to fieldworkers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The importance of new data-
collecting methodologies for phonological theory is highlighted here with very
brief descriptions of phenomena that have been illuminated by some of these
methodologies. All of these examples rely on data from under-documented and/or
endangered languages, and this will be a major emphasis of the workshop. (1)
Careful acoustic and articulatory analysis has revealed that speech sounds that
have long been thought to be inert to phonological processes may actually
participate in those processes, creating distinctions that are difficult to
distinguish impressionistically. This illustrates the importance of conducting
experimental phonetic research to inform phonological theory. (2) Acoustic
analysis of pitch contours based on data collection with a number of native
speakers of relevant languages has established that lexical and grammatical tone
alignment can be contrastive irrespective of phonological structure. Such a
result has important ramifications for the analysis of tonal systems, but would
have gone unnoticed without detailed acoustic research that helps inform
phonological representations. (3) Recent articulatory studies of nasal sounds
have shown that they may be characterized by lingual, pharyngeal, and/or voice
quality changes in addition to characteristic velum lowering, implying that the
phonetic implementation of nasality is multidimensional. Such results could only
be definitively found using articulatory measurements. (4) As spoken corpora of
under-documented and endangered languages are constructed and become available,
phonologists are able to employ computational tools to mine these data for
phonological information and generalizations. Researchers now have the potential
to combine both approaches, and indeed many field phonologists are making
significant contributions in both domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.