* 1753474
* Collaborative research RUI: Timing of slip along the Sierra Nevada frontal fault zone, California: A thermochronologic study
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Ann Blythe, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 54,375.00

The eastern flank of the southern Sierra Nevada, California, forms an impressive
topographic escarpment with some of the highest elevation peaks in the
conterminous United States. The escarpment along Owens Valley is structurally
controlled by the active Sierra Nevada frontal fault zone. This research project
focuses this zone where Pacific-North America plate interaction processes
intersect with the extending Basin and Range. Thus, the eastern margin of the
Sierra Nevada has been of long-standing interest to the tectonics community and
the timing of faulting and uplift of the region remains under debate. This
research project focused on the southern Sierra Nevada frontal fault zone will
shed light on the long-term structural evolution of the normal faults bounding
the impressive Sierra Nevada mountain front and address several fundamental
questions: When did the range front form? Is the Sierra Nevada frontal fault
zone the product of a single or two distinct episodes of late Cenozoic normal
fault slip? And did the southern Sierra Nevada lose or gain elevation during
these episodes of normal slip? The project advances desired societal outcomes
by: (a) training the next generation of scientists via involvement of
undergraduates, including minority students, and graduate students in all
aspects of the research; (b) developing a diverse, globally competitive STEM
workforce through graduate and undergraduate student training; (c) fostering
international collaboration and (d) enhancing scientific literacy by developing
a field-based outreach program in the Sierra Nevada for undergraduate freshman
and transfer STEP students (Science Talent Expansion Program, which is centered
on scientific training of traditionally underrepresented
students).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will test two primary
hypotheses: (1) the southern Sierra Nevada frontal fault zone records two
episodes of late Cenozoic normal fault slip and (2) the southern Sierra Nevada
either lost or gained elevation during the first episode of normal slip and
gained elevation during the second episode of normal slip. Integration of new
field studies (geologic mapping, structural, and kinematic) and low-temperature
thermochronology (apatite fission track, (U-Th)/He, and 4He/3He), with published
geologic data, in forward and inverse thermokinematic-landscape evolution
modeling will be used to test these hypotheses. Examination of data on the
timing of late Cenozoic normal slip and the surface uplift histories in light of
model results will allow assessment of the validity of different geodynamic
processes (e.g. development of a slab window, increase in relative rate of
Pacific-North America plate motion, a flexural-isostatic model, and replacement
of foundering dense lithosphere with asthenosphere) postulated as driving both
faulting along the Sierra Nevada frontal fault zone and changes in mean surface
elevation of the Sierra Nevada. This research is motivated by the long-standing
disagreement whether the Sierra Nevada records uplift in the late Mesozoic
followed by no change or a decrease in elevation throughout the Cenozoic, or
uplift in the late Mesozoic followed by a decrease in elevation during the
middle Cenozoic and then a second pulse of uplift in the late Cenozoic. Data
acquired during this research - normal fault slip kinematics, slip histories,
and slip rates along the Sierra Nevada frontal fault zone - will be combined
with published results on erosion rates, thermobarometry, and other geologic
constraints into forward and inverse thermokinematic-landscape evolution models
to characterize the normal fault slip and late Cenozoic uplift histories of the
southern Sierra Nevada, and to assess the soundness of proposed geodynamic
processes driving normal fault slip and uplift. This research is the first to
apply low-temperature thermochronometry studies directly to the entire Sierra
Nevada frontal fault zone escarpment and to use this combination of
investigative tools to characterize the late Cenozoic slip history along the
Sierra Nevada frontal fault zone and uplift history of the Sierra
Nevada.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.