* 1753800
* Collaborative Research:  Diversity of Physcomitrium pyriforme in North America and Europe:  significance of autopolyploidy within a phylogenomic and experimental framework
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Matthew Johnson, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 12/31/2023
* USD 417,695.00

This project will investigate the effects of genome duplication in plants. Many
plant species, including some agricultural crops, have arisen as a result of
genome duplication. This natural event results in offspring having genomes that
are doubled in content or more as compared to their parents and may have
provided opportunities for innovation during plant evolution. However, the
short- and long-term consequences of genome duplication in wild plants are not
well understood. This research will investigate the natural rate of genome
duplication in a wild moss species distributed in North America and Europe.
Researchers will create experimental, genome-duplicated offspring in the
laboratory to measure how their morphology and reproduction differs from that of
their parents. They will then determine if and how duplicated genomes may change
over time by comparing the experimental, genome-duplicated offspring to those
that occur naturally. Researchers will train undergraduate and graduate
students, including members of under-represented groups, and support the
professional development of early-career researchers. They will also host
regional outreach lectures for K-12 teachers about best-practices in
evolutionary biology education. Researchers will engage the public online using
the citizen-science iNaturalist platform and will create bilingual
(Spanish/English) blog posts about moss biology and polyploid evolution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will expand our understanding of the
consequences of autopolyploid evolution in plants. Researchers will use as an
experimental model organism the moss species Physcomitrium pyriforme
(Funariaceae, the Funaria moss family), which harbors a morphologically-diverse
complex of seven karyotypes worldwide. The species is annual, bisexual, selfing,
and is easily grown in the laboratory. Unlike most other plant model organisms,
its genome content can be doubled with precision in vitro to create
autopolyploid offspring. Researchers will compare reproductive barriers among
naturally-occurring and artificially-induced autopolyploids as well as their
homoploid progenitors. Project outcomes will include a phylogeny of the
Physcomitrium pyriforme species-complex based on genome sequence data, an
estimate of ploidy changes within the complex over evolutionary time and among
populations today, and the description of new species. Researchers will further
develop the HybPiper bioinformatics data analysis platform and train other US
scientists in this method to enhance research capacity. The project will
strengthen research collaborations among US institutions and build natural-
history collections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.