* 1753308
* CAREER: The Influence of Social Problems on Healthcare and Legal Institutions
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Elizabeth Chiarello, Saint Louis University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2024
* USD 509,836.00

The United States is facing an unprecedented opioid crisis. Opioids are
addictive pain relievers that are profitable in illicit markets and pose
challenges for healthcare providers who are responsible for treating pain and
for enforcement agents who are tasked with ensuring proper drug provision.
Several states have responded by adopting prescription drug monitoring programs
(PDMPs), surveillance technologies designed for healthcare and criminal justice
use. However, researchers and policymakers have not fully considered how this
technology will impact professional fields. This project will examine how
current efforts to curb the opioid crisis affect healthcare and criminal justice
workers. This project asks: how does policing patients affect healthcare
practice? And, how does targeting healthcare providers affect law enforcement?
Addressing these questions is important because requiring workers to venture
beyond their traditional scopes of practice could undermine their professional
commitments and negatively impact professional community members. This research
contributes to policy by including both health care and enforcement workers,
aiming to develop policy solutions amenable to both fields. It advances
education by enlisting the help of undergraduate research assistants. Findings
will inform policymakers and clinicians about ways to address the opioid crisis
while avoiding unintended consequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project examines the opioid epidemic as a case for understanding how social
problems transform social fields. The primary goal is to extend sociological and
socio-legal theory by developing a micro-level theory of field change. This
project uses a mixed-methods, comparative design across three states,
California, Florida, and Missouri, that will culminate in four original
qualitative and quantitative data sets. These data will be analyzed with the
assistance of an undergraduate research team using grounded theory techniques.
This research contributes by addressing intersections between law and medicine
and by using nested maximum variation samples to capture field-level
heterogeneity and change. Although most research on opioid abuse is heavily
siloed, focusing either on healthcare or law enforcement, this research brings
together insights from both fields. Findings will inform policy makers and
healthcare leaders about how using technology to combat opioid abuse affects
practice. Technology is often considered a panacea for addressing social
problems, but this research brings a critical lens to technology, addressing the
kinds of unintended consequences that might result from its
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.