* 1753761
* I-Corps: Automated Spatiotemporal Intelligence Operations for Asset Integrity Management
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Christopher Lippitt, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 12/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project includes the
enabling of wide scale exploitation of the growing volume of airborne image data
from unmanned aerial systems (UAS) to monitor the environment in near real-time.
Persistent and tactical surveillance of infrastructure assets (e.g., critical
infrastructure, roads, pipelines), military bases, agricultural fields,
boarders, or other extensive assets requiring routine monitoring for tactical
decision making is becoming cost feasible with the introduction of UAS, but the
volume of data collected cannot be exploited using traditional, largely manual,
methods. Automated processing and interpretation of large volumes of airborne
imagery in near real-time will enable improved decision making and, subsequent,
cost reductions and improved performance for a range of industries and agencies.
The operations of infrastructure management, disaster response, security,
intelligence, and agriculture are amongst the expected beneficiaries.

This I-Corps project explores the commercialization potential of a platform from
near real-time analysis and exploitation of airborne image data. Research
exploring the development of an airborne system for monitoring critical
infrastructure during the response phase on natural disasters resulted in the
development of an analytical model for repeat station imaging and refinement of
a conceptual model for the design of time-sensitive remote sensing systems that
collectively permit the design and implementation of automated change detection
and monitoring systems from airborne imaging. This spatial analytics platform
automates 3D scene reconstruction, and uses artificial intelligence and machine
learning techniques to convert digital photos into a cataloged and indexed
spatial intelligence database of changes over time. 3D/4D object classifiers are
developed to extract complex features that 2D imagery is unable to represent.
This method trains neural networks on volumetric data and multi-temporal spatial
data to facilitate the extraction and identification of features and how they
have changed. Object identification and characterization will provide the
capability to semantically describe changes 3D and 4D space.