* 1753012
* CAREER: Baird's Polycyclic Anti-Aromatic Chromophores &amp; Application to Engineer Crystalline Dyads for Photon Upconversion in the Solid State
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Anoklase Ayitou, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 02/28/2022
* USD 649,947.00

In this CAREER project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp;
Mechanism B Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Anoklase Ayitou of the
Department of Chemistry at Illinois Institute of Technology is developing novel
aromatic chromophores and their dyad derivatives for photon upconversion. Photon
upconversion is a solar energy management process that can help maximize the
efficiency of current photovoltaic devices or solar cells. The ultimate goal of
this research is to exploit the photophysical properties of organic light
harvesting systems to devise next generation organic photonic materials. These
materials can be further derivatized to engineer not only high-efficiency
photovoltaic devices but also materials for biological imaging. Professor Ayitou
and his team use the tools of synthetic organic chemistry, computational
modeling, advanced spectroscopy and crystallography in this project, which
presents a mosaic of scientific techniques, educational and outreach activities
that benefit the scientific community and students of all levels. To this end,
Professor Ayitou mentors and provides training for students who participate in
this research. Additionally, the educational component of the project includes
outreach activities that promote STEM education at Illinois Institute of
Technology and in the South Side Communities of Chicago.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Baird's antiaromaticity is a characteristic of
chromophores that showcase 4n-pi electrons in the ground state and (4n+2)-pi
"aromatic species" upon photoexcitation. This project aims to understand how
tuning the intrinsic (4n+2)-pi aromaticity of polycyclic diimides can generate
novel polycyclic chromophores that exhibit Baird's antiaromaticity. Another
aspect of this project is the synthesis of polycyclic antiaromatic chromophores
(PAC) based organic dyads, which can be used to explore energy/photon
upconversion phenomenon. Overall, the results from this project help unravel the
following questions: (1) can the proposed PAC be more/less antiaromatic with
respect to the degree of pi-extension of their molecular core? (2) would
aromatic extension of PAC help modulate their photophysical properties? (3) can
the PAC-dyads exhibit superior photophysical properties in comparison with
native PAC in photon upconversion? and (4) can materials from these dyads be
used as ingredients for photovoltaic and optical devices fabrication and for
biological imaging?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.