* 1753557
* Enabling the Circular Economy through Sustainable Manufacturing: International Forum on Sustainable Manufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Fazleena Badurdeen, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 02/28/2019
* USD 24,000.00

1753557 (Badurdeen). "Enabling the Circular Economy through Sustainable
Manufacturing" will be theme for this Forum organized by the Institute for
Sustainable Manufacturing (ISM) at the Lexington Convention Center, Lexington,
Kentucky. The concept of Circular Economy promotes a restorative approach
through regenerative design to concurrently pursue sustained economic growth,
environmental protection, and societal wellbeing. Given that manufacturing is an
engine of wealth generation in many economies, adopting sustainability practices
in manufacturing is imperative to the Circular Economy vision. Sustainable
Manufacturing to promote the Circular Economy is only feasible through a total
and multi-lifecycle based approach to closed-loop material flow by adopting the
6Rs of Reduce, Reuse, Recycle, Recover, Redesign and Remanufacture. This Forum
will bring together experts from academia, industry and government agencies to
discuss opportunities and challenges to Enabling the Circular Economy through
Sustainable Manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Forum will provide a venue
for emerging and early career researchers as well as graduate students engaged
in sustainable manufacturing to interact with prominent researchers and industry
leaders in sustainable manufacturing. This will facilitate a greater dialogue in
related areas and also facilitate increased awareness of others' research to
foster more collaboration between different organizations. The dissemination of
forum presentations through different channels and scholarly publications will
also help increase understanding of how sustainable manufacturing can enable the
Circular Economy. The Forum will include an Emerging Researcher Showcase with
presentations from early-career researchers, and also a Student Poster Showcase.