* 1753762
* OPUS: Integrating long-term demographic data, field experiments, and mathematical models to understand mangrove forest dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Wayne Sousa, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 06/30/2022
* USD 303,897.00

This research project will integrate the results of a 25-yr field investigation
of the population and community ecology of mangrove forests along the Caribbean
coast. Mangroves are a predominant vegetation type of tropical and subtropical
coasts around the world. They support diverse, highly productive food webs, and
provide valuable ecosystem services such as nursery habitat for fishery species,
wintering habitat for migratory birds, protection of coastlines from storm
surge, and below-ground storage of large stocks of carbon. Despite the
considerable value of these ecosystems, mangrove habitats are severely
threatened by coastal development, pollution, and conversion to aquaculture. A
central goal of this research project is to enhance our ability to predict the
responses of mangrove ecosystems to both natural and human-caused disturbances;
this knowledge will help guide efforts to restore these highly valuable
ecosystems. This goal will be achieved by identifying general mechanisms
underlying these ecosystem responses through analyses of data from long-term
experimental and observational studies, and from the predictions of a
mathematical model of forest dynamics. Information about the rich biology of
these systems, and the findings of this and similar studies in the region will
be shared with other ecologists, their students, and amateur naturalists in a
PI-authored book on the ecology of neotropical mangrove forest communities. This
project will also involve undergraduate student assistants, maintaining the
investigator's long commitment to training young scientists and guiding them to
careers in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first phase of this research will
complete comprehensive analyses of data from long-term observational and
experimental field investigations of the factors that control the structure and
dynamics of the study forests. Forest demography and composition have been
documented by monitoring the fates of individually marked trees in six forests
plots that were established in 1993. These observational data are complemented
by two long-term field experiments, initiated in 1995 and 1999, that test the
independent and interactive effects of competition and herbivory on light gap
regeneration and the spatial distributions of species along the tidal gradient.
The results of these analyses will be synthesized with a spatially-explicit
model of mangrove forest dynamics, parameterized with tree demographic data
collected from the forest plots and field experiments. Model simulations will
predict changes in forest composition and age/spatial structure under a range of
environmental scenarios. The final phase of the project will be devoted to
designing and writing a photo-illustrated book on the ecology of neotropical
mangrove forest communities. It will be the first of its kind for the region.
While focusing on the rich biology of these systems and key ecological processes
that shape their structure and dynamics, the book will highlight the dire
circumstances faced by mangrove ecosystems and discuss approaches to their
protection and sustainable management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.