* 1753324
* CAREER: Investigating Ultrafast Electronic and Structural Dynamics During Light-Driven Chemical Reactions
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Daniel Rolles, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This project will develop new experimental tools for imaging ultrafast dynamics
during photochemical reactions in molecules. This will enable new studies of
light-induced reactions that are important in several scientific areas. For
example, photochemical dissociation reactions play a major role in atmospheric
chemistry. Light-induced molecular ring-opening and isomerization reactions also
serve as prototypes for understanding biosynthesis of vitamin D, controlling the
dynamics of organic molecular switches, and engineering novel light-harvesting
materials. Imaging and controlling such reactions at the electronic level can
therefore lead to the development of new technologies with potential benefits to
society. This project will engage students from diverse backgrounds and foster
their interest in basic science and technology disciplines by introducing them
early in their academic career to scientific research. Students will benefit
from a variety of research environments ranging from a state-of-the-art laser
laboratory at a university to large-scale user facilities operated at national
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To further the understanding of the ultrafast
electronic and structural dynamics occurring during light-driven reactions, this
project will use femtosecond light sources combined with powerful detection
techniques such as coincident electron and ion momentum imaging and time-
resolved photoelectron spectroscopy. These tools will be used to study
isomerization and ring-opening reactions in organic molecules with chemical
relevance. Femtosecond pump-probe techniques with laboratory-based femtosecond
lasers and high-order harmonic generation sources will be complemented by
experiments with free-electron lasers. Being able to record "molecular movies"
of benchmark photochemical reactions will allow for a more direct comparison to
quantum chemistry calculations. The aim is to provide a better understanding of
the underlying reaction mechanism and to develop and optimize schemes for
controlling the dynamics and outcome of such
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Atomic,
Molecular, and Optical Physics Experiment program in the Division of Physics and
the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program in the Division of Chemistry (both
Divisions are in the NSF Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences) as
well as the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.