* 1753317
* CAREER: A new perspective on the transformation of internal waves on the inner shelf
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Kristen Davis, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2023
* USD 686,385.00

In a layered fluid like the ocean, waves can occur in the interface between the
different density layers of water. These are called internal waves and they have
been largely studied in deep ocean basins and mid-to-outer continental shelf
regions. However, steep internal waves are common in the inner shelf and can
modify turbulent mixing, exchange of materials across the continental shelf, and
biological productivity of coastal waters. This research will conduct an
intensive field campaign and numerical modeling aiming at resolving the
transformation of internal waves across the shelf including breaking and
dissipation. Historically, internal waves are detected using observations of
subsurface ocean temperature that are made at fixed locations using moorings or
vertical profiles of temperature, each with their own limitations in resolution.
This research uses a fiber optic distributed temperature sensing (DTS) system, a
new method that provides measurement over large areas over the shelf
(kilometers), with high spatial (&lt;1 meter) and temporal resolutions. These
measurements will be combined with more traditional point measurements for
hydrographic and turbulence variables. Results from this work will yield
insights into benthic ecology, cross-shelf exchange of nutrients and pollutants,
turbulent mixing, larval connectivity, coastal hypoxia, and ocean acidification.
The educational component of this CAREER project is based on the idea that one
of the best ways to help students succeed in the sciences, and to shape the
innovators of the next generation is to inspire passion for science. This is
achieved through the integration of research and teaching and activities that
relate curricular concepts to societal issues that excite the students, and by
demonstrating how perseverance is an important part for success. At the
university level, courses will be re-designed to include: (i) socio-scientific
issues related to ongoing research, and (ii) active learning techniques that
encourage risk-taking and perseverance as a constructive path to scientific
discovery. At primary and secondary education levels, the investigator will
develop a mentor-toolkit to help professionals in STEM careers, who desire to
serve as a role model but lack training in elementary education, to most
effectively communicate their path to science and the struggles that they faced
and overcame along the way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The inner shelf is, in effect,
a "swash zone" for nonlinear internal waves (NLIWs) and their intermittency and
small spatiotemporal scales pose challenges to observation. Consequently, there
are few comprehensive field measurements of NLIWs on the inner shelf to test
dynamical theories derived from numerous laboratory and numerical studies. This
project will use high resolution DTS measurements, coupled with a dense array of
hydrographic instruments and turbulence measurements, to capture a continuous
view of the cross-shelf evolution of NLIWs. Results from a pilot study in the
South China Sea demonstrate that DTS measurements can provide a unique
perspective on NLIWs - allowing for detection of internal wave characteristics
(form and path), variable propagation speed, reflection, wave-wave interactions,
and "internal tidepools" (cool water left behind after the wave has run back
down the slope). Furthermore, as opposed to boat-based measurements, which must
physically follow a wave across the shelf, the proposed measurements are capable
of capturing a cross-shelf view of many waves and will be useful for
understanding variability in internal wave "weather" on the shelf. The
observations will be performed at two locations, representing different shelf
geometries and characteristic internal wave fields, and the data will be
analyzed to advance our knowledge on NLIW transformation over the inner shelf,
the fate of internal wave energy, and the effects of NLIWs on mass flux and
turbulent mixing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.