* 1753748
* Collaborative Research: Geochemical and geodynamic investigation of lithospheric drip viability beneath the East African Rift
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Wendy Nelson, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2022
* USD 83,946.00

Geochemical and geodynamic investigation of lithospheric drip magmatism
&lt;br/&gt;beneath the East African
Rift&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continental rifting is a fundamental part
of the Wilson Cycle that defines the geological paradigm of plate tectonics. In
this context, however, the relationships among magmatism, lithospheric thinning
and crustal extension are poorly constrained. The PIs will evaluate the role of
lithospheric drip magmatism as a trigger for successful continental rifting by
studying alkaline mafic lavas from the Bufumbira and Toro Ankole volcanic fields
in western Uganda. A growing body of evidence suggests that density
instabilities in the lowermost lithosphere can undergo abrupt localized
destabilization in response to regional thermal or mechanical stress. This
physical thinning of the lithosphere, occurring on a scale of 20-50 km, enhances
both magmatism and the likelihood of extensional failure, i.e., successful
continental rifting, and thus controls the ultimate shape of continental
margins. The work couples detailed geochemical analysis of proposed drip-related
lavas and their accompanying mantle xenoliths with geophysical modeling of
lithospheric drip and the ensuing crustal extension. The implications of this
work to the understanding of continental extension represent a new approach to
predicting the locus of new ocean basins and the forces required to produce
them. At a regional scale, this work is of high importance to nations along the
East African Rift: drip magmatism does not sustain the shallow long-lived magma
chambers that are necessary for viable geothermal energy production. In terms of
human resources, this project supports female researchers from a wide range of
educational institutions as well as graduate and undergraduate students in
geochemistry and geodynamics, and brings a short-course in geophysics to geology
undergraduates who seek careers in this field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
lithospheric mantle is foundational - literally and conceptually - to the
construction, destruction and division of tectonic plates. Modification of the
lithospheric mantle by magma and fluids affects its composition and, by
extension, buoyancy. If the bottom of the lithosphere is made denser, the base
of the lithosphere can detach and sink, leading to small-volume basaltic
volcanism, lithospheric thinning, and potentially rifting. Geochemical data on
lavas suggest lithospheric drips drive volcanism in several parts of the East
African Rift. Also, xenoliths from this area show significant metasomatism by
melts and fluids, and lithospheric removal has been invoked to explain the
timing and rates of recent uplift. In order to test this hypothesis, the role of
lithospheric drips will be evaluated by: 1) obtaining detailed petrographic and
mineral-scale compositional data on lavas and pyroxenite xenoliths, 2)
calculating the physical conditions recorded by lavas and xenoliths, and 3)
applying those calculations to 2D and 3D geodynamic models to whether
lithospheric drip tectonics and melting explain the rocks themselves.
Lithospheric drip melting is somewhat paradoxical, because cold descending
lithosphere should not melt unless it is heated through conduction more rapidly
than it becomes compressed during descent. It may be that additional complexity
to symmetrical dripping is required, such as edge-driven convection during
rifting or a nearby upwelling plume. This project will promote collaboration
between 3 U.S. universities, including an REU institution, and provide
opportunity for researchers from Uganda.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.