* 1753753
* I-Corps: Personalized Tissue Engineering
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Sherry Harbin, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 01/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the potential
commercialization of a platform technology for tissue engineering and
regenerative medicine. Complex tissue injuries and non-healing wounds represent
a global therapeutic challenge, making tissue engineering and regenerative
medicine a multi-billion commercial opportunity with many unmet clinical needs.
Today most wound care products rely on a "degrade and replace" mechanism,
mediated by inflammation and resulting in disorganized scar tissue. The
innovative technology, on which this project is based, works by a mechanism of
"persist and regenerate" to restore tissue architecture and function.
Additionally, these materials have unique capacity for customization,
positioning it for future applications in areas including soft tissue
reconstruction such as after tumor removal; repair of tendons, ligaments, and
bone; tissue bulking agents for treating urinary incontinence or laryngeal
paralysis; and for cellular therapies such as islet transplantation for
diabetes. Taken together, these attributes will potentially enable innovative,
low-cost products for personalized tissue engineering that have potential to
reduce health care costs and improve patient outcomes.

This I-Corps project is based on an advanced tissue-derived product, namely
Collymer Self-Assembly Matrix, which represents the first injectable collagen
which exhibits self-assembly-the ability to transition from a fluid to a stable
fibrillar scaffold upon injection. This technology was inspired by new
mechanistic insights into i) collagen synthesis and assembly as occurs within
the body and ii) mechanobiology signaling which relies on cell-collagen
biophysical interactions. Because Collymers immediately restore the natural
tissue architecture by forming collagen fibrils just like those found in the
body, this natural biomaterial is non-inflammatory and exhibits superior tissue
regeneration. Collymers' unique capacity for patient-specific customization by
incorporating cells and customizing the architecture of the scaffold (density,
shape, and architecture) makes it the first personalized tissue
regeneration/engineering technology. The specific aims of the I-Corps project is
to explore and prioritize most promising applications for this technology as
well as the best path to commercialization considering factors such as
reimbursement, regulatory path and customer segment.