* 1753452
* CAREER: Advancing Personal Informatics through Semi-Automated and Collaborative Tracking
* CSE,IIS
* 06/20/2017,09/30/2023
* Eun Kyoung Choe, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 562,348.00

This research examines a novel self-tracking approach called semi-automated
tracking to help people easily engage with a rich set of personal data, such as
weight, activities, sleep pattern, and medication use. In principle, being aware
of self-tracking data can help people reflect on their health condition and
understand how their behavior affects their progress toward goals, potentially
improving health and well-being. In practice, however, self-tracking is hard.
Manual tracking approaches such as diaries require much effort, while automated
tracking approaches such as wearable sensing tools significantly reduce the
tracker's awareness, accountability, and involvement compared to manual
tracking. To address these problems, this research proposes to design and
develop a semi-automated tracking platform, combining both manual and automated
data collection methods. The platform will enable people to design and customize
their own tracking tools and capture many kinds of personal data depending on
individuals' diverse tracking needs. As the customization itself can be hard,
the platform will also support collaborative tracking by incorporating templates
created based on experts' input. The proposal will test these ideas while
working with two user groups who can benefit from practicing self-tracking: (1)
older adults living in retirement communities, and (2) clinicians and surgical
patients in prehabilitation programs (that is, dietary and exercise plans for
enhancing patients' health prior to surgery). The differences in individuals,
their motivations, and the demands of tracking between the older adult and
prehabilitation groups will provide insight on how to design semi-automated and
collaborative tracking tools. The principal investigator (PI) will use both the
resulting case studies and research platform in her courses on human-computer
interaction and personal informatics, and make the curricula openly available to
other educators and researchers. The PI will also work closely with programs at
her institution to involve people from under-represented groups in the research,
including undergraduates, women, and minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
phase of the research will focus on learning people's concerns, needs, and
challenges regarding the use of tracking technologies via formative studies. The
research team will conduct a technology probing study using a platform that
supports customizable manual tracking, along with interviews and observations of
older adults, clinicians, and surgical patients. During this phase, the research
team will continue developing the research platform, which will be used as the
technical basis for the proposed studies and interventions. These formative
studies will generate insights into how these populations currently approach
self-tracking: what do they do and what would they like to do, and what makes it
hard and what are they afraid of. These insights will provide general design
guidelines for the research platform, which will include the semi-automated
tracking elements designed to balance people's information needs and data
capture burden while enhancing their engagement. In the second phase, the
research team will test the feasibility of the semi-automated tracking approach
with a short-term deployment study followed by design iterations. Then the
revised platform will be deployed longitudinally to test its efficacy with both
older adults and surgical patients. In the third phase, the research team will
focus on the collaborative tracking approach, aiming to help patients configure
self-tracking settings and collect high quality data that are useful for
clinicians. To support these goals, the research team will conduct design
workshops with clinicians to generate templates for common prehabilitation
regimens, which will later be incorporated in the research platform. The
collaborative tracking elements of the platform will be evaluated in a
longitudinal study in hospitals. This research will contribute to the growing
bodies of knowledge in personal informatics and health informatics. It will
inform us of elders' and surgical patients' self-tracking practices and ways in
which self-tracking tools should be designed to support the needs of various
stakeholders, including partners, caretakers, and clinicians. As a way to expand
the impact of the work, the research team will disseminate the semi-automated
tracking platform to academic communities (e.g., behavioral scientists, personal
informatics researchers), medical communities (e.g., clinicians and patients),
Quantified Self communities (i.e., dedicated self-trackers), and individuals who
wish to engage in self-tracking practices.