* 1753677
* EAGER: Modifying human cognition using targeted non-invasive stimulation of large-scale brain networks
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Gagan Wig, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 149,940.00

Cognitive abilities differ across individuals. These differences are present
across individuals with different status of health, but also within seemingly
homogenous cohorts such as healthy young adults. Individual differences in
cognition are typically differentiated according to distinct domains of
processing (e.g., long-term memory, executive function, language, perception).
These distinctions are thought to be a result of the functional specialization
of dissociable systems, or networks, in the human brain. This project
investigates whether a specific cognitive ability can be modified by directly
manipulating its corresponding brain system. The study involves the development
and application of "network-guided" non-invasive brain-stimulation to enhance
specific cognitive abilities in healthy young adults; specifically, executive
function and long-term episodic memory. The results of the research will inform
our understanding of the biological source of individual differences in
cognition and possibly provide an approach for modifying cognitive ability
within an individual. In doing so the project will help us further understand
the brain mechanisms that mediate cognitive dysfunction in impaired individuals
across the lifespan, and may allow application of the research program towards
delaying or even preventing cognitive dysfunction in vulnerable individuals,
using brain stimulation. The project includes mentorship to a post-doctoral
fellow, sharing of tools and methods that are developed in relation to the
project, and engagement in outreach and education activities with the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous work has used brain stimulation to modify
various aspects of cognition across numerous target locations in the brain. The
outcome and success of these studies have been variable but encouraging. Where
stimulation-associated gains in cognitive ability have been noted, there has
been sparse evidence linking the behavioral change to changes in the underlying
neurophysiology, thus leaving a gap in our understanding of the underlying
mechanism of change. The proposed research aims to elucidate whether and how
non-invasive stimulation of the human brain can enhance specific domains of
cognition (executive function and long-term episodic memory). Transcranial
magnetic stimulation (TMS) sessions will target critical areas (network nodes)
within two functional brain systems that have been implicated in each cognitive
domain (frontal-parietal control system and default system, respectively). To
characterize cognitive and brain changes, the study will incorporate extensive
cognitive testing and measurement of brain network organization using functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), collected both prior to and following the
multiple TMS sessions. To accomplish the proposed aims, the project brings
together methodological advances that the PI has helped pioneer. These methods
allow precise characterization of brain stimulation targets on a subject-by-
subject basis, and formal methods for characterizing and assessing changes in
brain network organization observed at rest in an individual. By targeting
specific features of brain organization and measuring their change as a result
of stimulation, the broader goal of the proposed work is to gain a deeper
understanding of how brain stimulation may modify cognition and the brain's
functional network organization.