* 1753034
* CAREER: The Lapse Rate Feedback and Other Mechanisms of High-Latitude Climate Change
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Nicole Feldl, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2024
* USD 798,235.00

Model simulations of the warming effect of greenhouse gases typically show
greater temperature increases over the polar caps than the rest of the globe.
This "polar amplification" is consistent with the dramatic temperature increase
seen in the Arctic, which has caused a variety of severe impacts on the human
and natural systems of the region. Research on polar amplification is thus of
practical as well as scientific interest, as the warming and thawing of the
polar regions is poorly understood and difficult to predict yet has worldwide
consequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the education and outreach component of
this CAREER award the PI works with undergraduate students to develop computer
games that can be used to introduce middle school students to environmental
science. The work is based on research showing that appropriately designed games
can be used to introduce students to scientific discovery, enticing them to
probe a virtual world through formulating, testing, and reevaluating hypotheses.
Games have been developed to foster scientific thinking in other disciplines
including molecular biology and astrobiology. The work has educational broader
impacts both for the broad audience of game players, many of whom may have
limited interest in traditional STEM classwork, and for the cross-disciplinary
team of undergraduate students who develop the game.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific focus of the project is the lapse rate feedback, in which changes in
the way temperature varies with height affect the total amount of warming that
occurs for a given increase in carbon dioxide (CO2). In the tropics the warming
is top heavy, with greater temperature increases at upper levels, and the
greater warming aloft helps the atmosphere cool to space more effectively to
balance the heat trapping effect of the CO2. But the polar caps typically warm
more near the surface, in part due to reductions in ice and snow cover which
expose the darker land and sea surface below. This bottom heavy warming requires
a greater temperature increase to balance the CO2 increase than would be
required if the warming were distributed equally at all levels, thus it
contributes to polar amplification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The logic of the polar
lapse rate feedback is sound and the effect has been demonstrated in models, but
the strength of the feedback is unclear. One consideration is that energy
transport into the polar caps could work against bottom-heaviness given that
much of the transport occurs aloft. But the net effect of energy transport is
unclear as the transport of dry static energy is expected to decrease with
warming while latent energy increases as the air becomes more moist. Low cloud
changes due to near-surface warming may also reduce the warming effect of the
polar lapse rate feedback. These effects are examined through simulations using
a hierarchy of models at varying levels of complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.