* 1753482
* Melt Network Geometry in Stressed, Partially Molten Mantle Rocks: Implications for Seismic Anisotropy
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Matej Pec, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2022
* USD 379,999.00

Melting and deformation are intimately coupled in nature and work in concert to
accommodate plate tectonic movements. These movements are associated with
earthquakes and volcanic eruptions which are one of the primary natural hazards
to human settlements. It is therefore important that we understand how melt and
deformation interact deep in our planet. Since we are unable to directly observe
this interaction, we rely on the interpretation of various remote sensing
surveys. One powerful means of interrogating our planet's interior is to study
the sound waves propagating through the Earth after an earthquake. The speed at
which waves propagate as well as their damping depends on the details of how
melt and crystallized minerals are aligned. This information can therefore be
used to detect the spatial extent of partially molten domains as well as their
flow direction deep in Earth's interior. The investigator's research aims at
constraining the basic physical principles that govern melt and mineral
alignment in deforming partially molten rocks through a series of laboratory
experiments. The research funded by this proposal will form the basis of a
doctoral dissertation of a graduate student in the PI's laboratory and will
introduce the student to the scientific method and thinking. Additionally, an
analogue experiment will be developed to illustrate the influence of partial
melting on sound wave propagation. This experiment will be used in undergraduate
and graduate classes taught by the PI as well as for outreach to general public
during events like the Cambridge Science Festival. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Melting
occurs in actively deforming regions of the Earth such as subduction zones and
mid-oceanic ridges and affects much of the chemical exchange between mantle,
crust and atmosphere. The presence of melt strongly influences the mechanical
and transport properties of partially molten rocks and can produce a signature
detectable by remote sensing. Remote sensing of plate boundaries gives us a
wealth of information about the fundamental forces that drive plate tectonics
and forms the basis for testing geodynamic hypotheses. The primary goal of this
research is to elucidate the (i) influence of deformation on grain-scale melt
network topology and (ii) the influence of deformation with melt present on the
evolution of crystallographic preferred orientation (CPO) in olivine, the most
abundant mineral in the lithospheric mantle. Both stress-driven melt preferred
orientation (MPO) as well as CPO evolve on different length- and time-scales and
contribute to the integrated seismic signature of deforming partially molten
rocks in nature. The team will synthesize fine-grained olivine rocks with
approximately 3 vol% of mid ocean ridge basalt added as a melt phase and deform
these rocks in general shear under pressure and temperature conditions typical
for the upper mantle (T = 900 - 1200 degrees C, P = 0.3 - 2 GPa). Constant load
experiments at load levels covering at least one order of magnitude will be
performed to study the effect of stress on the grain-scale melt network
topology. Several experiments at a constant stress level will be taken to
different finite strains to elucidate the influence of strain on MPO and CPO.
Conducting such a comprehensive series of well-controlled experiments will
constrain the influence of stress and strain on both MPO as well as CPO
development in partially molten mantle rocks. The derived quantitative
microstructural data will be used to calculate the seismic signature of the
rocks based on several theoretical models. Establishing correlations between
measured microstructural quantities and external forces in experiments will
provide tight constraints for theoretical models of deforming solid-liquid
composites and will facilitate extrapolation of laboratory data to natural
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.