* 1753797
* Scanning Ion Conductance Microscopy Using Protein Channels
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2017,05/31/2020
* Ryan White, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 05/31/2020
* USD 249,600.00

This project is funded by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the
Chemistry Division in the National Science Foundation. Professor Ryan White and
his team at the University of Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC) are developing a
new chemical imaging platform that uses the same molecular machinery that a
biological cell uses to map and identify the location of specific molecules with
single molecule sensitivity. This project has relevance to the Understanding the
Brain initiative. The study relies on incorporating proteins that cross cell
membranes into lipid bilayers to look at the movement of small molecules through
a membrane. The use of a scanning ion conductance microscope offers the
advantage of providing chemical information about processes occurring at the
cell membrane. The long-term aim of this work is to map out the concentration of
specific molecules in the cellular environment to better understand the
molecular basis of cellular communication. The broader impacts of this work
include providing a strong interdisciplinary background in chemistry,
bioanalysis, and biochemistry to students engaged in the research.
Underrepresented groups are included in several programs at UMBC that promote
science. The scientific broader impact is the introduction of a new imaging
capability to scanning ion conductance microscopy. In the long term, the protein
channel-based method may be applied towards studies of a broad range of
biological systems.

The objective of this proposal is the development a bio-inspired, protein
channel-based scanning ion conductance microscope (SICM) for simultaneous
surface imaging and specific molecule concentration mapping. The method relies
on incorporating naturally-occurring trans-membrane protein channels as
reproducible nanopores (~1 nm diameter) with activities that are gated by
specific molecules of interest. Professor White and his team are quantitatively
determining what affects the resolution of the bio-inspired SICM measurement
including imaging pipette dimensions and the number of embedded protein
channels. The coupling of the powerful imaging capabilities of scanning ion
conductance microscopy (SICM) with the specific and sensitive single molecule
detection abilities of protein channel measurements provides quantification of
the imaging resolution and specific molecule detection abilities. The research
may provide new knowledge to the field of scanning probe microscopy and may
introduce a new chemical imaging abilities for specific molecules not accessible
with current methodologies.