* 1753387
* CAREER: Hybrid protein-DNA nanostructures and devices
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Nicholas Stephanopoulos, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 06/30/2023
* USD 548,320.00

Non-technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;One of the greatest challenges for science is
to create materials that can interact with, and influence, biological systems in
order to treat disease, regrow damaged tissues, or elucidate fundamental
scientific mechanisms. This proposal aims to develop new methods for building
these materials, relying on the smart, programmable assembly of molecules like
proteins or DNA. In particular, the PI aims to develop: (1) nanofibers (similar
to those in tissue) composed of DNA elements linked by proteins; (2) three-
dimensional cages mimicking viruses from both protein building blocks and DNA
scaffolds; (3) mechanical elements like hinges or boxes with latches that are
activated by proteins. The use of proteins will allow for stability, control
over structure, and interaction with cells that is not possible with DNA alone,
whereas the DNA components will permit for complex designs that are difficult to
make with proteins alone. The final materials will be useful as gels for
stimulating cell repair, cages that can selectively target therapeutics to
diseased cells, and nano-machines that can probe fundamental biological
processes. The materials developed will also serve as a modular toolkit that can
be used by scientists in a range of disciplines to create new materials for
applications beyond biology and medicine, such as energy applications or nano-
scale factories that mimic cells.&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the PI will develop an
integrated training program for undergraduate and graduate students to introduce
them to cutting-edge research in bio-nanotechnology, as well as outreach
programs to middle and high school students to help demonstrate the beauty of
nanotechnology and its great potential to make a difference to human
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this proposal is to develop functional nanomaterials that combine the structural
programmability of DNA nanotechnology with the functional diversity of proteins.
DNA is unparalleled as a building block for complex, self-assembled structures,
but these assemblies are limited to the physical and chemical properties of
oligonucleotides. The PI proposes to build DNA nanostructures that incorporate
proteins in controlled locations and orientations on DNA scaffolds, to serve as
both structural components and functional elements, with a particular emphasis
on dynamic responsiveness to stimuli such as light or temperature. Two key
Research Directions will be explored, each with several synthetic targets:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) The first Research Direction involves creating hybrid
nanostructures integrating DNA and protein self-assembly, specifically one-
dimensional nanofibers and three-dimensional cages. The nanofibers will be
constructed using protein-protein interactions such as that between a nanobody
and its target. The protein interaction will drive hierarchical assembly of
rigid DNA elements, which can be tuned in geometry and valence to obtain
branched fibers or even hydrogels. The cages will be constructed using a
trimeric protein building block modified with DNA, which will be integrated with
programmable DNA components to create three-dimensional polyhedra with various
geometries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) The second Research Direction aims to create
dynamic DNA nanostructures driven by light or heat, using stimulus-responsive
proteins, specifically latches for 3D cages and hinge elements for rigid
tweezers. For this purpose, photoswitchable proteins that can reversibly
associate with light and thermally responsive proteins that reversibly aggregate
with heat will be used as actuation elements. Both projects will require
integrating proteins in controlled orientations on DNA scaffolds through site-
specific bioconjugation chemistry of multiple oligonucleotide handles. For this
purpose, the PI will develop novel strategies for synthesizing seamless protein-
DNA hybrid materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The final materials will enable nano-
devices with applications in drug delivery, sensing, catalysis, molecular
robotics, and biomaterials for regenerative medicine and tissue
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.