* 1753214
* CAREER: Integrated Studies of Polar Wave and Magnetosphere-Ionosphere-Thermosphere Couplings from New Observations and Whole Atmosphere Modeling
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Xian Lu, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Roman Makarevich
* 07/31/2024
* USD 657,633.00

This CAREER grant will study the upper atmosphere and magnetosphere-ionosphere-
thermosphere (MIT) coupling at high latitudes. The polar upper atmosphere is a
complex region driven by wave disturbances generated in the lower atmosphere and
by the energy fed through the magnetosphere. The research work will advance our
understanding of the variability of the polar upper atmosphere region by novel
applications of lidar and radar observations, and computational models. This
CAREER grant will integrate research and education by developing a new
curriculum in atmospheric modeling, giving students an early exposure to current
research topics in atmospheric research and high-performance computing. The
grant will also support integration of research and education to develop a
knowledgeable STEM workforce. The outreach activities will actively pursue
efforts to broaden participation amongst members of underrepresented groups and
develop a diverse scientific workforce that is reflective of our society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this CAREER grant is to study
atmospheric wave dynamics and magnetosphere-ionosphere-thermosphere (MIT)
coupling in the polar regions using observations and computational models. The
research will investigate the following key aspects of the polar aeronomy:
&lt;br/&gt;1) the dynamics, coupling, and interactions of polar atmospheric
waves; &lt;br/&gt;2) the localized magnetospheric energy deposition and MIT
coupling at high latitudes; and &lt;br/&gt;3) the interactions and comparative
contributions of the lower atmosphere wave forcing and magnetospheric forcing to
the variability of geospace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this research
will advance our understanding of the role wave-wave and wave-mean interactions,
intra-hemispheric coupling, and inter-hemispheric asymmetries on the polar upper
atmosphere. The research will also lead to improvement in computational models
used to upper atmospheric research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research also
includes a major educational development component. The educational activities
will: &lt;br/&gt;1) develop a new curriculum for atmospheric modeling and create
an inventory of numerical programs that will be used for both education and
research, and develop and publicize an education website to host this inventory
for highly interactive model runs and learning; &lt;br/&gt;2) mentor graduate
and undergraduate students with interdisciplinary knowledge and solid skills,
and provide research opportunities for underrepresented students via the Call Me
Mister program; and&lt;br/&gt;3) involve high school students and K-12 teachers
from South Carolina rural communities in atmospheric science education via
Clemson's Emerging Scholar and outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
career grant will provide education and training opportunities for the next
generation of STEM workforce and implement activities for broadening
participation and the development of a diverse scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.