* 1753029
* EAGER:  Novel Biobased Chemicals
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Brent Shanks, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 12/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

The project will demonstrate the potential of the bioprivileged molecule concept
to systematically generate novel chemical compounds with improved performance
properties. There are two key aspects of the project: 1) the identification of
new bioprivileged molecules, and 2) the diversification of existing
bioprivileged molecules. In the former, identifying new bioprivileged molecules,
which requires the integration of biology and chemistry, is important for
validating and expanding their role in developing biobased chemicals. The
diversification will involve synthesis of novel chemicals for inhibiting the
corrosion of metals. The novel chemicals, derived from biological sources with
further refinement by chemical processes, have the potential to replace existing
chemicals that are non-biological in origin, and some of which have adverse
environmental and toxicity properties. The project will be carried out in
collaboration with researchers from Tuskegee University, a minority serving
institution. Specifically, the project will investigate the chemical synthesis
process that starts with triacetic acid lactone (TAL), - a bioprivileged
molecule identified through the NSF-Engineering Center for Biorenewable
Chemicals (CBiRC) - and builds on a previously identified synthesis pathway by
the CBiRC team that converts TAL to opuntiol, a plant product having natural
corrosion inhibition properties. The crux of the project will involve the
synthesis of several novel opuntiol analogs that are expected to demonstrate
improved corrosion inhibiting properties compared to opuntiol. The synthesis-
related research will be conducted by a Tuskegee graduate student and his
faculty advisor, and the corrosion inhibiting properties of the synthesized
analogs will be assessed by the CBiRC team. The project will also include a
visit by the CBiRC leadership to the Materials Discovery Center at the
University of Liverpool. The Center is a collaborative enterprise between the
University and industrial partners with state-of-the-art laboratories for high
throughput screening of lab-scale samples of novel molecules for a broad range
of potential industrial applications. The visit will aid the CBiRC team in
identifying methods and resources needed to link novel molecules to new product
applications.