* 1753087
* CAREER: New methods to functionalize pyridines and diazines
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Andrew McNally, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 04/30/2023
* USD 650,000.00

With this CAREER award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Chemistry
Division supports the research of Professor Andrew McNally in the Department of
Chemistry at Colorado State University. Professor McNally and his students
develop new synthetic methods that allow common building blocks of
pharmaceuticals and agrochemicals to be transformed into biologically active
derivatives. In particular, pyridines are among the most widely encountered
structures in current drug compounds. Research in Professor McNally's laboratory
exploits the unique reactivity of new bond-forming reactions on pyridines, to
make complex pharmaceuticals. This project is a combination of organic
synthesis, medicinal chemistry and catalysis that is preparing his students for
careers at the forefront of the chemical sciences. Educational activities focus
on increasing enrollment into undergraduate programs, preparing graduate
students for the pharmaceutical industry via a new medicinal chemistry program
and changing the public's perception of chemistry in society through a new
series of 'pub lectures'.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pyridines are used widely across
the chemical sciences including applications as pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals,
materials and ligands. Despite their importance, there are deficiencies in the
current synthetic toolkit to prepare valuable pyridine derivatives. This project
develops new chemical transformation of pyridines using phosphorus compounds as
reagents and catalysts. Three distinct questions are addressed in this project:
1) Can phosphonium salts be formed on complex polypyridines with 'switchable'
control of site-selectivity? Can phosphorus ligand-coupling reactions be used to
enable sp2-sp3 coupling in new pyridine alkylation reactions? 3) Can phosphorus
intermediates, and new catalytic approaches, enable 3-position selective
halogenation, trifluoromethylation and amination reactions? The educational plan
focuses on increasing the enrollment in the undergraduate chemistry program
through a chemistry in context lecture series. At the graduate level, students
are enrolling in a new medicinal chemistry course that includes guest lectures
from medicinal chemists. The public is engaged through a new 'pub lecture'
series that tackles contemporary and controversial aspects of chemistry in
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.