* 1753630
* SG:  Collaborative Research:  Measuring intra-locus conflict across the genome in a dioecious plant
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2021
* John Kelly, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 03/31/2021
* USD 101,904.00

Understanding natural selection is an important scientific objective that
furthers our understanding of the natural world and impacts human health and
welfare. Modern agriculture is based on the adoption of selection as a method to
improve crops. Furthermore, dealing with emerging diseases and antibiotic
resistance is helped by understanding how natural selection operates. This
project examines the fact that the strength and direction of natural selection
routinely differs between males and females of a species. The consequence of
this selection depends on whether the same genes are expressed in males and
females. The research team will explore selection on males and females using
field studies, genomic analyses, and statistical modeling using Silene
latifolia, an herbaceous flowering plant. This plant is an ideal model for this
research given extensive prior work demonstrating important phenotypic and
genetic differences between males and females. Workshops to the scientific
community will be presented on how to write scientific articles and the genomic
techniques used in this study. Outreach to the general public will include a
project involving high-school students in Kansas in genetic research, and a
demonstration on flowers at a community-level science festival in Indiana.

The research team will collect phenotypic and fitness measurements on all
individuals within a S. latifolia population from Virginia, and then interrogate
these individuals, and their progeny, at Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs)
across the genome. The combination of phenotypic, genotypic, and fitness data
will allow the researchers to determine if selection is evident at the scale of
individual loci and if it differs between males and females. This species has
heteromorphic sex chromosomes (males are XY), and a genome-wide characterization
of selection will enable a test of the prediction that selection should differ
between autosomes and sex chromosomes. While there is a great body of work
measuring natural selection in plant populations, this experiment will provide
unprecedented detail on a typically hidden component of selection, the
differential success of male plants in siring. Finally, the project will allow
both undergraduate and graduate students to engage in and learn field
techniques, laboratory methodology, and bioinformatics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.