* 1753998
* Mathematical Theory Development in America
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Suman Seth, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 05/31/2019
* USD 12,600.00

This award supports a doctoral dissertation research project in the history of
mathematics. It uses postulate theory, an approach to the foundations of
mathematics that searches for and establishes the basic postulates (or
principles) that govern a particular mathematical field, as a window into the
relationship between mathematics and American society during the first half of
the 20th Century. The goal is to show how the relationship between mathematics
and society in the early twentieth century helped erect barriers to
participation in the mathematics community today. Closely tied to culture and
diversity issues are ongoing debates about math education and the challenge of
public engagement. This study's analysis of math education debates in the early
twentieth century will highlight the many factors that are at stake in such
debates, which are important to consider when drafting and deliberating current
policy.

The project addresses three primary research questions: How did the exploration
of the foundations of mathematics inform the meaning and value of American
mathematics in the early 1900s? How were the boundaries of professional
mathematics redefined in the US during that time? How did the cultural identity
and public image of American mathematicians change alongside Progressive Era
conceptions of hierarchy and difference? These questions will be answered
through the analysis of institutional and public media archives as well as the
work of individual mathematicians engaged in the study of postulates. The
overall purpose is to further understand the development of American mathematics
by situating its early-twentieth-century growth within the context of American
society. By exploring the image and status of professional mathematicians in the
Progressive Era United States alongside historical perceptions of who was
thought capable of contributing to mathematical knowledge, this study will shed
light on the dynamics of inclusivity and cultural identity in American science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.