* 1753854
* Collaborative Research:   Spatial Dynamics, Early Warnings and Harmful Algal Blooms
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Emily Stanley, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/29/2024
* USD 493,560.00

Small changes in the environment can have large effects on ecosystems when these
changes approach a critical tipping point. For example, harmful algal blooms in
lakes can appear suddenly in response to subtle changes in environmental
conditions. Knowing when and where they are likely to happen in time to prevent
them or to reduce their impact can be quite challenging. Some scientists have
suggested that there may be early warnings of algal blooms detectable by
frequent measurements of water quality. Recent advances in technology now make
it possible to measure water quality in real time using sensors. These high
frequency data provide a way to develop early warnings of imminent blooms of
harmful algae. An effective early warning system will help scientists understand
what causes harmful algal blooms and develop strategies to prevent them. This
research will study how to use spatial patterns, in addition to changes over
time, to more effectively detect early warnings in lakes where harmful algal
blooms are expected to occur. The goal is to create a new approach to predicting
when and where large changes to ecosystems will occur. The results will be
useful for management as harmful algal blooms are a serious water quality and
public health problem. Early warnings before blooms begin could help managers
protect beaches, water quality, and other important public resources. This
project will also involve outreach to journalists to help educate the public
about efforts to prevent harmful algal blooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Empirical
evaluation of spatial pattern in ecosystems requires a means of repeatedly
generating spatially rich data. The Fast Limnology Automated Measurement (FLAMe)
platform rapidly determines the spatial distribution of a suite of variables
including phytoplankton pigments that are diagnostic of algal blooms. The
project will generate pigment maps and a variety of spatial statistics using the
FLAMe platform. Spatial patterns will be studied for lakes across a natural
nutrient loading gradient and for a set of eutrophic lakes. Dynamic spatial
models of lake phytoplankton will be developed to evaluate existing indicators
and possibly develop new ones. Lakes near thresholds for algal blooms are
hypothesized to have higher spatial variance, autocorrelation, and skewness than
either more oligotrophic (low nutrient inputs) or more eutrophic lakes (high
nutrient inputs). Spatial early warnings will be tested in a whole lake
manipulation that compares a nutrient enriched lake to an unenriched reference
lake. The enriched lake is hypothesized to increase in spatial variance,
autocorrelation, and skewness prior to the development of a bloom. The research
will provide new knowledge of spatial patterns in lakes as nutrient status
changes, as well as new insights about spatial variability and change
indicators. The study will systematically explore spatial indicators for blooms
and generate hypotheses testable in other types of
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.