* 1753742
* Regulation of Calcium Signaling by the Intrinsic Cell Death Pathway in C. elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2021
* Keith Nehrke, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 11/30/2021
* USD 493,206.00

Calcium, and regulating its concentration, are essential for life. Changes in
calcium concentration are used to convey diverse types of information within
cells (intracellular calcium signaling). The particular physiological outputs of
calcium signaling cascades are exquisitely dependent upon spatial and temporal
constraints. A variety of proteins help to shape calcium signals, and in mammals
this regulation can be extremely complex. The nematode worm Caenorhabditis
elegans is a model organism that is widely used for genetic approaches and
exhibits many of the same constraints on calcium signaling as mammals. The use
of this model allows researchers to circumvent the complexities of mammalian
systems and more directly show cause and effect through advanced genomic editing
approaches and integrative physiology. Specifically, this project will
investigate how the interaction between two classes of proteins that are central
to calcium signaling regulates physiological and behavioral outputs. The Nehrke
Lab is strongly committed to promoting community interactions and diversity in
science and to training the next generation of scientists. Toward these ends,
the project will continue to provide STEM education to Rochester City School
District third-graders through an outreach program at the YMCA and will initiate
a joint training program with Monroe Community College that allows students to
rotate among a variety of University of Rochester Medical Center laboratories
during the academic year and then to undertake a ten-week summer research
fellowship in one of those labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The inositol 1, 4,
5-trisphosphate receptor (IP3R) is an endoplasmic reticular (ER) Ca2+ release
channel whose activity is central to Ca2+ signaling. Fine-tuning of IP3R
activity by other proteins diversifies its signaling repertoire. Recent evidence
indicates that anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family members interact with the IP3R and
that this may facilitate ER-to-mitochondrial Ca2+ transfer to promote
oscillatory Ca2+ signaling rather than apoptotic Ca2+ overload. In mammals,
studying the role of IP3R/Bcl-2 interactions is complicated by multiple IP3R
isoforms and Bcl-2 family members that share contact sites with the receptor,
making it difficult to address specific cause and effect. In contrast, C.
elegans has only a single isoform of each protein, which nevertheless perform
similar functions and possess nearly identical amino acid sequences to their
mammalian counterparts at the sites of interaction. Sophisticated genetic tools,
including CRISPR-Cas9 mediated genome editing to create "loss-of-interaction"
models and cutting-edge approaches using biosensors to measure localized calcium
signaling, will be used to test this hypothesis and to interrogate the
underlying mechanisms. Research results will increase understanding of inter-
organelle communication and its relevance to normal physiology. The award
supports a successful and long-standing outreach program aimed at Rochester City
School District third-grade students, who are among the most impoverished in the
country. In addition, a new initiative will synergize with existing local
infrastructure to create shadowing and summer research traineeships for
underrepresented Monroe Community College students continuing on to four-year
universities. Research training for a postdoctoral fellow and mentoring
experience for two graduate students will also be
provided.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.