* 1753933
* EAGER: Black Phosphorus For Tunable Wide Bandwidth Sensor Arrays
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Anupama Kaul, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 06/30/2022
* USD 280,158.00

Abstract: Black Phosphorus for Tunable Wide-bandwidth Sensor
Arrays&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanocarbons have captured the attention of
researchers over the past several decades with materials such as buckeyballs,
carbon nanotubes, carbon nanofibers and graphene. This rich variety of
nanocarbon choices is possible due to the diverse crystalline structures of
nancarbons, one form of which is two-dimensional (2D) graphene, a layered
material. Two-dimensional graphene has enabled researchers to explore other 2D
layered materials, such as the transition metal dichalcogenides, a wide variety
of oxides and nitrides and clays. A recent addition to the suite of materials
beyond carbon is phosphorus which also shows great diversity in its structures
in the solid state, ranging from orthorhombic black phosphorus, cubic white
phosphorus, monoclinic violet phosphorus, fibrous red phosphorus and amorphous
red phosphorus. Recently, a great deal of attention has been paid to the layered
form of phosphorus, specifically black phosphorus which has a unique puckered
honeycomb lattice. However, unlike graphite, black phosphorus is a direct band
semiconductor in the bulk making it an attractive material for optoelectronics
and sensing applications. The focus of the work proposed here is to understand
the intriguing electronic and optoelectronic properties of black phosphorous and
to develop novel optoelectronic sensing devices from this material.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Black phosphorus has a narrow direct band gap
of 0.3 eV in the bulk, unlike most of the transition metal dichalcogenides which
have much higher, indirect band gaps, suggesting that black phosphorus has
prospects for sensing and detector applications targeted for the near IR and
mid-IR regimes. Moreover, the band gap of black phosphorus can be engineered
through control of layer thickness; the band gap increases with decreasing layer
number, reaching 2 eV for single layer phosphorene. Therefore, engineering the
layer number in arrays of black phosphorus devices with varying layer number
should enable photo-detection over a broad spectral range. We will utilize the
exotic properties of black phosphorus and integrate this novel material with
molybdenum disulphide (MoS2) to demonstrate high performance tunable sensor
arrays operational over a wide spectral regime from the visible to the infrared
(IR). The novel features of this proposal are to capitalize on the tunable band
gap properties of black phosphorus, the high mobility of its carriers to enable
fast response time detectors, and at the same time, the atomically sharp
interfaces between two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals heterostructures should
yield ultra-sensitive detectors by reducing dark currents that plague the
performance of doped-graded junctions.