* 1753690
* RUI: Characterization of the gene regulatory network promoting hormogonium development in the filamentous cyanobacterium Nostoc punctiforme
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Doug Risser, University of the Pacific
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 02/28/2022
* USD 298,776.00

The filamentous cyanobacteria are a group of photosynthetic microorganisms that
first evolved about 2.5 billion years ago, making them one of the first
multicellular organisms on earth. These relatively simple multicellular
organisms provide an excellent, cost-effective model system for studying
fundamental aspects of developmental biology. Additionally, because these
bacteria are relatively easy to modify genetically, and are capable of both
converting sunlight into energy and providing a source of nitrogen-based
fertilizer to certain plants, they are of considerable interest for development
in biofuel production and agriculture. This project is focused on characterizing
the genetic mechanism controlling the development of specialized filaments that
are capable of movement, using the model strain Nostoc punctiforme. As part of
the broader impacts, this project will also provide training for both
undergraduate and graduate students in state-of-the art genetic and molecular
techniques, as well as an outreach program to local area schools which serve a
diverse student body, many of whom are economically disadvantaged. Aspects of
this project will be incorporated into teaching labs and several undergraduate
and graduate students will participate in the research, including students
recruited from the Community Involvement Program (C.I.P.) at University of the
Pacific, which serves first generation college students from ethnically
underrepresented and economically disadvantaged backgrounds. Students recruited
from C.I.P. will be provided support for summer research assistantships and also
participate in an outreach program for 5th-8th grade classrooms at local schools
where they will disseminate a learning module using a portable fluorescence
microscope to explore cell biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Filamentous
cyanobacteria are among the most developmentally complex prokaryotes and the
study of these organisms has provided valuable insight into developmental
biology. Many species develop an array of specialized cell types including
motile filaments termed hormogonia that facilitate dispersal. Hormogonia are
also essential for the formation of supracellular structures and the
establishment of nitrogen-fixing plant- and fungal-cyanobacterial symbioses that
contribute significantly to global nitrogen fixation. Currently, the underlying
molecular interactions controlling hormogonium development and ecologically
important hormogonium-dependent processes are largely undefined. Based on recent
studies and preliminary data, the working hypothesis is that hormogonium
development is governed by a conserved gene regulatory network that includes
sigma factors, partner-switching regulatory systems, the hmp chemotaxis system,
and several additional uncharacterized components. This project has two specific
aims: 1) Identify and characterize components of the gene regulatory network
promoting hormogonium development, and 2) Define the role of sigma factors and
partner-switching regulatory systems in hormogonium development. The project
uses forward and reverse genetic approaches combined with a range of phenotypic
analyses of mutant strains including morphological analyses and immunological
assays of hormogonium-specific protein and polysaccharide expression, as well as
transcriptomic studies to define the gene regulatory network promoting
hormogonium development in the model filamentous cyanobacterium Nostoc
punctiforme. Completion of this project will lay the foundation for a model of
the gene regulatory network promoting hormogonium development that can then be
used to rationally design genetically modified strains of filamentous
cyanobacteria for various applications including biofuel production and novel
plant-cyanobacterial symbioses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.