* 1753738
* Collaborative Research: East African Rift Tephra Database [EARThD]: a compilation documenting and analyzing explosive volcanism in East Africa
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Karen Fontijn, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 04/30/2023
* USD 135,201.00

The East African Rift Valley is home to hundreds of volcanoes that have produced
large explosive eruptions in their past, sending volcanic ash into the
atmosphere and dispersing it over large distances. This volcanic ash (also
called tephra) is deposited on land or in water bodies, and may become preserved
in the geological record. Studies of tephra are important for a wide range of
purposes including learning about the eruptive history of a volcano to
anticipate potential future behavior, and correlating and dating rock layers for
paleoanthropology and paleoclimatology studies. Traditionally, much of this work
has been carried out by separate groups of researchers from these various
disciplines, and a significant amount of data is then published in specialized
literature, and hard to discover. A centralized database of tephra occurrence in
East Africa would help overcome this barrier and encourage the use of existing
valuable datasets, but also answer fundamental questions about the evolution of
volcanism in East Africa through time. This project will address this need by
building the East African Rift Tephra Database (EARThD), a comprehensive
database that will integrate, standardize, and investigate geochemical and age
tephra datasets from the East African Rift focusing on the record from the past
5 million years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EARThD project will utilize the
existing NSF-supported community-based data facility, Interdisciplinary Earth
Data Alliance (IEDA), to store, curate, and provide access to geochemical data
and metadata through IEDA's EarthChem library. Tephra samples from published
articles will be assigned an International Sample Geo Number (IGSN) and
associated datasets and metadata will be entered and formatted using
standardized IEDA templates. The development of EARThD will fulfill the
currently non-existent but crucial data integration and standardization effort
needed to support the growing East African Rift tephra record and the
increasingly complex and interdisciplinary research questions being studied. It
will benefit a broad scientific community by encouraging and facilitating the
cross-disciplinary use of tephra geochemical data and involve undergraduate
student researchers. Results of this project will provide a clearer
understanding of the temporal variations of explosive volcanism along the East
African Rift, including the frequency and magnitude of past eruptions and long-
term geochemical variations in response to continental
rifting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.