* 1753983
* PISCES 2023 - Partnership in Securing Cyberspace Through Education and Service (Renewal)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2025
* Lance Hoffman, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2025
* USD 4,684,222.00

Since 2003, the George Washington University's (GWU) Partnership in Securing
Cyberspace through Education and Service (PISCES) program has produced 88
federal government employees and supported 17 more scholars through the
CyberCorps(R): Scholarship for Service (SFS) program. This project from the GWU
proposes to continue to provide cybersecurity education opportunities for an
additional 24 students from diverse backgrounds, to become cybersecurity
professionals and help protect the safety and security of our nation's
information infrastructure. This will be achieved by combining scholarship
support, university courses in computer security and information assurance,
internships, laboratories, and government service, with a unifying and
reinforcing seminar that prepares students with the knowledge, perspective, and
expertise to succeed in their future cybersecurity government
positions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GW will apply its multidisciplinary approach to
this cybersecurity project, by bringing students from a variety of schools
(e.g., Engineering, Law, International Affairs, Arts and Sciences). GW SFS
scholars will take cybersecurity-related courses in and outside their home
departments as appropriate for their individual program of study. A unique
seminar course and weekly meetings will bring all the students together in a
cohort and provide opportunities to examine a range of security issues from
various points of view (e.g., technical, legal, policy, business, forensics,
national security studies), thus providing an opportunity for cross-training and
expanding the breadth of their expertise. Scholars will be assembled from three
academic pathways: students who transition from community colleges, students who
enroll in a 4-year institution from the start, and career changers seeking a
master's degree. This will enrich the diversity of each cohort and broaden
participation for a wider pool of interested and qualified candidates looking to
serve in cybersecurity positions with the government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.