* 1753364
* CAREER: Mechanistic Studies of Secondary Organic Aerosol Production from Biomass Burning Derived Precursors
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Kelley Barsanti, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 09/30/2023
* USD 572,581.00

The goal of this project is to improve models that predict the formation of
secondary organic aerosol (SOA) in the atmosphere. It is focused on SOA formed
from biomass burning emissions. The project includes experiments conducted in
the atmospheric chambers at the University of California, Riverside (UCR) and
builds on the historical expertise and the series of aggregated chemical
mechanisms produced by the Statewide Air Pollution Research Center (SAPRC) at
UCR. The results of this project will be beneficial to local and regional
regulatory agencies (e.g., the California Air Resources Board and the South
Coast Air Quality Management District) and fire management communities (e.g.,
the Joint Fire Science Program).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanistic
understanding and model representation of biomass burning (BB)-SOA will be
advanced through conventional and novel chamber studies of recently identified
and poorly characterized potential SOA precursors emitted from BB, the
evaluation of chamber data and SOA parameterizations using existing approaches;
and the development and testing of an innovative SOA model that better
integrates gas- and particle-phase chemistry based on the widely-used gas-phase
chemical mechanism SAPRC. The specific objectives of the research are to: (1)
Elucidate the secondary organic aerosol (SOA) formation potential for biomass
burning (BB) derived hydrocarbon precursors; (2) Evaluate changes in SOA mass
formation and properties with changes in chemical conditions; (3) Develop SOA
parameterizations using existing two product (2p) and volatility basis set (VBS)
model approaches; and (4) Advance an integrated gas- and particle-phase model
representation of SOA formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.