* 1753148
* CAREER: From Single Swimmers to Swarms: A Computational Study of Mesoscale Active Matter In Fluids
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Daphne Klotsa, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/29/2024
* USD 499,998.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical and
computational research integrated with education on active matter, an area of
soft matter inspired by biology that focuses on understanding soft matter made
from fundamental building blocks that are maintained far from the steady state
of equilibrium by injecting energy at microscopic scales. &lt;br/&gt;It takes a
trip to the local aquarium for one to admire schools of small fish forming
spectacular patterns as they swim and swirl in a coherent synchronous manner.
The tiniest jolt from an intruder, a big fish perhaps, sends the school into a
momentary frenzy, where the little creatures explode in all directions, only to
reform the swarm seconds later. Squint a little and the school of fish appears
like one object, one continuous "living" material with a life and intelligence
of its own; grander than the sum of its parts, smarter than the individual
organisms. The dynamic properties of such "living materials" contrast sharply
with the static characteristics of traditional materials. The former consists of
"active" components such as bacteria, self-propelled nanorods, or molecular
motors, that locally consume energy to move, exert forces or perform chemical
reactions, and so, are inherently out of equilibrium, while the latter have
fundamental building blocks that are "passive", such as molecules at
equilibrium. The PI envisions designing a new and distinct class of materials by
putting together active components to create active materials. In the same way
that schools of fish respond to predators, swarms of bacteria swim towards
nutrients, or skin heals itself when wounded, an artificial active material of
self-propelled colloids or insect drones can respond to stimuli, restore
coherence of the flock or "self-heal", adapt, store energy and information,
assemble and disassemble at will. The PI aims to formulate a framework for
understanding active matter based on statistical physics which focuses on
systems composed of a large number of particles that will contribute to the
foundations for developing design rules for making living materials with
functionality beyond ordinary materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applications with
broad societal impact range from novel active materials that are responsive,
adaptive and self-healing, to aquatic swarming robots, for example for ocean
exploration, under-water maintenance, remediation of oil, detection and
collection of plastics in the ocean, to novel drug delivery platforms. The
research and education plans are tightly integrated to one another, and both are
designed to incorporate diversity. The PI will collaborate with programs that
promote and advise on diversity, as well as evaluate success, and will include
minorities and underrepresented groups both in her group and through outreach.
Undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral fellows will receive
training in a highly interdisciplinary field that combines computational, and
analytical skills and draws knowledge from materials, physics, chemistry,
biology, mathematics and engineering. Broader outreach with the public will be
achieved through three exciting avenues: (i) podcast interviews; (ii) online
material and a blog for students and postdocs with children; (iii) soft matter
video project and (iv) local community outreach at science fairs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports
theoretical and computational research integrated with education on active
matter under conditions of intermediate Reynolds number flow. The complexity of
emergent active-matter behavior has been demonstrated at many length-scales in
both biological and artificial systems. Most studies so far have either
developed minimal models without hydrodynamic interactions or focused on
microscopic scales, where the Reynolds number approaches zero, Stokes flow. Both
approaches are vibrant fields of research showing novel emergent behavior and
providing insight for nonequilibrium theories of active matter. However, a whole
region of parameter space. active matter of inertial particles at intermediate
Reynolds numbers, remains largely unexplored. The intermediate regime covers at
least three orders of magnitude in the Reynolds number and opens numerous
possibilities for materials science, and describing millions of different
organisms that one can study as model systems. The overarching goal of this
project is to study active particles in fluids where viscous and inertial forces
coexist with the aim to build a framework for describing mesoscale active matter
suspensions. The two main thrusts that build upon each other towards that goal
are to: (1) study and classify single model swimmers, at the point they
transition from low to intermediate Reynolds numbers, and then for increasing
Reynolds numbers; (2) examine the pairwise interactions for different model
swimmers and establish an understanding of their collective behavior, emergent
swarming and many-body interactions. In this way, the research will contribute
to formulating a statistical mechanics based framework of active inertial
suspensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.