* 1753555
* Collaborative Research: Effect of Contrasting Structural and Compositional Inheritances on the Development of Rifting Margins
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Luc Lavier, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 05/31/2020
* USD 40,987.00

Throughout Earth's history continents have broken apart and reassembled as part
of the fundamental plate tectonic evolution of the planet. How continents break
apart by rifting processes is thought to be predefined by inherent structural
and compositional variability of Earth's crust and mantle that make up the
lithosphere and is likely inherited from previous tectonic events. Understanding
the style of continental breakup provides fundamental information for the
exploration for energy and mineral resources and to understanding the geologic
hazards associated with these processes. Geological observations often support
the fact that these inheritances are key parameters in the development of rift
structures but the extent to which these inheritances play a role during the
rifting process remain unclear. This project investigates how the variable
composition of continental lithosphere and the presence of inherited geological
structures affect rifting processes. A multi-disciplinary approach will employ
geological and geophysical observations to characterize inheritances in the
crust and mantle of the lithosphere. These observations will be integrated into
numerical models that simulate the deformation of the lithosphere over millions
of years by extension. The results of this project will fundamentally advance
the understanding of lithospheric scale deformation processes and impact
structural geology, computational geosciences and potentially the fossil fuel
communities. Under broader impacts the project supports an early career female
researcher at Texas State University, a primarily Hispanic-serving institution,
and a master student will be recruited to participate directly in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Passive margins define about half of the Earth's
coastlines and have been the focus of numerous studies in recent decades. While
understanding of rifting processes has greatly improved, fundamental questions
remain on the effects of inherited conditions on localization processes in
extending lithosphere. Multiple studies suggest that structural, compositional
and thermal inheritances are key parameters in the development of rift
structures. However, the extent to which they play a role during breakup is
still unclear. This project will address the hypothesis that inheritances
strongly affect rifting processes and can explain: 1) the distribution of strain
during the initial phase of deformation, 2) the mechanism of thinning during the
rifting process, and 3) the mechanism leading to the exhumation and/or the
formation of oceanic crust. To test this hypothesis numerical rifting
experiments will be run with both structural and compositional inheritances.
Inheritances are parameterized as oriented fabrics obtained from 2D seismic and
3D structural observations. A polymineralic composition is assigned to these
heterogeneities in order to account for the natural variation in compositions
observed in the continental lithosphere. In order to constrain the models, a
multidisciplinary approach will be used that combines: 1) the analysis of
geological and geophysical data, 2) a systematic exploration of the effects of
numerical modeling experiments using a bimineralic rheology, and 3) a case study
of the Northeastern Canadian margin with 2D and 3D numerical models. This
approach will allow for a large amount of quantitative information on rift
evolution to be acquired by independently varying the composition, distribution
and orientation of inheritances. Results will help improve understanding of
strain distribution, localization processes and mechanisms of deformation during
continental breakup, and visualize the dynamic evolution of rifting processes
depending on the type of inheritances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.