* 1753054
* CAREER: First-Principles Predictive Theory and Microscopic Understanding of Nonlinear Light-Matter Interactions towards Designer Nonlinear Optical Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Xiaofeng Qian, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2024
* USD 439,519.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and
the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure contribute funds to this CAREER
award. This award supports an integrated research and education effort on
developing and applying computational methods for understanding how nonlinear
optical materials respond to light. How nonlinear optical materials respond to
light depends on the intensity of the light which leads to interesting phenomena
that can be used in technological applications. For example, the dependence of
the index of refraction on light intensity can cause a nonlinear optical
material to function like a lens causing a light beam to narrow or collapse as
it passes through the material. &lt;br/&gt;These materials have applications in,
for example, noninvasive imaging for medicine, optoelectronic devices, and
advanced sensitive quantum mechanical sensors. Understanding and accurate
prediction of strong light-matter interaction at microscopic level would help
enable the design of novel materials with tailored nonlinear optical properties
for specific applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
develop and apply methods that starting from knowing the identity of the
constituent atoms to predict how specific nonlinear optical materials will
respond to light. Emphasis will be placed on novel two-dimensional materials and
topological materials which can have metallic states with exotic properties that
cover surfaces and edges of the material. This work will elucidate the
fundamental role of symmetry, topology, surface/edge, and spin-orbit coupling in
nonlinear light-matter interactions. The results obtained from this work will
also help generate design principles for nonlinear optical materials and
nanostructures. The methods and data acquired will be broadly disseminated to
the scientific community, industry, and the general public through open-source
distributions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To integrate outreach and education with the
research, the PI will host and train high-school students from under-represented
groups and secondary school teachers in scientific computing and simulations
during summers. The PI will also integrate the research into undergraduate and
graduate curricula, provide multidisciplinary training to undergraduate and
graduate students, disseminate computational tools in computational materials
science summer schools, and promote women in materials science and engineering
through seminar series. The graduate students working on this project will
acquire an interdisciplinary background in physics, materials science, and high-
performance computing. The computer codes and data generated will be shared with
the public to benefit the education and outreach in the community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Division of Materials Research and the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure
contribute funds to this CAREER award. This award supports an integrated
research and education effort on developing and applying predictive first-
principles methods for understanding nonlinear optical responses of materials.
Materials and nanostructures with tailored nonlinear optical properties are not
only important for understanding, probing, and ultimately controlling light-
matter interaction at the nanoscale, but highly desirable for many applications
such as ultrafast nonlinear optics, biosensing, all-optical transistor and
computer, and optical quantum teleportation, communication, and computing.
Recently, giant nonlinear optical processes such as second and third harmonic
generation were discovered in two-dimensional crystals and topological
materials, which challenges the current understanding and requires fundamental
investigation at the microscopic level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to advance fundamental understanding and theoretical prediction of
nonlinear light-matter interaction in materials. The research will focus on
developing and applying first-principles density-functional-based methods and
approaches to investigate and eventually predict second and third order
nonlinear optical responses of materials. Spin-orbit coupling, crystalline
symmetry, causality, electron-hole interaction, quasiparticle energy, and
quasiparticle lifetime due to carrier-carrier and carrier-phonon interactions
will be included in this first-principles theoretical framework. Particular
emphasis will be placed on elucidating the role of symmetry, electronic
topology, surface/edge, and spin-orbit coupling in two-dimensional materials and
topological materials. The results obtained will generate new knowledge of
nonlinear optical processes and contribute materials design principles for
control of light-matter interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To integrate outreach
and education with the research, the PI will host and train high-school students
from under-represented groups and secondary school teachers in scientific
computing and simulations during summers to motivate the aspiration and
curiosity of the students in science and engineering. The PI will also integrate
the research into undergraduate and graduate curricula, provide
multidisciplinary training to undergraduate and graduate students, disseminate
the developed computational tools in computational materials science summer
schools, and promote women in materials science and engineering through seminar
series. The graduate students working on this project will acquire a solid
interdisciplinary background in physics, materials science, and high-performance
computing. In addition, the computational methods, codes, and data generated
from this project will be broadly disseminated to the scientific community, the
industry, and the general public through open-source distributions with the
intent to benefit the broader research, education, and outreach in the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.