* 1753654
* I-Corps: Agent Based Control of Assets in Distribution Energy Networks
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Soummya Kar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 03/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is in addressing
a substantial challenge in energy systems. The future electric power grid,
commonly referred to as the smart grid, is expected to differ from the current
system by the increased integration of distributed generation, demand response
and sensing and communication technologies. As distributed energy resources
become more prevalent and shape the future of the electric power grid, the
overall operational flexibility of the grid increases. This also means that more
control decisions need to be made. This project provides an optimal coordination
solution for coordinating geographically scattered energy resources. A
commercially viable optimal coordination solution for ever increasing energy
resources is crucial for cost efficient generation and dispatch of electricity
and ensuring the reliability of the power grid. Specially, focusing on cold
chain technologies, this project addresses scalable and flexible control and
coordination of distributed refrigeration systems; it is envisioned that the
proposed solution and software would turn end-users' pre-installed refrigerators
and freezers into an integrated intelligent refrigeration system and
significantly improve their energy efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project provides a novel distributed control method that addresses a significant
operational challenge of the distribution electric grid. Control of energy
systems today is largely performed by centralized computing and control
solutions run at central units. Increased infeed measurements (sensing data)
result in growing stress and extended time for computations. Thus, centralized
control solutions may not be feasibly computed and applied in real-time. This
project contributes to fundamentally new methodologies and software for
distributed computation of control decisions in real-time. Our research provides
a promising solution for the intelligent control of distributed energy
resources, which enables the efficient interaction and coordination of a variety
of components with and by a central unit. The key premise in this research is
that if coordinated in an intelligent, predictive and scalable way, operation of
numerous energy resources can be optimized in real-time, thereby resolving the
issue of scalability. In addition to extending the proposed distributed control
methodology toward achieving reliable and cost effective energy and demand side
management, this project focuses on commercializing a more target specific
extension of the proposed approach directed at minimizing the operational cost
of refrigeration systems in cold chain industries through enhanced distributed
coordination.