* 1753657
* Collaborative Research:  Consequences of changing oxygen availability for carbon cycling in freshwater ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Paul Hanson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2023
* USD 87,219.00

The amount of oxygen in many lakes and reservoirs is changing globally. These
changes may threaten ecosystem services lakes provide. In addition to degrading
drinking water and fisheries, changes in oxygen can change how much carbon is
buried in lake bottoms. Since human-made reservoirs store more carbon annually
than the ocean, these changes may have a major impact on global carbon cycling.
The magnitude of changes in oxygen, and consequences for water quality, are
unknown. This project will take advantage of an unprecedented opportunity to
switch an entire reservoir from low to high oxygen. The study includes several
experiments that involve changing oxygen levels, and examining the impacts on
carbon cycling. This research will improve predictions of how environmental
changes will affect carbon burial in lakes. The project results will help
managers meet goals to improve reservoir water quality. It will also contribute
to understanding long-term effects of management on carbon burial in lakes. This
project will produce educational tools and lesson plans for undergraduate
courses on reservoir ecology. Project scientists will work with water utilities
and the broader research community to share knowledge to improve policy.
Finally, graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in subjects
spanning ecology, geosciences, and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Freshwaters, especially human-made reservoirs, receive and
process a vast amount of carbon, which can be emitted as carbon dioxide and
methane or buried in sediments. Increasingly variable oxygen concentrations may
have global implications for freshwater carbon cycling because high oxygen
conditions promote not only the mineralization of new carbon that has recently
entered an ecosystem, but also legacy carbon accumulated over years of
sedimentation. This project will address the overarching question: How will
changes in oxygen alter carbon processing and carbon dioxide and methane
emissions in freshwater ecosystems? To answer these questions, carbon
mineralization and electron acceptor pathways will be measured with new sensor
technology at the time scale of minutes under different oxygen and temperature
conditions in whole-ecosystem oxygen experiments to quantify rates of carbon
processing. Additional sampling across a suite of reservoirs on a gradient of
oxygen availability will be used in open-source ecosystem models to improve
predictions of long-term carbon burial in freshwater ecosystems. In sum,
integrating whole-ecosystem manipulations of oxygen with modeling will determine
how dynamic oxygen conditions alter carbon cycling in aquatic
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.