* 1753014
* CAREER: Exploiting Novel Architectures for Advanced Heterometallic Magnetic Molecules and Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Michael Nippe, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2024
* USD 762,219.00

In this CAREER project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp;
Mechanism B Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Michael Nippe of the
Department of Chemistry at Texas A&amp;M University is developing new classes of
heterometallic transition metal-rare earth complexes with interesting magnetic
properties. The goal of this research is to exploit various interactions between
paramagnetic metal ions to develop new classes of single-molecule magnets (SMMs)
that will feature improved performance, higher operating temperatures, and
switchable magnetization dynamics. These molecular materials have tremendous
potential for next generation data storage and future spintronic devices. This
interdisciplinary project combines state-of-the-art techniques from inorganic,
synthetic, computational, and physical chemistry to identify important
fundamental design guidelines for novel SMM systems. The project is very well
suited to holistically educate future scientists at all levels. This project
also involves the creation and development of new class modules at the highest
level of education. Several outreach activities to high schools featuring
underrepresented students in sciences are also part of the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interactions of lanthanide (Ln) atoms with transition
metal (TM) atoms result in hard bulk magnetic materials. Highly magnetic
anisotropic Ln3+ ions are also commonly exploited for the study of slow magnetic
relaxation in SMMs, which have attracted increased attention due to their
potential application in information storage and spintronic devices. SMMs are
characterized by a thermal energy barrier to magnetization reversal. However,
only very limited information about the magnetic properties of molecular
materials featuring direct Ln-TM bonds have been reported. Furthermore, Ln-TM
bonded complexes are rare and fundamental questions concerning the nature of the
bonding remain open. This project addresses these questions with the specific
goal to develop next-generation SMMs. Synthetic strategies to access and study
molecules that feature (1) direct Ln-TM bonds or (2) Ln···TM interactions will
be developed. Focus is given to the study of magnetic properties at various
timescales of these heterometallic Ln/TM complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.