* 1753240
* CAREER:  Symmetry, Topology, and Transport in Strongly Interacting Quantum Many-Body Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2024
* Maissam Barkeshli, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2024
* USD 430,531.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research
and education on fundamental questions in quantum condensed matter systems and
their applications to quantum computing. A central question in physics is to
understand how matter can collectively organize itself into many different types
of ordered phases. The transformation of water into ice is a common example. The
study of liquids, crystals, magnets, superconductors, and other such phases of
matter has revolutionized our understanding of matter itself and the
technological basis of our society. The last decade has seen a renaissance in
our ability to theoretically understand and experimentally probe novel quantum
states of matter that do not exhibit conventional types of organization, but
which are rather characterized by a subtler quantum topological order. The
phenomena exhibited by these quantum states of matter can potentially be
harnessed for a variety of quantum technologies, including quantum computers,
which would be able to solve certain computational tasks exponentially more
efficiently than classical computers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical
tools to describe these phenomena are currently under rapid development and
require basic advances. The PI and his group will pursue a multifaceted research
program to tackle foundational theoretical questions, and to address the
question of characterizing distinct possible quantum states of matter and their
collective phenomena. These will then be pursued further in the context of
specific materials and experimental settings. Finally, the theoretical insights
gained will be applied to devise new ways of protecting delicate quantum states
from their external environment, in order to advance the pursuit of scalable,
fault-tolerant quantum computers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project has
significant impact not only on the condensed-matter community, but also on high-
energy physics, mathematics, quantum information, and potentially in industry in
the area of quantum computing. The research will be carried out primarily with
graduate students and postdoctoral scholars, whose training will benefit from
the wide and advanced scope of the projects. The PI plans to also mentor
undergraduate students to study these topics, and to maintain contact with the
local K-12 community through a number of outreach activities organized by the
Joint Quantum Institute and Physics Frontier Center at the University of
Maryland, with the aim of increasing the participation of women and
underrepresented minorities in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award supports research and education on fundamental questions in
strongly interacting quantum many-body systems and their applications to quantum
computing. Recent years have seen a renaissance in our ability to theoretically
characterize and experimentally probe novel quantum states of matter and their
excitations. This progress includes an understanding of new types of topological
defects that can occur in strongly interacting fractionalized phases of matter.
The universal properties of these defects are characterized within a recently
been developed theoretical framework that incorporates the interplay of symmetry
and topology in strongly interacting quantum liquids. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research focuses on the following main objectives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1)
Further developing the understanding of the physics of these new types of
topological line- and point-defects and how they can be studied by using
realistic model Hamiltonians, and be realized and probed experimentally in
graphene fractional quantum Hall systems, and quantum spin-liquid materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Developing a comprehensive theoretical framework to
characterize and describe symmetric topological phases of matter. The current
theory must be extended to incorporate situations of physical interest, such as
where the symmetries include space-time symmetries and can be anti-unitary
and/or continuous, and also situations where the microscopic constituents are
fermions. The ultimate goal is to develop a complete list of topological
invariants that fully characterize strongly interacting topological quantum
states of bosons and fermions with symmetry. An important aspect of this
investigation will be to subsequently apply the insights gained to our
understanding of quantum critical phenomena as well. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(3)
Developing applications of defects and symmetry-enriched topological states to
quantum computation. Specifically, all scalable approaches to quantum error
correction with local interactions rely heavily on topological states of matter
for fault-tolerance and thus can benefit from the advances in our understanding
of defects and symmetry in topological states. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(4)
Studying hydrodynamic thermal and electrical transport behavior in metallic and
quantum critical systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project has
significant impact not only on the condensed-matter community, but also on high-
energy physics, mathematics, quantum information, and potentially in industry in
the area of quantum computing. The research will be carried out primarily with
graduate students and postdoctoral scholars, whose training will benefit from
the wide and advanced scope of the projects. The PI plans to also mentor
undergraduate students to study these topics, and to maintain contact with the
local K-12 community through a number of outreach activities organized by the
Joint Quantum Institute and Physics Frontier Center at the University of
Maryland, with the aim of increasing the participation of women and
underrepresented minorities in STEM fields.