* 1753822
* I-Corps: Rapid Photonic Treatment for High-Speed Printing of Flexible Perovskite Solar Cells
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2017,03/31/2020
* Dawen Li, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 03/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact and commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to
provide a path for integrating photovoltaics into a wide range of new form
factors. The project will first explore the commercial potential of integrating
high-performance, light-weight flexible solar panels onto freight truck
trailers, shading fabrics, and military tents. When the large exterior surfaces
of a freight truck trailer are covered by high-efficiency solar panels the
technology can significantly improve overall diesel fuel efficiencies.
Retrofitting flexible solar panels onto shading fabrics, such as canopies,
awnings, and car parking ports can potentially allow for local, potentially off-
grid, power sources. The flexible solar panels will also potentially help the
military cope with their power needs for operations occur in remote locations.
All these applications rely on the new form factors the core technology in this
project enables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on core
technology that overcomes major obstacles in perovskite solar cells, including
their short lifetime, lengthy processing steps, and substantial efficiency drops
from large-area fabrication on flexible substrates. Commonly used annealing
approaches require prolonged heating at high temperatures to attain desired
material properties. Therefore, they are not typically compatible with high-
speed printing. The technology developed here accomplishes a rapid layer-
specific photonic treatment for the target layer without damaging the underlying
flexible substrate and perovskite materials. This innovative technology enables
large-scale manufacturing of durable and fully-flexible perovskite solar cells
through high-speed printing.