* 1753393
* CAREER: Development and Characterization of New High Thermal Conductivity Materials for Energy-Efficient Electronics and Photonics
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Yongjie Hu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 05/31/2024
* USD 496,128.00

Non-technical Description: With the ever-shrinking dimensions of electronic and
photonic devices to the nanoscale, heat dissipation is an increasingly critical
technological challenge. To address this challenge, discovering and
understanding the properties of high thermal conductivity materials that can
efficiently dissipate heat from hot spots and improve the performance of devices
constitute an urgent need. This CAREER project aims to investigate new high
thermal conductivity materials and understand the fundamental transport
phenomena and mechanisms associated with the chemistry and structures of such
materials. The PI is using complementary approaches, including multiscale
modeling, advanced synthesis and characterization methods. These less explored
materials are theoretically predicted to offer new paradigms to enable advanced
electronics, optoelectronics, thermal energy conversion and management. The
research components of this project are closely integrated with various
education and outreach activities, offering cross-disciplinary training beyond
traditional educational boundaries, and involving the participation of
underrepresented and diversity groups. This is accomplished through industry-
academia collaborations, development of a new interdisciplinary course
curriculum, and establishment of a Nano-Energy outreach
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The principal investigator
and his research team are investigating a new class of high thermal conductivity
materials (such as BAs, BP, GeC) to address the critical challenge of heat
dissipation in modern electronics and photonics. Some of these unique materials
have been predicted recently by ab initio theory to have ultrahigh thermal
conductivity, over 1000 W/mK, enabled by multiple factors, including a large
mass ratio of the constitutive atoms, acoustic bunching, and isotopic purity.
This CAREER project aims to experimentally realize these high thermal
conductivity materials through a synergistic growth-measurement-model approach
to investigate the optimum growth conditions, structural and thermal properties,
and phonon transport mechanisms. The team develops new characterization tools,
including advanced phonon spectral mapping spectroscopy based on the time-domain
thermoreflectance technique, and advanced atomic-level material structural
control methods, to establish detailed structure-property relationships with
microscale quantification. Experimental measurement results including phonon
mean free path spectra are analyzed using atomistic density functional theory
and multiscale Boltzmann transport equations solved by Monte Carlo simulations.
Completion of this project may lead to transformative technological innovations
for advancing the performance and energy-efficiency of future electronics and
photonics. In addition, the multidisciplinary research components are closely
integrated with various education and outreach activities with graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students, involving students from
underrepresented minority groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.