* 1753651
* Collaborative Research: Hard Tissue evidence of weaning variation in primates
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2024
* Tara Stoinski, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 03/31/2024
* USD 397,655.00

Weaning (cessation of breastfeeding) is a critical developmental milestone with
important consequences for maternal reproductive strategies and infant outcomes.
Modern humans wean their young much earlier on average than the great apes, but
the evolutionary origins of this uniquely human pattern are not well understood.
This interdisciplinary research project will study behavioral, ecological,
physiological, and developmental data for three different wild great ape
species, to understand sources of weaning variation in a comparative primate
framework. The project will generate a more comprehensive understanding of the
biological, ecological and social correlates of weaning variation in our closest
living relatives using approaches that are translatable to paleontological
contexts, thus contributing to a framework for understanding the evolution of
weaning in humans. This project will broaden participation of underrepresented
groups in science through structured internships, mentoring and other enhanced
training opportunities for students and early career scientists. Research
infrastructure will be enhanced by establishing new collaborations and
interdisciplinary datasets relevant to many questions at the intersection of
primate conservation and human evolutionary biology. Results of this work will
advance our understanding of the population dynamics and health of these
critically endangered apes, and will be communicated to wildlife veterinarians
and park managers to inform conservation strategies, as well as through online
and other public venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The timing of weaning represents a
balance of maternal and offspring evolutionary interests, and is sensitive to
physiological constraints as well as physical and social environments. However,
behavioral observations of living primates cannot distinguish nutritive versus
social functions of nursing, and methods for reconstructing weaning in
paleontological contexts are limited in their ability to discriminate weaning
variation among closely-related taxa. This comparative and multi-proxy study of
weaning variation in wild great apes focuses on three ecologically-distinct
populations that show pronounced variation in suckling behavior and maternal
reproductive strategies: Virunga and Bwindi mountain gorillas, which differ
markedly in ecology, and Gombe chimpanzees, which provide an important taxonomic
contrast. This project integrates suckling and feeding behavior, physical
development, and fecal stable isotope data collected from individuals in life,
with chemical characterization of their foods, and morphological and dental
trace element analyses of associated skeletons from these populations after
death. This research investigates (1) what factors influence variability in
weaning-related dietary transitions across living wild chimpanzees and gorillas,
(2) how chemical proxies in biological tissues (fecal, dental) relate to
behavioral and anatomical proxies of weaning, and (3) how reliably dental trace
elements record variability in documented dietary histories at the individual
and population levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.