* 1753354
* CAREER: Moving into the 3rd Dimension: Quantifying the influence of Magmatism, Tectonics, Hydrothermal Cooling, and Hotspots on the Dynamic Evolution of Divergent Plate Boundaries
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Eric Mittelstaedt, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 599,643.00

The theory of plate tectonics states that the surface of the Earth is made up of
numerous moving plates. The interior regions of these plates are believed to be
rigid and strong, while boundaries in the ocean where the plates spread apart,
mid-ocean ridges, are thin, hot, and weak. In contrast to the standard
expectations of plate tectonic theory, observations find that sections of mid-
ocean ridges often shift, or jump, from weak boundaries to strong plate
interiors. As a result, jumps of mid-ocean ridges can change the size and shape
of the tectonic plates and even create micro-continents (small slivers of
continental material) when they jump into continental regions. Mid-ocean ridge
jumps are believed to result after some process weakens a nearby plate interior.
However, scientists do not know the reasons or driving forces behind this
weakening. Previous studies examined mid-ocean ridge jumps in a 2D geometry, but
could not address several key processes that would control their formation,
leaving a gap in our understanding of plate tectonics. In this study, innovative
laboratory and state-of-the-art 3D numerical simulations will be used to isolate
the processes that lead to mid-ocean ridge jumps. Understanding these processes
will improve understanding of the thermal evolution of the planet and the
locations of potential mineral resources associated with past hydrothermal
activity. The educational component of this CAREER award has two primary goals:
1) to motivate young students (~10-18 years old) to pursue STEM-based inquiry
through interactive, marine geology-based video games that are engaging,
entertaining, and provide easily accessible opportunities for in-depth
exploration of marine geology topics, and 2) to involve several
interdisciplinary groups of undergraduate students in a hands-on, engaging
experience where they learn STEM skills and explore marine geologic
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observations of numerous relic spreading
centers and micro-continents formed by sudden relocations or jumps of ridge axes
indicate that mid-ocean ridge jumps regularly shift to new, off-axis locations.
This project's primary research goal is to quantify the processes that govern
ridge jumps and thereby test the hypothesis that there are predictable length-
and time-scales for ridge jump formation. This goal is split into three
objectives that aim to quantify: 1) the role of magmatic accretion in
propagation of nascent rifts adjacent to established ridges and consequent
formation of transform faults or overlapping spreading centers; 2) mantle plume-
induced ridge jumps in oceanic lithosphere; and 3) micro-continent formation by
jumps into continental lithosphere. These objectives will be addressed with 3D
numerical simulations and innovative laboratory experiments using colloidal
fluids. To establish testable predictions from these models and experiments,
results will be used to derive functional relationships between length- and
time-scales of ridge jumps and observable quantities such as spreading rate,
ridge migration rate, seafloor age, and melt flux. These relationships will be
evaluated through comparison to a new database of jump statistics including jump
distance, final segment length, transform fault or overlapping spreading center
formation rate and location, and the time between repeat
jumps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.