* 1753559
* Steroid-mediated Chromatin Remodeling in Developmental Plasticity
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2022
* Robert Reed, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 11/30/2022
* USD 700,000.00

Developmental plasticity is the ability of an organism to alter its development
in response to external cues. This is significant because it allows plants and
animals to adapt to changing environmental conditions. Developmental plasticity
is an important and widespread phenomenon, however there is only limited
understanding of the mechanistic basis of how external information is translated
into changes in organismal development. In some cases, it is well understood how
animals respond to environmental cues through production of hormones, and how
these hormone signals are translated into developmental changes. What is less
known, however, is how these environmentally induced hormone signals are
translated into developmental changes in specific tissues. With this work, the
investigators will use buckeye butterflies as a model to examine how
environmental cues can coordinate tissue-specific changes in gene expression
through the large-scale alteration of DNA structure. The buckeye butterfly
serves as a powerful model system for studying plasticity because different
populations show variation in their responses to seasonal cues, thus allowing
isolation of genetic elements that control and tune plasticity in natural
populations. Findings from this work will help in developing a new understanding
of how environmental cues can induce developmental changes through large-scale
modification of DNA structure. Such knowledge forms the basis for predicting
organismal response to changing environments. Training of undergraduate and
graduate students in modern biological investigations of genetic and
developmental science is integral to the project. This includes the recruitment
of members of under-represented groups in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developmentally, phenotypic plasticity can be
characterized as a three-part process. First, a cue such as nutrition,
temperature, photoperiod, crowding, or predator presence, is sensed by the
organism and then translated into an internal signal, which is often endocrine
in nature. Second, cells throughout the organism receive the signal in a manner
that often appears to be tissue-specific. Third, molecular machinery within
cells processes and responds to the signal, resulting in changes in gene
regulation, thus altering development. While the physiological basis of
phenotypic plasticity has been well described in many systems, it is only in
recent years that studies have started to look at the molecular and genetic
mechanisms of how development responds to plasticity-inducing physiological
signals. This question is particularly compelling because different tissues
respond differently to signals, and the mode and degree of response of different
tissues can change quickly between generations. However, it is still unclear how
tissue-specific plastic phenotypes can be rapidly modulated by environmentally
induced endocrine signals. With this work Reed and colleagues will study how
endocrine signaling and chromatin organization interact to induce seasonal
developmental plasticity in the buckeye butterfly Junonia coenia. A well-
characterized endocrine signal, natural genetic variation in seasonal reaction
norms, and the ability to apply experimental approaches including ATAC-seq and
CRISPR genome editing makes this species an ideal model to address how endocrine
signaling mediates genome-wide chromatin remodeling, and how chromatin
remodeling induces tissue-specific plastic phenotypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.