* 1753031
* CAREER: A Local-Nonlocal Coupling Framework for Tissue Damage in Fluid-Structure Interaction
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Yue Yu, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 402,451.00

This project aims to develop a new mathematical framework and the corresponding
high-performance open source software for addressing fundamental open questions
on multiscale and multiphysics modeling of soft tissue damage process, with the
ultimate goal of improving the understanding of heart valve damage mechanisms.
The resultant framework will have substantial impacts in heart valve operation
and research, and will potentially contribute towards more rigorous
interventional and surgical procedures. The computational tool and the
methodology developed in this project can also be used efficiently in a wide
range of physical and biological problems. For the educational component, this
project will provide an excellent research and outreach platform for promoting
female and under-represented groups in Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics (STEM) fields in a range of educational levels from middle school to
young researchers post graduate school. These activities include (1) introducing
a heart function module in a summer outreach program to expose middle school
girls to science and engineering, (2) providing research opportunities for
undergraduate students from primarily undergraduate institutions to promote the
students' engagement in scientific studies, and (3) organizing an annual high-
performance computing (HPC) workshop and a multiscale/multiphysics modeling
topical workshop to promote the participation of female students and researchers
in the areas of applied mathematics and scientific
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, a central theme of the research
component is the development of a computational approach which models the
physically realistic process of heart valve degradation under long-term cyclic
hemodynamic loading with the objective of understanding tissue fatigue
mechanisms. Emphasis will be placed on modeling the fiber-level tissue damage
induced by cyclic hemodynamic loading and its long-term progression.
Specifically, the computational domain is composed of three subregions: the
fluid (blood) simulated as incompressible Newtonian flow, the fracture thin
structure (damaged heart valves) modeled by the nonlocal peridynamic shell
theory, and the thin structure (undamaged heart valves and aortic walls)
described by a classical hyperelastic shell model. These three subregions will
be numerically coupled to each other with proper interface boundary conditions.
Novel constitutive models and corresponding numerical schemes will be developed,
and new local-nonlocal coupling strategies will also be designed. A powerful
computational open source software will be developed, which not only will
contribute to advance the knowledge of soft tissue damage, but also will
increase the range of capabilities for computer simulation of problems in long-
term materials and manufacturing damage progression in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.