* 1753695
* Collaborative Research:  SG:  Genomic and functional tests of mitochondrial-nuclear coevolution
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Kristi Montooth, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2022
* USD 200,459.00

Harmful mutations can negatively affect gene, protein, and organism function. In
the extreme, the accumulation of harmful mutations can lead to population
extinction. The genetic information in mitochondria - the main source of energy
production in most complex organisms - is usually passed intact from parents to
offspring. Thus, the mitochondria should be especially prone to the buildup of
harmful mutations. However, mitochondria have maintained their function for more
than one billion years; how and why is an important question in evolutionary
biology. This research uses a model snail system to address these questions. It
takes advantage of the fact that some lineages of snails pass both their nuclear
and mitochondrial genomes on to their offspring without any genetic shuffling; a
process that accelerates the accumulation of mutations in these snails. By
contrast, there is shuffling of genetic material between parents and offspring
in other lineages of the same snail species. This project will compare different
lineages of snails, some with genetic shuffling and some without. In doing so,
this research will explore how harmful mutations are cleared from populations.
Reducing the impact of harmful mutations is important for keeping organisms
healthy. In turn, healthy organisms can guard against population extinction. It
is possible that harmful mutations in the mitochondria are compensated for by
mutations in nuclear genes. This hypothesis will also be tested by this
research. Because functional mitochondria are important to the health of many
organisms, the research will be relevant to the biomedical and agricultural
communities. The research will also train a new generation of scientists and
broaden participation in biology. The broader impacts include collaborations
with high school students and museums. The project will also extend an award-
winning partnership with the National Center for Science Education to new
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research combines genetic and functional
methods to test for signatures of mitochondrial-nuclear coevolution in the New
Zealand freshwater snail Potamopyrgus antipodarum. In this snail system, some
lineages are sexual and others are asexual. Crucially for this study, the
asexual lineages of P. antipodarum have higher mitochondrial substitution rates
than the sexual lineages. This contrast in mitochondrial substitution rates
permits the study's two objectives. Objective 1 will test the hypothesis that
higher mitochondrial substitution rates in asexual versus sexual lineages drive
stronger mitochondrial-nuclear molecular coevolutionary dynamics. One prediction
of these coevolutionary dynamics is that substitution rates for proteins encoded
by the nuclear genome that are then targeted to the mitochondria will be higher
than the substitution rates in control nuclear gene sets. Objective 2 will test
for functional effects of mitonuclear interactions on mitochondrial respiration
and snail metabolic rate. Since temperature can impact snail metabolic rates,
the second objective will include four different temperature treatments. Results
of this research will contribute to our understanding of the mitochondrial-
nuclear interactions that define eukaryotes. Furthermore, they are of broad
relevance to genome evolution, speciation, and the functional and evolutionary
consequences of reproductive mode variation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.