* 1753963
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Comparison of arboreal locomotion in ecologically distinct primate populations
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Kelly Ostrofsky, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 12/31/2021
* USD 13,167.00

The skeletal anatomy of an animal species is generally related to its patterns
of movement and behavior and to its habitat. Understanding the complex
relationships between form, function, and environment is essential for
reconstructing the behaviors and habitats of past species. This doctoral
dissertation project will investigate how populations of wild mountain gorillas
living in ecologically distinct habitats may differ in their patterns of
movement (locomotor behavior). This information will help contextualize the
observable skeletal variation in apes and inform our inferences about locomotion
in fossil apes and humans. The project will involve interdisciplinary and
international collaborations, broaden the participation of under-represented
groups in STEM, and provide research mentorship to undergraduate students. The
researchers will engage with the public on topics related to human evolution and
our closest living relatives, the African
apes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paleoanthropologists have long debated how our early
ancestors moved, especially in terms of how they first began walking upright on
two legs, and how much time they may have spent in the trees. While more
fossils, and more species, have been added to the hominin family tree, there is
still limited knowledge about how closely related species and populations may
have differed in terms of habitats and locomotion. Data on the locomotion of
living ape populations can advance our understanding of the form-function
relationships between locomotor behavior and skeletal features, allowing more
informed inferences from the ape and human fossil record. The researchers will
investigate how the locomotor behavior of two populations of mountain gorillas
differs, in terms of the frequency of key locomotor behaviors and limb and joint
motions. The study will use traditional observational methods to quantify the
relative frequency of different postural and locomotor behaviors, and place into
context the frequency of locomotor behaviors (e.g., vertical climbing and below-
branch suspension) in comparison to other great apes. The video-based motion
analysis (kinematics) will implement new field-based methods for capturing
motion data, providing some of the first 3D kinematic data on apes in their
natural environment. Kinematic analysis will quantify the joint postures and
movements used during locomotion, offering new quantitative data for
interpreting the functional role of skeletal features often used to infer
locomotor capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.