* 1753856
* Aquatic metabolism and carbon dioxide flux: Linking physical and biological processes in Amazon floodplains
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Sally MacIntyre, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2024
* USD 564,136.00

Changes in carbon dioxide in the atmosphere are influenced by the activities of
wetland plants and microbes. Wetlands are a major natural source of greenhouse
gases. The Amazon basin contains the largest area of tropical wetlands on Earth.
Wetlands in this region consist of floating grasses, flooded forests and lakes
surrounded by upland rainforests. Human activities and environmental changes are
changing the landscape in the Amazon. How these changes affect wetlands is
critical for understanding the global carbon cycle. The immense size and
remoteness of much of the Amazon has limited this understanding. This project
will take advantage of new satellite technology to map flooding and measure the
extent of wetlands in the Amazon. This research will also apply new techniques
to measure greenhouse gas emissions in remote locations. These new approaches
will produce critical knowledge on biological activities responsible for wetland
greenhouse gas emissions. The results will lead to better resource management
strategies, and improved accounting of global carbon dioxide emissions. In
addition, this project will provide training for postdoctoral scientists and
graduate students in cutting-edge technologies for studying global carbon
cycling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inland aquatic ecosystems, including wetlands,
have a large and disproportionate impact on carbon cycling and greenhouse gas
emissions. Predicting how human activities and environmental changes will alter
carbon cycling in tropical wetlands, such as those in the Amazon basin, requires
combining intensive field measurements with remote sensing and mathematical
models. The exchange of greenhouse gases, such as carbon dioxide, between
wetlands and the atmosphere depends on hydrodynamic, chemical and biological
processes. This research is designed to test the hypothesis that most of the
carbon dioxide released to the atmosphere from Amazonian wetlands represents
recycled aquatic productivity rather than lateral transport of organic matter
from uplands. To test this hypothesis, the project applies state-of-the-art
measurements of turbulence, fluxes of greenhouse gases, and remote sensing of
flooded areas and aquatic plants. The distinction between aquatic and
terrestrial sources of organic matter is critical to predicting the impacts of
changes in land-use and climate on wetland greenhouse gas
fluxes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.