* 1753760
* Phylogenomics and the roles of chromosome architecture, recombination and hybridization on phylogenetic accuracy in the cat family (Felidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* William Murphy, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 06/30/2024
* USD 969,986.00

Accurately determining the pattern and timing of the evolutionary history of
Earth's species is essential to understand how geologic and environmental forces
drive the origin, diversification, and extinction of species. The advent of low-
cost genome sequencing has revolutionized the field of systematics and the use
of genetic data to infer the evolutionary relationships of organisms. But the
ability to generate data on genome structure and variation has outpaced
understanding on how to use it to infer evolutionary history and species
relationships. This project will analyze the impact of genomic features on
evolutionary inference in the cat family. Because cat species relationships are
well understood, genomic data are available for several species, and genetic
tools are available that allow detailed analyses, cats are an excellent system
to investigate how chromosome characteristics and structural variation in the
genome affect evolution and the inference of evolutionary history. This study
promises to have a large impact on the field of systematics and evolutionary
biology. This study also has broader impacts on society. Cats are consistently
ranked as the most charismatic and recognizable symbols of wildlife and animal
conservation, and provide a gateway to engagement and learning about biology and
evolution across diverse socioeconomic backgrounds. One of the most important
project outcomes will be the development of a website by student recruits and
researchers, describing and integrating research outcomes with information on
the members of the cat family, and connecting these to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the remarkable radiation of the cat family
Felidae as a model system, this project will generate high quality genome
sequence assemblies from all living species to identify the impact of
chromosomal characteristics on the accuracy of species tree inference. Novel
computational algorithms will be developed to search, sort, and characterize
genome-wide variation in topology, tree shape and divergence time, and connect
this variation to genomic features predictive of the species tree. The ultimate
goal is to understand which chromosomal features have positive and negative
influences on accurate species tree estimation, to guide future principles and
applications of phylogenomics. Felids are an excellent model system because of
the high rate of recombination within the family and the existence of
established genomic tools and information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.