* 1753859
* LTREB:  Testing Paradigms About Plant Functional Responses to Environmental Change
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Peter Reich, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 05/31/2023
* USD 398,760.00

Long-term ecological experiments are needed that simulate the conditions of the
future so that scientists can study their potential impacts on ecological
communities. This study uses a 20-year old, field experiment, called BioCON,
that raises the carbon dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere above prairie
plant communities to levels that are expected to occur later in this century.
The experiment is designed to study how higher carbon dioxide levels in the
atmosphere affects the growth of different kinds of plants. The experiment is
also designed to understand how the availability of soil nitrogen, an important
nutrient that plants need to grow, influences the ability of plants to take up
higher levels of carbon dioxide during photosynthesis. Data from the study will
be made publicly available through the Cedar Creek, Long Term Ecological
Research website. BioCON is visited by over 2500 K-12 students and teachers
annually, including teachers of Native American students. College students work
and learn how to carry out their own research projects in BioCON each summer.
New K-12 lesson plans as well as videos for the sustainability science themed
YouTube Channel MinuteEarth will be developed that specifically feature new
knowledge gained from BioCON. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through continued
measurements of functional group and functional group mixture responses to
carbon dioxide (CO2) and nitrogen treatments, this study will test two kinds of
hypotheses. The first set uses a functional trait classification framework to
develop predictions regarding direct functional group responses to eCO2 and N
(i.e., responses expected in the absence of soil-mediated feedbacks, species
interactions, or interactions with stochastic or directional changes in
climate). The second set posits that long-term outcomes will diverge from
predictions based on expected direct responses because of modifying processes,
involving physiological acclimation, functional group effects on aboveground and
belowground resource supply and soil pH, and interactions between treatments and
variation in climate. The long-lived perennials in BioCON have not yet
equilibrated in their response to CO2 and N, exhibiting interactions with year-
to-year variation in climate and generating soil-mediated feedbacks. In BioCON,
across 20 years, C4 species have become increasingly productive under high CO2
whereas the benefit of CO2 has gradually disappeared for C3 species,
contradicting current theory. Understanding these divergent responses and
whether they will continue is a major focus of the study, along with
understanding the role of functional groups with respect to other long-term
processes relevant to ecosystems under global environmental change, including
productivity, decomposition, nutrient cycling, and water
fluxes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.