* 1753380
* EAGER:  Advancing High-Efficiency Nanoscale Antiferromagnetic Spintronics with Two-Dimensional Half Metals
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Xiang Zhang, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 02/29/2020
* USD 100,000.00

Antiferromagnets hold promise in spintronics, due to the unique advantages over
ferromagnets, such as high phase transition temperatures and null stray field.
These characteristics make antiferromagnet appealing for high-density integrated
devices, because each magnetic bit is robust against thermal and environmental
magnetic field perturbation, and adjacent bits does not interfere mutually.
However, zero-magnetization, an intrinsic attribute of antiferromagnet, usually
is considered to be a primary factor limiting its applications. Despite of zero-
magnetization, the Fermi surface electrons can be 100% spin-polarized, highly
desirable for high-efficiency spintronic devices. Through rational material
design of antiferromagnetic half metals, a novel type of spin field effect
transistor can be realized. The work will fundamentally advance the nanoscale
spintronics and the applications in information processing and storage.

This project supports the study of a novel type of two-dimensional materials,
antiferromagnetic half metals, and the development of spin field effect
transistors. The study can fundamentally impact the state of the art spintronics
and the related applications in information processing and storage. This work
would also provide an excellent platform for education activities. Such an
interdisciplinary research brings together researchers from material scientists,
physicists, and electronic engineers. It requires concerted efforts to design
and synthesize the promising antiferromagnetic materials, fabricate nanoscale
transistors, and measure and optimize the device performance.