* 1753660
* A proposed study of the dynamics of the Hikurangi New Zealand margin.
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Harlan Johnson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Johnson
* 03/31/2022
* USD 359,611.00

This multi-disciplinary study will investigate the processes that trigger
submarine slope failures on the New Zealand continental margin. The
investigation will explore how many failures occur and their frequency, whether
small landslides in an area make the slope resistant to large landslides, and
what types of landslides generate tsunamis. Recent work off the northwest coast
of the U.S. has shown that small landslides on continental margins occur more
frequently than previously thought. The small landslides are caused by shaking
generated by both local and remote earthquakes. Changes in the overlying water
column were also found to be important in generating the small landslides. In
this new study off New Zealand, seafloor sensor data will be combined with other
available geophysical, water column, and meteorological data, to evaluate
whether the results of the Cascadia work on the stability of submarine slopes
can be generalized to other subduction zone margins. The results of this study
will improve the capability to identify past large earthquakes in the
sedimentary record. In addition, this study will provide constraints for models
of submarine landslides and aid in predicting areas of potential slope failure.
The study supports the training of a postdoctoral
investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accretionary margins that overlie
active subduction zones undergo continuous re-surfacing by repeated sediment
slope failures and gravity flows. Studies done off Cascadia show that slope
failures can occur either spontaneously or be triggered by identifiable events
that include oceanographic processes or by seismic waves generated by local or
remote earthquakes. The mechanisms and key attributes of these triggering
seismic waves (e.g., frequency content, duration, etc.) remain speculative.
Preliminary results also indicate that the geologic structure and topography of
the accretionary wedge have profound impacts on the seismic loading. Sediment
slope failures and flows also can be triggered by storms, tides, upper water
column eddies and circulation changes. This study tests these ideas by analyzing
new data from seafloor sensors that were deployed on the Hikurangi margin off
New Zealand in 2015. These data will also be used to examine the signature of
slow slip events on the shallow plate interface. A Regional Ocean Modeling
System hindcast will provide insight into the nature of signals at the seafloor
that originate from ocean surface forcing in this area. By combining seafloor
pressure, temperature and seismic ground motion measurements, with other
available geophysical, water column and meteorological data, and the
oceanographic context provided by the regional model, it will be possible to
improve the fidelity of seafloor temperature and pressure signals associated
with sediment slope failures and flows, with the side-benefit of characterizing
near-surface eddies and ocean circulation changes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.