* 1753182
* CAREER: Designing Surface Patterns for Adaptive Shape Control of Soft-Matter-Based Nanoparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Vikram Jadhao, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2024
* USD 446,172.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports an
integrated computational and theoretical research, education, and outreach
project to develop design patterns for adaptive shape control of nanoparticles
made from soft materials. Much of the cream, soap, and gel we use in everyday
life, the food we eat, and the biological matter we are made of is classified as
soft material. Soft materials include matter such as colloidal dispersions
(paints, milk), polymers (plastics, fibers), biological matter (proteins,
cells), and liquid crystals (electronic displays). The PI is particularly
motivated by biological soft materials that dynamically change their shape in
response to chemical and mechanical cues. For example, proteins change
conformations in response to changes in ion concentration to enable specific
biological processes, and red blood cells deform reversibly to enable their
passage through thin capillaries. Researchers have long sought to mimic this
intrinsic adaptability of biological materials in the design of synthetic
matter. In this project, the PI will develop powerful computational methods to
link the inherent attributes of soft-matter-based nanoparticles with their
mechanistic behavior, including stable shapes, real-time shape evolution, and
self-organization into larger nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's
research team will program the surface charge and elasticity patterns of charged
soft-matter-based nanoparticles such as virus-like nanocages and polymeric
nanomembranes to enable controlled shape adaptation. Establishing the links
between surface pattern and shape will guide the development of deformable
nanocontainers into drug-delivery carriers that adapt their shape to evolving
physiological conditions and biological barriers. The findings will also
elucidate the principles of designing shape-reconfigurable nanoparticles that
can act as building blocks of next-generation materials with responsive
properties tailored for specific applications, such as shape-shifting
microrobots and functional coatings with adaptive optical
response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education and outreach components of this
project are directly integrated with its research investigations. The PI will
lead a simulation-to-3D-printing workshop for high-school students in
Bloomington, Indiana, where they will become familiar with applications of
computing tools and fabrication techniques while learning about the design of
matter at the nanoscale. The PI's team will design web-based science gateways to
bring the computational methods developed in this project to classrooms in and
outside of Indiana University, and facilitate the learning of underrepresented
students at Minority-Serving Institutions. The PI is in a unique position to
play a pivotal role in the design and implementation of a brand-new
undergraduate program focused on nanoscale engineering that will significantly
impact Indiana University, as it will train a diverse pool of undergraduate
students to develop advances in nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports computational and
theoretical research and education to identify the fundamental mechanisms of
engineering adaptive shape control in soft-matter-based nanoparticles.
Harnessing the adaptability of biological materials in synthetic matter is one
of the biggest challenges in materials engineering. The PI is deeply inspired by
biology, where viral capsomeres self-assemble into rods and spheres which
display shape adaptation, and where proteins selectively bind to viruses that
exhibit unique combinations of surface pattern and shape. With such instances in
mind, in this project, the PI will connect the surface patterning to mechanistic
behavior for nanoparticles made from charged soft materials, such as virus-like
nanocontainers, micellar vesicles, and polymeric nanomembranes. The PI's
research team will investigate how surface charge and elasticity patterns affect
the overall shape of these nanoparticles, and how these patterns control the
timescales of shape-switching and aggregation of nanoparticles in physiological
conditions. Molecular dynamics simulations will be used to probe surface charge
and elasticity patterns that 1) enable nanoparticle shape adaptation, and 2)
control real-time shape-switching and assembly of nanoparticles into higher-
order nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will develop molecular
dynamics methods that are uniquely capable of connecting the smaller length-
scale effects of counterion condensation on nanoparticle surfaces to the larger
length-scale aggregation behavior of nanoparticles. Based on this multiscale
information, this research will produce maps that link surface patterns to
equilibrium and dynamical properties of the shapes of virus-like nanoparticles
and polymeric nanomembranes for a wide range of environmental conditions. These
maps will help guide the design of deformable nanoparticles that can actively
change shape and associated functionalities, advancing the current capabilities
for engineering biomimetic nanocontainers for applications in targeted drug-
delivery. This research will also expand the synthetic capabilities of designing
reconfigurable materials via the self-assembly of deformable nanoscale building
blocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve graduate students,
undergraduate students, and a diverse online community of users in active
research via hands-on experiences and research-based courses, workshops, and
online computing platforms. The PI will develop a simulation-to-3D-printing
workshop and web-based science gateways that will provide a sophisticated, user-
friendly environment to engage with the simulations of nanoparticles. These
platforms will facilitate access of the educational and research materials to a
broad group of students and educators, including those at Minority-Serving
Institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.