* 1753397
* Collaborative Research: Indigenous Observation Network 2.0: Impacts of Environmental Change on the Yukon and Kuskokwim Watersheds
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Alexander Kholodov, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 04/30/2024
* USD 486,851.00

Part 1: This continuation of the Indigenous Observing Network (ION) project (now
ION 2.0) will be led by the Yukon River Intertribal Watershed Council (YRITWC)
in partnership with the University of Alaska-Fairbanks. ION 2.0 will continue
measurement of water quality constituents and expand the observation and
monitoring program to include measurements of changes in permafrost depth due to
thawing of the active layer at numerous of the long-term water quality
monitoring sites. The ION project has documented the long-term changes in major
ion chemistry that have occurred over three decades throughout the Yukon River
Watershed. The investigators have interpreted these changes as being driven by
thawing of discontinuous permafrost throughout this large Arctic watershed and
complementary measurements of the active layer will support further
interpretation and modelling. This project involves significant co-production of
knowledge with members of Indigenous communities and capacity building through
training in sampling methods, and sample and data analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: This project will continue the long-term water
quality monitoring at many sites in the Yukon River Watershed that have been
conducted by the Indigenous Observing Network (ION) project. The ION 2.0 project
will be led by the Yukon River Intertribal Watershed Council (YRITWC) in
partnership with the University of Alaska-Fairbanks. ION 2.0 will expand the
observation and monitoring program to include measurements of changes in
permafrost depth at numerous of the long-term water quality monitoring sites.
These changes occur due to thawing of the active layer driven by the changing
Arctic climate. The ION project has shown that changes in major ion chemistry
have occurred over three decades throughout the Yukon River Watershed due to the
thawing of discontinuous permafrost. The investigators have interpreted the
complementary measurements of the active layer will support further
interpretation and modelling. This project involves significant co-production of
knowledge with members of Indigenous communities and capacity building through
training in sampling methods, and sample and data
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.