* 1753492
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Initiation and History of the Aleutian Arc and Composition and Significance of North Pacific Seafloor via Dredge Samples from the R/V Sonne
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Brian Jicha, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2020
* USD 123,646.00

Subduction is a fundamental tectonic process that shapes the Earth's physical
and chemical evolution and has many important potential human impacts, including
seismic and volcanic hazards, as well as mineral resources, which are common
products of subduction magmatism. As a result, subduction-related processes are
the subject of broad public interest and widespread investigation in the
geosciences. Despite almost a century of research on the Alaska-Aleutian
subduction system, several key questions remain unanswered including how and
when the subduction zone was formed and to what extent the subducting Pacific
plate contributes to the creation of magma generated beneath Alaska-Aleutian
volcanoes. This project will allow a group of U.S. scientists from the
University of South Carolina and the University of Wisconsin-Madison to
precisely determine the timing of Aleutian arc formation and to characterize the
products that are entering and have erupted from this active volcanic arc. This
is a collaborative effort involving graduate and undergraduate students, post-
docs, and researchers from Germany, Russia and the United States. All data from
this project will be made available to the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project has two broadly related themes: 1) Constraining the timing of subduction
initiation and early evolution of the Aleutian arc, and 2) Characterizing
subduction inputs to both the Aleutian and Kamchatka arcs and relating them to
the processes controlling arc magma formation. Analyses of samples from
Expedition SO249 of the German R/V Sonne as part of the German-Russian BERING
project will provide constraints on the timing of Aleutian arc formation and the
geochemistry of the early arc products. The project will also obtain geochemical
data for north Pacific seafloor samples adjacent to the western Aleutian arc,
including sites both east and west of the northern Emperor seamounts. This study
will help better understand geochemical linkages between subduction input and
volcanic output, and will provide new constraints and significantly improve
models of arc magma genesis for the Aleutians and
Kamchatka.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.