* 1753599
* Trace Element Crystal Growth Speedometry: Implications for Magmatic and Hydrothermal Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2021
* Cin-Ty Lee, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2021
* USD 348,482.00

The purpose of this study is to better understand what controls how fast
crystals can grow in simple and complex natural systems. For example, crystal
growth has direct implications for predicting the conditions for volcanic
eruptions because crystallization may induce the formation of bubbles or
increase the viscosity of magma, both of which facilitate the build-up of the
over-pressures needed for eruptions. Quantifying crystal growth rates would also
provide insight into how long it takes for magma bodies to grow before they
erupt catastrophically, generating hazardous conditions for life and human
society. Adequate methods for constraining crystal growth rate, however, remain
elusive. The goal of this work is to develop and calibrate a new crystal growth
speedometer based on the extent to which trace elements are incorporated into a
rapidly growing crystal at levels that deviate from equilibrium. Theory will be
combined with state of the art in situ analytical measurements to develop a
generalized workflow for quantifying crystal growth rates. This work will have
implications for 1) magma dynamics prior to eruption, 2) the rate at which
faults and cracks heal after a natural or induced earthquake and 3) the rates at
which economically important mineral deposits are precipitated in veins. The
work also has implications for controlling the rate of latent heat release by
crystallization from melts or solutions, which in turn, has implications for
chemical storage of renewable energies (solar and wind). Participants of this
project will also be involved in several community outreach programs in the
Department of Earth, Environmental and Planetary Sciences at Rice University: 1)
content production for Outcroppings, a department sponsored magazine of the
Earth, environment and energy, 2) geology education with K-12 teachers and
students in Houston, and 3) participation and organizing of an annual industry-
Rice Earth Science symposia that brings together leaders in industry and
academia to work on problems of mutual societal interest.

The goal of this project is to develop a relatively new crystal growth
speedometer based on disequilibrium incorporation of trace elements that would
otherwise be rejected by the crystal at equilibrium (incompatible elements).
This speedometer will be developed by calibrating against field studies in which
crystal growth rates have been independently constrained. A fundamental
objective will be to evaluate how common disequilibrium effects associated with
rapid crystal growth are observed in magmatic systems. A comprehensive sampling
of olivines in magmas from different tectonic and volcanic settings will be
analyzed for incompatible trace elements using state of the art high resolution
laser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry and time of flight
secondary ion mass spectrometry. The empirical speedometer will then be applied
to olivine phenocryst populations from different magmatic settings to map out
the distribution of crystal growth rates within the population, with particular
emphasis on resolving the question of whether phenocrysts grow slowly in a long-
lived magma chamber or instead nucleated and grew just before eruption. Insights
from this work will be used to develop models for crystal growth in different
geologic settings, such as during fault healing and generation of pegmatites.