* 1753865
* Collaborative proposal:   Evaluating phenotypic plasticity's role in adaptive evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* David Pfennig, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2024
* USD 579,294.00

Many organisms can respond to changes in their environment by dramatically
altering their morphology, behavior, or physiology, and the widespread
occurrence of this ability has provoked a spirited debate. On the one hand, many
biologists maintain that the flexibility to change appearance, behavior or
physiology are of no relevance to evolution, because evolution requires genetic
change. On the other hand, a growing number of researchers have suggested that
such flexibility plays a critical role in evolution by jump-starting genetic
change. This research will help resolve this controversy by investigating
whether changes in appearance, behavior and/or physiology precede (and enable)
the evolutionary origins of major, new, genetically-encoded features. The
research will specifically evaluate whether pre-existing, diet-induced
flexibility has contributed to the evolution of a novel, complex body form in
spadefoot frogs. Thus, not only will this research provide important insights
into the evolutionary process, it will also shed new light onto one of biology's
enduring mysteries: how complex features originate. The research will also
promote educational outreach by training school children and undergraduate
students and by organizing public talks at museums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will test the Plasticity-First hypothesis of adaptive evolution. To do
so, the proposed research will focus on spadefoot toads. Like most frogs,
tadpoles in the genus Scaphiopus develop only into a typical 'omnivore' morph.
By contrast, tadpoles in the genus Spea exhibit striking plasticity: depending
on their diet, they develop into either omnivores or a novel 'carnivore' morph.
Interestingly, certain components of this distinctive carnivore morph can be
diet-induced in Scaphiopus. Moreover, some Spea populations have secondarily
lost the omnivore-carnivore plasticity and become monomorphic. Indeed, in some
populations, selection has favored the near fixation of the carnivore morph.
Thus, as a group, spadefoots appear to represent different stages in the
evolution of the novel carnivore morph: from its possible initial induction (in
Scaphiopus), to its refinement as part of a novel developmental 'switch' (in
many Spea populations), to its ultimate fixation (in some Spea populations). The
planned research will evaluate whether this novel carnivore phenotype arose
through plasticity-first evolution by contrasting development, genetic
variation, and performance in different species/populations that serve as
different evolutionary stages in the origins of this distinctive form. In doing
so, the research will evaluate the critical predictions of the plasticity-first
hypothesis. This research will thereby help to clarify plasticity's role in
evolutionary innovation and provide a roadmap for others to test the plasticity-
first hypothesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.