* 1753186
* CAREER: Environmental Change and Extinction on the Mammoth Steppe
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Jacquelyn Gill, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 04/30/2024
* USD 793,815.00

During the last ice age, large parts of the Arctic were covered in diverse,
productive grasslands that supported large populations of mammoths, bison, and
other large grazers. This "mammoth steppe" habitat disappeared by 10,000 years
ago, along with the megafauna who lived there, but it is still unknown whether
their extinction was a cause or an effect of habitat loss. Large herbivores play
important roles in maintaining the health of grasslands in modern ecosystems,
but the role they played in ice age landscapes is less clear. This project will
reconstruct ecological prehistory across Beringia, the ice age land bridge that
connected Asia and North America, to establish the timing and nature of
extinction, environmental change, and habitat loss. Herbivores remain some of
the most threatened animals today, so understanding the "Serengeti of the ice
age" can help in the management of Earth's largest animals today, and may
provide insights into the role native grazers play in a warming Arctic. This
project also will provide education, mentoring, and training for students from
middle school to graduate school (including a majority first-generation college
student population), who will work collaboratively on this project in the field
and in the lab. Project results will be incorporated into a student-designed ice
age virtual reality game, and implemented in middle schools by newly trained
college student "science ambassadors" to provide cutting-edge science
experiences for students in rural, low-income, communities. The research will be
conducted in several protected Arctic locations, including Bering Land Bridge
National Reserve, Wrangel Island Reserve (a UNESCO World Heritage site and the
last known location of woolly mammoths on Earth), and Pleistocene Park, which
also will benefit from these results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
understand the relationship between megaherbivores, vegetation, and
environmental change in the mammoth steppe, using new high-resolution, multi-
proxy records of megaherbivore collapse, paleovegetation, fire, and climate,
from four sites in western and eastern Beringia, including the last dated
location of woolly mammoths on Earth. Methods include a mix of traditional
(e.g., pollen, charcoal) and emerging (ancient DNA, molecular paleoclimate
proxies) approaches that will provide opportunities for interdisciplinary
training and education in Quaternary environments. These state-of-the-art
paleoenvironmental reconstructions will immerse a cooperative team of graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students in field-based, cross-disciplinary
cooperative learning and research experiences based around data-informed ice age
virtual reality experiences for middle schoolers, with a goal of broadening
participation of rural and first-generation college students in STEM. Results
will test and refine hypotheses for the ecological context and consequences of
megafaunal extinctions, which have implications for interpreting paleorecords
and the conservation of modern keystone species in a warming
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.