* 1753846
* Mechanisms of Color Perception: Dependences on Color Contrast and Spatial Pattern
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Robert Shapley, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 06/30/2022
* USD 684,830.00

This research project concerns an apparent contradiction in human color
perception. When a human observer is asked to detect a colored target that is
barely visible (near threshold), her/his visual system adds color signals across
space to achieve maximum sensitivity. But when one views a scene that contains
highly colored objects at normal levels of visibility (suprathreshold), the
visual system seems to subtract color signals. In this project, we will
investigate how those two mechanisms (addition and subtraction) combine in the
human visual cortex to produce perception. The project has important
implications for all perceptual research. Our results indicate that perception
at threshold can be very different from suprathreshold perception. The project's
results will explain how these differences relate to color perception. These
results will have potential applications across a wide range of areas including
communication and industrial design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In our experiments, we
will measure the spatial pattern dependence of color perception in humans over a
range of cone contrasts from color threshold to highly saturated color, using
the technique of hue and saturation scaling. In parallel, we will make
measurements of the dependence on spatial stimulus variables of the human cVEP
(color-Visual Evoked Potential, an EEG measure of color responses in early
visual cortex) recorded with a dense array of electrodes on the scalp. The cVEP
experiments have already proven that there are two cortical mechanisms that are
the basis of color perception near threshold and suprathreshold: single-opponent
and double-opponent neuron populations. The experiments in the continuation
project are aimed at studying interactions between the two mechanisms and how
interactions affect perceived color.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.