* 1753332
* 4th Annual KUMUNU Conference in Partial Differential Equations, Dynamical Systems and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Milena Stanislavova, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 02/28/2019
* USD 17,704.00

This award will provide support for participants, especially graduate students,
junior researchers, women and mathematicians from under-represented groups in
the sciences, to attend the 4th Annual KUMUNU Conference on PDE, Dynamical
Systems, and Applications to be held at the University of Kansas on April 21-22,
2018.  This conference is co-organized by faculty from the University of Kansas
(KU), the University of Missouri (MU), and the University of Nebraska (NU).
 Nearly all physical phenomena are governed by fundamental laws and design
principles that directly relate rates of change of one quantity to that of some
other quantity.  This powerful idea leads naturally to differential equations,
which are widely used as models in mathematical physics and have potential
applications to many fields including Bose-Einstein condensates, fluid dynamics,
pattern formation, gas dynamics, and fiber optical communication.  This
conference will bring together researchers from the geographic area close to
Kansas, Missouri and Nebraska to exchange ideas and report new results in
differential equations and applications.  Building on the success of the three
prior conferences in this conference series, the conference will provide a venue
for regional junior and senior researchers, as well as graduate students, to
discuss recent advances and challenges in their respective fields.
 Additionally, young researchers will be given the opportunity to present their
work and to gain insight into this important subject through interactions with
senior experts in the field.  The conference website can be found at http://dept
.ku.edu/~math/conferences/2018/KUMUNUPDE/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex nonlinear
systems abound in science and engineering, and their behavior is often modeled
by systems of nonlinear partial differential equations (PDE). Any progress
towards understanding the behavior of their solutions is of paramount importance
for a variety of practical applications, including fluid flow, flame front
propagation and fiber optical communication. Many PDE can be conveniently
described as infinite dimensional dynamical systems, allowing for the use of
tools and methodologies from dynamical systems theory to make qualitative and
quantitative predictions about the solutions of these systems. Objects like
invariant manifolds have been a great aid in understanding the behavior of
finite-dimensional dynamical systems, but the connections between nonlinear PDE
and dynamical systems is still an area of active current research. In the last
few decades, collaborations between researchers in these fields, as well as with
those working in their applications, have provided tremendous progress in our
understanding of the dynamical behavior, stability and robustness of coherent
structures in such nonlinear PDE.  The themes of this conference include (i)
fluid dynamics, water waves and dispersive PDE, (ii) existence, dynamics and
stability of nonlinear waves in dissipative systems, and (iii) dynamical
systems, invariant manifolds and attractors.  These themes are well represented
by the regional experts as well as the invited plenary
speakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.