* 1753993
* Collaborative Research:   Ecological and evolutionary impacts of disrupted transmission on host-microbiome associations
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Jessica Metcalf, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 06/30/2021
* USD 29,549.00

The microbiome living in or on an organism is critical to that organism's
health. It influences everything from growth and development to behavior to
disease susceptibility. How an organism gets the best possible microbiome during
its development is key to its lifetime health and reproductive success. However,
we know very little about how the processes by which microbiomes are transmitted
among individuals affects organism health. This knowledge gap becomes especially
important when building predictions about how interfering in the transfer of
microbes between individuals might matter. For example, there has been
discussion of how caesarean section birth might reduce the transmission of
microbiota from mother to offspring, and in agriculture there are numerous
common practices, such as sterilization of seeds or crop rotation, that likely
impact the movement of plant-associated microbes across generations. This
research project will focus on the consequences of differences in how tomatoes,
a model agricultural crop, get their microbiomes. It will compare how vertical
transmission, from parent to offspring, or horizontal transmission, among
unrelated organisms, affects microbiome establishment, adaptation, and function.
The outcomes of this work will be relevant to the development of agricultural
practices that better incorporate the potentially useful role of the plant
microbiome for crop yield. Undergraduate students from underrepresented groups
will also be involved in the project, and researchers will also work with local
teachers to create teaching materials based on the research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work uses a model tomato plant - phyllosphere
(leaf associated) microbiome system to determine both the short term
(ecological) and longer-term (evolutionary) consequences of interrupted
microbiome transmission between generations on host-microbiome interactions. By
manipulating the likelihood that seedlings will be colonized by microbiota
coming from parental plants versus unrelated plants, the work will directly test
the impact of transmission mode on microbiome successional dynamics, adaptation,
and function. The combination of microbial experimental evolution, culture-
independent sequencing, and metagenomic analyses will allow for a causal link to
be established between microbiome transmission mode and the taxonomic and
functional diversity of phyllosphere microbiota. The empirical work will be
complemented by theory on how vertical microbiome transmission affects host-
microbiome coevolution. Together, the work will determine the importance of
vertical transmission in shaping host-microbiome
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.