* 1753418
* Collaborative Research: Defining the Atmospheric Deposition of Trace eEements into the Arctic Ocean-Ice Ecosystem During the Year-Long MOSAIC Ice Drift
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Clifton Buck, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 12/31/2022
* USD 350,412.00

This project will use a Beryllium 7 (7-Be) method in a year-long expedition as
part of the international Multidisciplinary drifting Observatory for the Study
of Arctic Climate (MOSAiC) expedition to assess the seasonal variability of
aerosol deposition. This is the first modern opportunity for such a
comprehensive study of the yearly depositional flux of trace elements (TEs) into
the Arctic ocean/ice ecosystem. The combination of 7-Be and aerosol TE
measurements has been shown to be an effective tool for estimating the
atmospheric input of TEs in remote ocean regions where nearby land-based
collection sites do not exist. The data generated in this work will be available
to allow ground-truthing of models of aerosol deposition and atmospheric input
of TEs. Atmospheric deposition is the dominant pathway by which
anthropogenically-derived trace elements, especially mercury (Hg), enter the
Arctic Ocean, and recent literature suggests that atmospheric deposition of
biologically-essential trace elements such as iron (Fe) could play a major role
in controlling biological productivity in the
Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atmospheric transport and deposition of aerosols is
an important delivery mechanism of natural and contaminant trace elements (TEs)
to the Arctic. Existing data show that atmospheric deposition of contaminant
elements like Hg, Pb, and Se may be a major input of these elements to the
Arctic, with likely sources being anthropogenic - industrial or power plant
emissions associated with fossil fuel combustion in Europe, Russia, and Asia.
The atmospheric input of biologically-essential trace elements (e.g. Mn, Fe, Co,
Ni, Cu, Zn) plays a key role in controlling biogeochemical processes in the
ocean, and recent work suggests this might be true in the Arctic as well. These
inputs have strong implications for the ecosystem, and even human health.
Assessment of this input is difficult because measurements of deposition rates
in remote ocean regions are scarce, and are particularly daunting to take in the
Arctic because harsh conditions and limited research platforms make it difficult
to obtain quality-controlled precipitation and aerosol chemistry measurements on
a routine basis. This research will provide estimates of the yearly atmospheric
deposition flux of aerosol TEs (total and soluble), including those of
biogeochemical importance as well as pollutant species. The seasonal evolution
of partitioning of trace element deposition among the various catchments (ice,
water, snow, melt ponds) will also be assessed. The work will involve
measurements of 7-Be inventories, 7-Be aerosol activities, and aerosol
concentrations of TEs. Field work will be during a year-long ice drift of the
MOSAiC expedition through the central Arctic Ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will be a component of the MOSAiC expedition, an international
initiative motivated by the rapidly evolving Arctic climate system, with
thinning sea ice, warming ocean and atmosphere temperatures, strong climate
feedbacks, and dramatic implications for society. MOSAiC has broad international
support and has been endorsed by international and US institutions as a project
that is critically needed to provide foundational information on the changing
central Arctic system required to support coupled model development. The ability
to provide estimates of the atmospheric input of relevant TEs to the Arctic
Ocean will contribute widely to the field of chemical oceanography, including
understanding anthropogenic impacts on the region and the role atmospheric input
of TEs plays in Arctic Ocean ecology. The lead institution is one of the
country's leading minority serving universities, and the lead researcher has
undertaken a mentoring program for students involved in its research activities.
The team will record short lectures and video logs that can be used in future
iterations of his courses to introduce important oceanographic concepts and give
his students a first-hand account of life aboard an oceanographic vessel. Other
scientists will be asked to grant interviews to add to the breadth of
perspectives, and the outreach will emphasize the role of basic scientific
research in improving our understanding of natural phenomena and the planet's
response to anthropogenic stressors.