* 1753082
* CAREER: Location-Aware Social Science for Adaptation: Modeling Dynamic Patterns in Public Perceptions and Behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Peter Howe, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 06/30/2024
* USD 538,323.00

This research project will investigate geographic patterns of public behavior,
perceptions, and attitudes about climate adaptation. The project will advance
scientific methods needed to take social data gathered in larger units and apply
them to make the data usable at subnational levels in order to measure public
responses at geographic scales relevant to decision making. Project insights
will be provided to improve decision making about societal adaptation to risks
created by environmental variability and change. A publicly accessible,
interactive, online mapping and data tool will provide local decision-relevant
information to the public, educators, and policy makers across the U.S. and
promote public geographic literacy and education. The educational agenda of this
project will strengthen the talent pool in science, technology engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines through mentorship of undergraduate and graduate
students, course development, research, participation in K-12 educational
activities, and public outreach activities that integrate science, art, and
geographic education. The integrated research and educational activities will
advance scientific understanding about adaptation strategies to reduce the
negative impacts of environmental risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adaptation to
environmental risk involves decision making by individuals and other
stakeholders from the local to national levels. The investigator undertaking
this research project will collect survey data regarding public perceptions,
attitudes, and behaviors relevant to climate adaptation at the national level,
and he will use these data for building and validating models and visualization
tools. He will develop models that integrate both dynamic changes in public
perceptions over time and spatial relationships across individuals. These new
methods will facilitate study of the drivers of changes in public risk
perceptions and behaviors related to adaptation and provide relevant data to
local decision makers. The investigator will develop a publicly accessible, web-
based, risk- and adaptation-decision observatory tool to facilitate the
visualization, mapping, and communication of the modeled outcomes to the public
and decision makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.