* 1753553
* Crystallographically-oriented Lamellae Phases in Garnet and Their Potential Use as Petrogenetic Indicators, Central Maine Terrane, Connecticut
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2022
* Jay Ague, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2022
* USD 313,316.00

Tectonic plates are consumed at subduction zones, vast undersea regions which
stretch thousands of miles across the face of our planet. During subduction, one
plate sinks beneath another to be recycled into Earth's mantle. Subduction zones
are the sites of active volcanism, the largest known earthquakes, and a wide
array of mineral deposit types. Tracing the history of subduction as recorded in
mountain belts is essential for reconstructing plate movements, paleogeography,
paleobiology, and paleoclimate throughout geologic time. The Appalachian-
Caledonide mountain chain is one of the largest in the world, stretching from
the southern and eastern United States up through Canada and Greenland and
across to Europe. Nonetheless, the record of subduction in the northeastern
United States is surprisingly cryptic in terms of the rock record it left
behind, particularly in terms of the metamorphic rocks comprising the deep roots
of the mountain belt. New discoveries, however, are providing fresh
perspectives, including the recognition of "ultrahigh-temperature" metamorphic
rocks in northeastern Connecticut (CT) formed in excess of 900 °C (about 1650
°F). Of major significance is that this CT locality also preserves tantalizing
evidence for subduction of crust to great depths-perhaps in excess of 60-100
miles. The research project will focus on these CT rocks as they may be the
first "ultrahigh-pressure" (UHP) metamorphic rocks definitively recognized in
the United States; their presence would catalyze a rethinking of how, where, and
why rocks were subducted during Appalachian mountain building. More broadly, a
deeper understanding of the tectonic architecture of the region may help resolve
longstanding questions involving Paleozoic plate movement and associated
implications for the location and geologic formation of natural resources in the
mountain belt (which extends into the Arctic and potentially as far west as
Alaska). The project will support and train Yale Ph.D. and undergraduate
students, and integrate research results into public science outreach programs
at the Yale Peabody Museum of Natural History. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gneisses in
the field area host garnets that contain spectacular examples of
crystallographically-oriented lamellae minerals (rutile, ilmenite, apatite,
amphibole, pyroxene, quartz, and other phases). Comparisons with other
localities worldwide indicate that such lamellae correlate broadly with
pressure-temperature conditions and, thus, they hold considerable but as yet
mostly untapped potential as petrogenetic indicators. For example, lamellae
assemblages including rutile, ilmenite, quartz, amphibole, and apatite are
documented only from UHP settings. In order to be used to diagnose metamorphic
regimes, however, lamellae origins must be understood. Consequently, this
project will undertake mineralogical and petrological study of the lamellae in
the CT garnets involving: (1) Characterization of lamellae assemblages and
chemical compositions via electron imaging and microprobe techniques together
with Raman spectroscopy. (2) Electron-backscatter diffraction and transmission
electron microscopy studies to determine crystallographic relationships between
garnet and lamellae. (3) Chemical mapping using the electron microprobe to image
closed and open-system garnet behavior. (4) Field work to identify other
lamellae-bearing garnet localities in the region. The results of the above
research will be used to test whether or not the lamellae are the products of
exsolution from garnet, or if they formed by some other mechanism such as
coupled infiltration and precipitation. If the former, then the Si-, Ti-, and
P-rich garnet compositions point strongly toward majoritic garnet precursors
formed at UHP conditions ~5 GPa or higher during subduction. Regardless of
hypothesis test outcomes, lamellae formation processes must be better understood
to help guide petrotectonic interpretations in New England and other orogenic
belts across the globe.