* 1753017
* CAREER: Modeling the Physical Regulation of Immune Cell Activation
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Steven Abel, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2023
* USD 510,242.00

This CAREER award will establish an integrated research and education program
that uses theory and computation to elucidate physical mechanisms that regulate
immune cell activation. Immune cells such as T cells and B cells use surface
receptors to directly engage other cells as they search for molecular signatures
of pathogens. An emerging paradigm in immunology is that forces at the cell
surface regulate antigen recognition and cell activation. Understanding antigen
recognition by T cells and B cells remains one of the most significant
unresolved issues in immunology. This project will contribute to fundamental
immunological understanding and provide mechanistic guidance for designing
immuno-modulatory materials and therapies. The project will leverage a recent
initiative to increase the number of Tennesseans with college degrees by
engaging high school and community college students in active learning modules.
Additionally, first-year undergraduates will be targeted with a new seminar on
physical biology, and an emphasis will be placed on engaging students from
Tennessee's Appalachian region. These efforts will help to recruit new students
into science and engineering, and will expose a broad range of students to the
interface of physics and biology. All research students will be involved in
educational activities. A graduate student will spend time embedded in an
experimental lab, and a workshop organized by the PI will bring theorists and
experimentalists together to explore the physical regulation of immune cells.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate processes that are essential
for a proper immune response. It will resolve how membrane and cytoskeletal
forces couple with force-dependent dissociation kinetics to influence the
dynamics of T cell receptors, elucidate mechanical processes that enhance the
ability of B cells to discriminate between and internalize membrane-presented
antigens, and characterize how dynamic membrane protrusions on the T cell
surface impact the antigen search process. Investigating these processes will
result in a new computational framework that can be used to address other
emerging questions in immunology and cellular bio-mechanics. Many physical
features of antigen recognition are difficult to explore experimentally, and
there is no framework for systematically investigating the underlying
mechanisms. This project will address this gap by developing computational and
theoretical approaches that capture important biophysical interactions at cell-
cell interfaces, including stochastic receptor-ligand binding kinetics, membrane
mechanics, and actin-mediated forces on the membrane. Such approaches are
essential for understanding antigen recognition, as they allow systematic
investigation of physical features that are experimentally inaccessible. The
computational framework will generate hypotheses that can be experimentally
tested, thus providing feedback between theory and experiment. Receptor-mediated
interactions between cells are ubiquitous in biology, and as such, the
approaches developed in this proposal can be used to study diverse biological
phenomena extending far beyond immunology. This project is being jointly
supported by the Physics of Living Systems program in the Division of Physics
and the Cellular Cluster and the Systems and Synthetic Biology clusters in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.