* 1753203
* CAREER: Adapting the Fluid Projection Method to Model Elasto-plastic Materials
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Christopher Rycroft, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

There are two main ways that materials deform under an applied force. The
deformation can be elastic, so that when the force is removed the material
recovers its original shape. Alternatively, the deformation can be plastic,
whereby the material undergoes irreversible changes that may subsequently lead
to breakage. Many materials of technological importance exhibit a combination of
these two types of deformation depending on the applied force, and are called
elasto-plastic. One example are bulk metallic glasses (BMGs), which are alloys
that have an amorphous atomic arrangement in contrast to most metals. BMGs have
desirable properties, such as the ability to be processed like plastics, making
them attractive candidates for many applications (e.g. next-generation
smartphone cases) due to considerable improvements in manufacturing efficiency.
However, experimental measurements of BMG breakage properties show wide
variations, limiting their usage. To overcome these limitations, it is essential
to develop predictive theoretical and computational models of BMG elasto-
plasticity. This project is based on a surprising similarity between the
equations for elasto-plastic materials and the equations for incompressible
fluids. Using this similarity, computational approaches that were originally
developed for fluid flow will be translated to elasto-plasticity. These
computational methods will be used in collaboration with theorists and
experimentalists to study the fracture properties of BMGs. The ultimate aim is
to provide a practical engineering tool for predicting when elasto-plastic
materials will break, and how to best design structures using them. This work
will be undertaken as part of an integrated program of research, teaching, and
mentorship, and will involve outreach activities in New England, including a
local library lecture series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projection method of
Chorin (1968) is a well-established approach for simulating the incompressible
Navier-Stokes equations for fluid flow. This proposal is based on a surprising
mathematical correspondence between fluids in the incompressible limit and
elasto-plastic solids in the quasi-static limit (when inertia can be neglected).
In this proposal, this correspondence is harnessed to translate several modern
numerical approaches derived from Chorin's projection method to quasi-static
elasto-plasticity, resulting in a practical and powerful set of new simulation
tools for a different class of physical problem. Compared to existing
techniques, the resultant numerical methods are likely to be especially well-
suited to problems involving large plastic deformations. An example type of
elasto-plastic material are the bulk metallic glasses (BMGs), which are alloys
with many favorable properties such as excellent strength and wear resistance.
The numerical methods developed here will be used in a collaboration with
theorists and experimentalists to study the fracture toughness properties of
BMGs, with the aim of predicting BMG toughness over a wide range of experimental
conditions. The PI plans to expand the graduate curriculum in numerical methods
to address a pressing need in this area. Open source software will be released
as part of this project, and the PI will train students in best practices to
make software accessible to a broad audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.