* 1753228
* CAREER: Enabling a Rich Astro-particle and Exotic Physics Program in DUNE
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Georgia Karagiorgi, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Kaushik De
* 04/30/2024
* USD 800,000.00

The Standard Model of particle physics was a formative intellectual development
of 20th century physics. While the discovery of the Higgs mechanism in 2012 was
a crowning achievement for the Standard Model, many mysteries remain, including
the role of the elusive neutrino. Neutrinos are elementary particles that rarely
interact with ordinary matter. The Standard Model predicts three types of
massless neutrinos. However, experimentally, we know that neutrinos do have very
small masses, and yet they permeate the universe. Because they have mass, they
can change from one type to another. Measuring properties of these changes, and
comparing them to theoretical predictions, provides a promising pathway to
discover how neutrinos shape our universe. To that end, the neutrino community
is embarking on a challenging quest to complete the picture of neutrino physics
through the Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment (DUNE), which will be a
massive, 40,000-ton instrument optimized to detect neutrino interactions about a
mile underground at Sanford Lab in South Dakota. This facility, being built
during the next 10 years, will observe interactions of neutrinos produced at
Fermilab and traveling 800 miles to DUNE and, due to its large volume, can also
detect particles coming from astrophysical sources. This work seeks to develop
ways to look for and identify signals for new physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
DUNE experiment offers a unique opportunity for a rich astro-particle and exotic
physics search program, including: observations of low-energy astrophysical
neutrinos, e.g. from supernova core-collapse, thus lending itself to multi-
messenger astrophysics, and searches for other rare processes, e.g. proton decay
and neutron-antineutron oscillation. If observed, these signatures would have
profound implications for particle physics, astrophysics, and cosmology. The
rarity of these signals requires continuous, high-resolution readout and
processing of Time Projection Chamber (TPC) data from the entire DUNE detector.
The resulting data rates for such a data acquisition (DAQ) scheme are
prohibitively large and create a challenge: to develop readout and DAQ systems
that are capable of significant data reduction and efficient self-triggering
with zero deadtime. This award will carry out a unique and ambitious R&amp;D
program to develop novel readout and triggering techniques involving
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) deployed on FPGA devices, including a
demonstration of some of these techniques at the upcoming SBND experiment,
beginning in 2019.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award will strengthen the
undergraduate research experience of Columbia University students, including
underrepresented groups. The project will also provide unique opportunities of
involvement in cutting edge research in readout electronics, detector R&amp;D,
and computer science applications for data handling and data analysis, and
further promote interdisciplinary research opportunities for physics and non-
physics majors through a Seminar Series developed and organized by the PI. The
award will sponsor an additional slot in Nevis Lab's Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) Program for two years, specifically for non-physics majors
interested in particle physics. Outreach to the public and local high-school
students will also be carried out through lectures at local high schools and the
Nevis Science-on-Hudson public lecture series. Recruited summer high-school
students will develop a virtual reality visualization of a supernova burst, as
"seen" in a Liquid Argon TPC. This visualization will be demonstrated annually
at the World Science Festival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.