* 1753860
* OPUS:   A general, resource-based explanation for density dependence in populations of mammalian herbivores
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* N. Thompson Hobbs, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 08/31/2022
* USD 179,177.00

A relationship known as density dependence informs wise management of
populations of wild and domestic herbivores (for example, deer, elk, cattle, and
sheep) throughout the world. This relationship, observed in dozens of species in
scores of habitats, consistently shows that the number of surviving offspring
produced per female declines as the number of individuals in the population
increases. Managing the harvest of these species depends on understanding this
relationship because the largest harvests are sustained when populations are
neither too big nor too small. Despite the importance of density dependence to
hunters, pastoralists, and ranchers worldwide, the mechanism producing this
relationship remains poorly understood. The goal of this project is to improve
our general understanding of the mechanism causing density dependence in
herbivore populations. Achieving this goal could fundamentally change how
wildlife, livestock, and rangelands are managed. Impacts of the work will be
expanded by summarizing the effects of density dependence on harvest of wild and
domestic herbivores in media accessible to managers and policy makers.
Recommendations for best practices will be made based on the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A synthesis of thirty years of research on
foraging behavior and population dynamics of large mammalian herbivores will
support development of new, broadly explanatory mathematical and statistical
models showing how nutritional characteristics of plant communities create
density dependence. These models will predict how density dependence is altered
by animal body mass, the biomass of plants, and the mean and variance of
nutrient concentrations in plants, for example protein or metabolizable energy
content. The project will demonstrate the feasibility of fitting these models to
data using modern Bayesian methods. Evidence in data for competing models will
be evaluated. A new, theoretical and empirical framework for understanding how
plants mediate herbivore population growth will be produced, thereby motivating
new lines of inquiry in ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.