* 1753722
* Collaborative Research: Lithosphere-scale anisotropic imaging across the Eastern North American Margin's ocean-continent transition
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Zachary Eilon, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 183,537.00

The cycle of continent formation and subsequent breakup to build oceans is an
essential aspect of plate tectonics and is one of the fundamental processes that
shape the planet. Yet, there are several details of continental rifting that
continue to elude us. Rifted margins, such as that which comprises the entire
east coast of the United States, represent the contact between continental crust
and oceanic crust that is formed during, and after, the breakup (in this case,
the Atlantic Ocean formed as Africa moved away). These margins retain a record
of the processes that led up to, coincided with, and followed continental
breakup. This project will utilize existing onshore and offshore seismic data to
study in detail the deformation that produced the modern day eastern U.S. The
results will aid in assessing contemporary hazard and risks along the margin.
This project supports the training of a graduate student at the University of
California at Santa Barbara and at least one undergraduate student at the
University of Arizona. It also supports outreach activities to several high
schools in North Carolina that hosted seismic instruments that recorded
earthquake data used in the analyses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to shed light on two fundamental scientific questions related to
the structure, evolution, and on-going dynamics associated with the eastern
North American passive rift margin (ENAM): 1) What is the structure of the
lithosphere from top to bottom across the ocean-continent transition and how was
it shaped by rifting processes? 2) What is the history of deformation both
within and seaward of the passive margin, and how is present-day mantle flow
controlled by the margin's structure? Depth-constrained 3-D anisotropic velocity
models will be produced of the ENAM from crust to below the lithosphere-
asthenosphere boundary (LAB). By employing different imaging techniques in
sequence, we will create a suite of complementary models: a) 3-D isotropic shear
velocity model from inversion of ambient noise and earthquake-generated surface
waves; b) 1-D high-resolution velocity profiles using dispersion curves inverted
jointly with S-p and P-s receiver functions sensitive to crust and mantle
discontinuities; c) 3-D finite-frequency body-wave azimuthal anisotropy
tomography using the surface wave tomography as a starting model. These models
will be jointly interpreted to refine estimates of crustal thickness and LAB
character across the margin in the context of geodynamical rifting models, as
well as to understand deformational flow during rifting and margin maturation to
the present day.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.