* 1753344
* CAREER: Mapping the Chemical Reactivity of Metal Oxide Photocatalysts by Correlative Single-Molecule Fluorescence and Electron Microscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Bryce Sadtler, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 02/29/2024
* USD 613,735.00

Nanocrystal photocatalysts are tiny, synthetic crystals that use light to
accelerate chemical reactions. Photocatalysts that make fuels, such as methane,
using only carbon dioxide, water and sunlight would have significant benefit to
society. However, developing photocatalysts capable of sunlight-to-fuel
conversion is a challenging problem that requires a fundamental understanding of
the chemical reactions taking place on the nanocrystal surface. With support
from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the NSF
Division of Chemistry, Professor Sadtler at Washington University in St. Louis
is developing microscopy methods to watch individual, light-driven reactions as
they occur on single nanocrystal photocatalysts. Together, Professor Sadtler and
his students are gaining new insights into why some atomic sites on the surface
of nanocrystals are particularly active for catalysis. Professor Sadtler is also
infusing his research into education. He is developing new courses that use
atomic structure and chemical bonding as a basis to teach the frontiers of
chemistry and materials science, as well as working with high school teachers
and students in the St. Louis area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal oxide
semiconductor nanocrystals with tunable stoichiometry are promising
photocatalysts to produce liquid fuels through solar water splitting, partial
methane oxidation, and the reduction of carbon dioxide. However, the
contribution of specific structural and morphological features among individual
catalyst particles to their ensemble activity is not well understood because
each particle is different and possesses a variety of potential reaction sites.
This project uses super-resolution fluorescence microscopy and redox-active
fluorogenic probes to monitor photoinduced charge-transfer events on individual
metal oxide nanocrystals with nanoscale spatial resolution. Correlation of the
reactivity maps with the atomic resolution of scanning transmission electron
microscopy performed on the same particles reveals how the distribution of
oxygen vacancies in individual particles affects their reactivity. To further
develop structure-activity relationships in metal oxide photocatalysts, the
single-molecule, single-particle data are compared to measurements of bulk
photocatalytic activity for methane oxidation and carbon dioxide
reduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.