* 1753328
* CAREER:Membrane-Mimicking Nanomaterials with Tunable Elasticity for Selective and Efficient Intracellular Delivery
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2024
* Sheereen Majd, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 04/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award by the
Biomaterials Program in the Division of Materials Research, to the University of
Houston, is to create a class of liposomal membranes that comprise a polymeric
core with tunable mechanical properties, and study the cell recognition as well
as internalization of the so-called nanoliposomes (NLs). In diseases like cancer
where therapeutic drugs are designed to kill cells, systematic administration of
drugs can severely damage healthy cells, leading to undesired side effects in
patients undergoing treatment. Nanoliposomes are extremely small lipid capsules
that can carry these toxic drugs only to diseased cells without harming healthy
cells in the body, minimizing their side effects. These carriers should,
however, be carefully tailored to address selected group of cells affected in
different diseases while sparing other cells. The goal of this project is to
generate a toolbox for design and development of highly tailored nanoliposomes
for carrying drugs for a wide range of treatment applications. The impact of
this study goes far beyond the fields of biomaterials and drug delivery as it
tackles a major challenge in today's medicine, namely selective and efficient
drug delivery, impacting the lives of millions of patients with devastating
diseases like cancer or neurological disorders. Additionally, by supporting the
growth and empowerment of female youth in the diverse Houstonian community, this
project will raise the quality of life for this entire
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among nano-delivery vehicles developed to date,
nanoliposomes (NLs) have shown the greatest promise for efficient delivery of
bioactive molecules to specific sites in the body and have hence, found
applications beyond research laboratories. A particularly attractive aspect of
liposomal membranes lies in their ability to mimic the fluid and dynamic nature
of biological membranes. This unique feature can be effectively used for dynamic
adjustment of membrane surface properties, presenting outstanding opportunities
for delivery applications. NLs, however, suffer from the lack of mechanical
stability and control over the cargo release. An appealing strategy developed to
address these limitations is to add a solid nanoparticle that can provide
mechanical stability and controlled release, as a core into NLs. Despite the
fast growing interest in such hybrid vehicles for delivery applications, there
remains a gap in fundamental understanding of structure-function relationship in
these systems, hindering their full potential realization. Particularly, the key
differences between these hybrid vehicles and their parental systems including
(a) the presence of a stiff core within an otherwise highly deformable NL, and
(b) the dynamic display of targeting moieties on a solid NP with an otherwise
static surface, and their impact on the performance of these systems have
remained unexplored. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award by the Biomaterials
Program in the Division of Materials Research, to the University of Houston is
to fill the above-mentioned gap and provide an in depth understanding of the
unique physiochemical aspects of solid-core liposomes in relation to their
functionality and cellular interactions. To this end, a versatile class of
targeted liposomal membranes with mechanically tunable polymeric cores will be
developed and systematically studied for cell recognition and internalization.
The ultimate goal of this project is to develop a stimuli-responsive membrane-
mimicking vehicle that can simultaneously offer high specificity, high
efficiency, mechanical stability, and controlled release for intracellular
delivery of bio-active molecules. &lt;br/&gt;This work is potentially
transformative as it aims to develop nanomaterials that offer mechanical
stability and controlled release along with high selectivity and efficacy for
intracellular delivery of theranostics -an unmet need in several medical and
biomedical research areas including cancer research and regenerative medicine.
In addition, this project is the first study on the structure-function
relationship in solid core liposomal membranes -a rapidly growing class of
delivery nanomaterials. Moreover, this project will shed light on fundamental
yet unexplored aspects of nano-scale biomaterials: (i) the role of core
mechanical stiffness in NLs, and (ii) the effect of surface mobility of ligands
on targeted NPs, in their cellular interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.