* 1753845
* Collaborative Proposal:  Forest Carbon-water interactions in relations to the North American Monsoon climate system
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2022
* James Ehleringer, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 03/31/2022
* USD 565,724.00

Regional climate affects the forest growth and water use in the semi-arid
western US. These montane forests depend on water from winter snow and summer
rain. This water is provided by different climate systems. The North American
Monsoon climate system occurs each year across the southwestern US. It delivers
summer rain through near-daily thunderstorms that move northward from the Gulf
of California. Winter snow comes from longer-term storms that originate above
the Pacific Ocean off the coast of California and move eastward. Water from
these different climate systems have different chemistry and timing. Using tree
rings this research project will provide insights into how forest growth and
water use has responded to past climate variation and how variation in one part
of the season (e.g., winter or summer) influences forest growth and water use in
the following seasons. This region has experienced reduced snow packs, warmer
winter temperatures and an increase in droughts. Therefore, it is important to
understand how the change in water availability is affecting the growth of these
forests. An understanding of how drought controls forest growth is crucial to
not only predicting natural resource production, but also predicting and
controlling forest fire frequencies. The research will contribute to an exhibit
entitled: 'The Fingerprints of Forest Responses to Climate Variation', in The
Laboratory of Tree Ring Research and at the Biosphere 2 campus at the University
of Arizona. The research will include the training of two post-doctoral fellows
and numerous undergraduate students, with an emphasis on recruitment from the
large Hispanic and Native American student populations at the University of
Arizona. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will explore whether variation in
the amount of summer or winter precipitation over the past fifty years, in any
given year, is negatively correlated with the amount of precipitation during the
previous winter or the following summer, respectively, and whether those
correlated influences have affected forest wood production and water-cycling in
predictable ways. Researchers will examine how trees mobilize stored sugar
resources to sustain wood production and water cycling during years with
extremely low winter or summer rainfall, and the degree to which the use of
stored sugars differentially buffers the effects of extreme winter or summer
drought. This project will design a new generation of mathematical models to
better predict how variation in winter versus summer precipitation influences
forest wood production and water use, and whether there are limits to sustaining
wood production following multi-year droughts. The research will utilize
advanced techniques in the analysis of stable isotopes in the cellulose
extracted from individual tree-rings. A major part of the studies will focus on
tree rings produced during the 1960's and 1970's, when atomic bomb testing
produced an atmospheric spike of radioactive 14C that was subsequently
incorporated into trees. The 14C provides a detectable tracer that facilitates
determination of the age of stored sugars in trees and the utilization of those
tagged sugars in the production of tree rings specifically, and timber
generally. New theory will be developed to provide a foundation for
understanding and predicting how trees incorporate stable isotopes of carbon and
oxygen from the atmosphere into their wood. All data will be deposited in the
International Tree Ring Data Bank, which is administered by the US Department of
Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and which has been
used in numerous multi-national collaborations on understanding how climate
controls the health and vigor of forest ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.