* 1753101
* CAREER: "The Omnivore's Dilemma": The Effect of Autumn Diet on Winter Physiology and Condition of Juvenile Antarctic Krill
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Kim Bernard, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 08/31/2024
* USD 624,621.00

Antarctic krill are essential in the Southern Ocean as they support vast numbers
of marine mammals, seabirds and fishes, some of which feed almost exclusively on
krill. Antarctic krill also constitute a target species for industrial fisheries
in the Southern Ocean. The success of Antarctic krill populations is largely
determined by the ability of their young to survive the long, dark winter, where
food is extremely scarce. To survive the long-dark winter, young Antarctic krill
must have a high-quality diet in autumn. However, warming in certain parts of
Antarctica is changing the dynamics and quality of the polar food web, resulting
in a shift in the type of food available to young krill in autumn. It is not yet
clear how these dynamic changes are affecting the ability of krill to survive
the winter. This project aims to fill an important gap in current knowledge on
an understudied stage of the Antarctic krill life cycle, the 1-year old
juveniles. The results derived from this work will contribute to the development
of improved bioenergetic, population and ecosystem models, and will advance
current scientific understanding of this critical Antarctic species. This CAREER
project's core education and outreach objectives seek to enhance education and
increase diversity within STEM fields. An undergraduate course will be developed
that will integrate undergraduate research and writing in way that promotes
authentic scientific inquiry and analysis of original research data by the
students, and that enhances their communication skills. A graduate course will
be developed that will promote students' skills in communicating their own
research to a non-scientific audience. Graduate students will be supported
through the proposed study and will gain valuable research experience.
Traditionally underserved undergraduate students will be recruited to conduct
independent research under the umbrella of the larger project. Throughout each
field season, the research team will maintain a weekly blog that will include
short videos, photographs and text highlighting the research, as well as their
experiences living and working in Antarctica. The aim of the blog will be to
engage the public and increase awareness and understanding of Antarctic
ecosystems and the impact of warming, and of the scientific process of research
and discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this 5-year CAREER project, the
investigator will use a combination of empirical and theoretical techniques to
assess the effects of diet on 1-year old krill in autumn-winter. The research is
centered on four hypotheses: (H1) autumn diet affects 1-year old krill
physiology and condition at the onset of winter; (H2) autumn diet has an effect
on winter physiology and condition of 1-year old krill under variable winter
food conditions; (H3) the rate of change in physiology and condition of 1-year
old krill from autumn to winter is dependent on autumn diet; and (H4) the winter
energy budget of 1-year old krill will vary between years and will be dependent
on autumn diet. Long-term feeding experiments and in situ sampling will be used
to measure changes in the physiology and condition of krill in relation to their
diet and feeding environment. Empirically-derived data will be used to develop
theoretical models of growth rates and energy budgets to determine how diet will
influence the overwinter survival of 1-year old krill. The research will be
integrated with an education and outreach plan to (1) develop engaging
undergraduate and graduate courses, (2) train and develop young scientists for
careers in polar research, and (3) engage the public and increase their
awareness and understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.