* 1753362
* CAREER: Advanced Subsurface Imaging Across USArray and Intermountain Seismic Belt Using Dense Seismic Arrays
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Fan-Chi Lin, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 06/30/2024
* USD 629,920.00

This project will support big data seismology research on both continental and
local scales. The focus of the research is to advance current seismic imaging
methods aimed at achieving an unprecedented resolution to better determine
interior earth structure. On the continental scale, the research will leverage
data collected through the community-driven seismic experiment, namely the
EarthScope USArray, to construct 3D crustal and upper mantle models beneath the
contiguous United States and Alaska. The 3D models will be used to better
understand the tectonic processes such as the basin formation, mountain
building, and volcanic and earthquake activities. On the local scale, temporary
seismic arrays will be deployed within Yellowstone National Park and around Salt
Lake City to better determine the magmatic and basin structures, respectively.
The detailed crustal structures revealed by this study will lead to better
understanding of the potential volcanic and earthquake hazards within these
areas. Through the research, the project will support undergraduate and graduate
education as well as the development of K-12 educational earth science materials
that address the Next Generation Science Standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project targets two lines of research related to advanced array imaging
utilizing large N seismic arrays. First, using USArray data, the project aims to
advance the current broadband ambient noise and surface wave tomography methods
to resolve 3D velocity and density structure simultaneously by jointly inverting
surface wave dispersion, Rayleigh wave ellipticity, surface wave amplification,
and receiver function measurements. Moreover, the enigmatic 1-psi apparent
anisotropy signals observed using directionally dependent measurements will be
studied to better determine the sharpness of physiographic boundaries. The
velocity and density model constructed in this project will be used to evaluate
the nature of the major tectonic processes in the North America. Second, the
project will support the deployment of large-N nodal geophone arrays in several
locations within the Intermountain Seismic Belt (ISB). Two locations,
Yellowstone and Salt Lake Valley, will be of particular interest in this study.
By applying ambient noise tomography and receiver function analysis and using
different dense array configurations, the project aims to resolve the precise
geometries of the Yellowstone magma camber and the Salt Lake Basin, which are of
great importance to the determination of the regional volcanic and seismic
hazards, respectively. Broader impacts will support undergraduate and graduate
education. They include developing earth science materials at the K-12 level
that are in line with the Next Generation Science Standards. In addition, the PI
will work with the Yellowstone National Park to inform the myriad of visitors to
the park on the new scientific findings from this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.