* 1753954
* Collaborative LTREB Research: How will local adaptation and environmental extremes shape continental-scale changes in species distribution and abundance?
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Daniel Doak, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 06/30/2024
* USD 301,034.00

Predicting how species will respond to environmental changes across the globe is
among the greatest biological challenges faced today, as these responses will
determine the continued functioning of natural ecosystems and the ability of the
Earth to continue to provide food, clean water, and other resources for
humankind. Most efforts to predict ecological responses to environmental changes
only try to predict the future geographical ranges of species, not the actual
number of individuals across the range, even though numbers are likely to be a
far more important measure of ecological functioning. Among the problems with
forecasting either range shifts or changes in numbers is the variability in the
environment from year to year, such that short-term responses of species may be
very different than long-term trends, necessitating the long-term studies to be
carried out in this project. In addition, populations of widespread species
often show adaptation to the local environment, so that the range of climatic
conditions tolerated by a species as a whole may not reflect the suitable
conditions for individuals in any one population. Ignoring local adaptation may
lead to inaccurate predictions of both geographical ranges and numbers of
individuals. Finally, the scientists leading this project will develop training
materials and teach workshops to high school teachers in order to improve
students' understanding of the ecological responses to changes in climate and
other environmental conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed to
address these and other problems in predicting ecological responses to future
environmental conditions, using a long-term data set combined with new
experiments. The study focuses on two wide-spread plants that occur in western
North America from northernmost Alaska to central New Mexico. Seventeen years of
data on the species at sites across this latitudinal range have shown how
environmental change can influence survival, growth and reproduction of these
plants. In the current project, plants will be transplanted between multiple
sites to test for local adaptation to environmental change in the field
(evidence from growth chamber experiments suggests the potential for such
adaptation). Using these data and those from past and ongoing surveys of natural
populations, new models will be developed to predict plant numbers in response
to local environmental conditions for populations across the continent. These
predictions will then be tested against current distributions and population
sizes. After this validation, the local models will be tied to global models to
improve predictions of ecological responses to future environmental conditions.
The goals of the project are both to better predict how these particular species
will respond to changes in their environment and to develop and test methods for
making such predictions that can be used for many other
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.