* 1753273
* CAREER: Unraveling Chemical Consequences of Non-adiabatic Energy Transfer at the Gas-Surface Interface
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Sharani Roy, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 01/31/2024
* USD 624,469.00

Sharani Roy of the University of Tennessee is supported by a CAREER award from
the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
Division to theoretically investigate the role of nonadiabatic energy transfer
in chemical processes at the gas-surface interface. Chemistry at solid surfaces
and interfaces is the foundation of a wide range of technologies ranging from
heterogeneous catalysis, gas storage, and chemical sensing, to nanoelectronics,
nanolithography, and solar cells. It also governs natural phenomena, such as
corrosion and oxidation processes, e.g., the rusting of iron and the weathering
of rocks. Even interstellar formation of molecules occurs on the surfaces of
dust particles. In all the above examples, the fundamental interactions that
govern the processes are gas-surface interactions. Each complex surface process
is comprised of a series of elementary steps, such as the scattering,
adsorption, diffusion, desorption, and reactions of gaseous atoms and molecules
on solid surfaces. Therefore, a detailed understanding of the gas-surface
interface is essential to explain such diverse surface processes. The Roy group
investigates fundamental gas-surface interactions underlying different surface
and interface phenomena, with focus on phenomena that involve strong coupling
between nuclear motion and electronic motion. This coupling can have important
and unexpected consequences on the rates and pathways of chemical processes at
surfaces. Dr. Roy's research is integrated with a multi-component education plan
that includes the development of courses on computational chemistry, surface
chemistry, and high-performance computing in the context of scientific
computing. In addition, Dr. Roy plans to organize a symposium on chemical
reactions and dynamics at surfaces in collaboration with the Oak Ridge National
Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical and computational research in
surface and interface chemistry often involves studies of chemical dynamics in
which the motion of atoms and molecules on surfaces is simulated using classical
mechanics. This concept of molecular dynamics (MD) simulations has been very
successful in describing gas-surface interactions, and has provided valuable
qualitative insight into complicated surface processes. Conventional MD relies
on the ubiquitous Born-Oppenheimer or adiabatic approximation, which assumes
that nuclear motion is uncoupled from electronic motion. However, there are
several fundamentally and industrially important gas-surface systems in which
this approximation breaks down. Therefore, it is critical to develop accurate
and efficient dynamics methods that can be applied to understand interfacial
chemical processes where the adiabatic approximation is weak or invalid. Dr. Roy
aims to further develop the 'surface hopping' theoretical method of nonadiabatic
dynamics in the context of metal surfaces, and apply it to study strongly
nonadiabatic gas-surface phenomena where energy is efficiently transferred
between electrons and nuclei. These phenomena include (a) the interaction of
hydrogen atoms with a gold surface, (b) the interaction of oxygen atoms with a
silver surface, and (c) inelastic electron transport in molecular junctions. The
overall goal is to develop a method with broader applicability to surface and
interface chemistry that will help to attain a more comprehensive understanding
of dynamics beyond the Born-Oppenheimer approximation.