* 1753749
* Light-regulated development in Phytophthora: niche-specific diversification and evolution of the cryptochrome/photolyase superfamily
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Howard Judelson, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 07/31/2023
* USD 788,976.00

Many organisms regulate their growth using environmental signals such as light,
humidity, and chemicals. One biological process that is responsive to such cues
in microbes is sporulation. This produces spores, which are used for transport
to new geographic areas or to survive unfavorable conditions. Many pathogenic
microbes also use spores to infect their hosts. This project will examine the
role of environmental signals such as light on sporulation, with a focus on a
large and economically important group of plant pathogens known as oomycetes.
Some of these species make spores upon exposure to light, but light represses
spore formation in other species. This project will test the hypothesis that
sporulation is regulated by interactions between a specific type of
photoreceptor protein and other components of the cell's regulatory machinery,
such as those that activate or repress the activity of genes. The project will
also explain at a molecular level why different species respond divergently to
light. The research also has the potential for a practical return, since knowing
what regulates sporulation can lead to the development of inhibitors of
sporulation that will protect crops from disease. The project integrates
research with education and outreach in communities with high minority
demographics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Phytophthora, a genus of plant pathogenic
oomycetes, light stimulates sporulation by root pathogens but represses
sporulation by foliar pathogens. This ensures that spores of root-infecting
species appear above the soil line so that they can spread to new hosts, and
that spores of foliar pathogens appear at night to avoid desiccation or UV
damage. The goal of the research is to learn how these divergent responses to
light evolved, using the root pathogen P. capsici and the foliar pathogen P.
infestans as models. One objective is to use RNA-seq to characterize the effects
of light on gene expression in the two species, and identify functional elements
within light-induced promoters. A second objective is to study the role of
cryptochromes on sporulation. These photoreceptor proteins are distributed
widely in prokaryotes and eukaryotes, and have been shown to regulate growth,
development, and metabolism. Their function in P. capsici and P. infestans will
be examined using gene silencing, overexpression, heterologous expression, and
protein-protein interaction studies. Having divergent responses to light within
a single genus presents a unique opportunity for studying the evolution of an
important developmental process. Graduate and undergraduate students will
participate in the research, which will be integrated with programs for
increasing student success and interest in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.