* 1753306
* CAREER: Designing Topological States in van der Waals Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Stevan Nadj-Perge, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 04/30/2024
* USD 599,026.00

Non-Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;As electronic devices shrink in size, their
overall performance is degrading. Novel materials based on quantum phenomena
need to be explored in order to further boost the performance and reduce size of
future electronic devices. One particular promising class of such quantum
materials are topological insulators which are characterized by electrically
non-conductive bulk alongside with a highly conductive electronic state at its
boundaries. This program focuses on experimental research of the properties in
two-dimensional (2D) topological insulators that are only a few atoms thick. The
properties of these materials can be engineered by stacking monolayers with
different material composition and controlled by applying electric fields. The
research aspects of this project are accompanied by an extensive educational and
outreach plan aimed to prepare graduate and undergraduate students for
successful careers in industry and academia as well as help educate general
public about quantum science and nanotechnology through lectures and lab tours
for high-school students and teachers from the Pasadena Unified School District.
Moreover, all results from this project will be broadly disseminated through the
talks at national and international conferences and journal articles as well as
in publicly accessible blog posts and educational videos targeting broad
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award
supports experimental exploration of topological phases of matter in van der
Waals materials and hetero-structures. Due to their intrinsic 2D character,
these ultrathin materials can be studied by closely integrated combination of
quantum transport measurements and scanning probe microscopy. The research team
will focus on correlating local structural and electronic properties of the edge
states obtained using scanning tunneling microscopy with the overall transport
signatures in variety of experimental settings. This approach will allow for
novel insights into the relevant backscattering mechanisms as well as into the
spin polarization and spin relaxation of the helical edges. The team will also
explore prospects of coupling 2D topological van der Waals materials to
superconductors in order to create topologically protected superconducting
quantum states in one and zero dimensions. This project will offer ample
opportunities for integrating research, education and outreach. In particular,
as a part of this project, the principle investigator will develop lectures for
the general public and enhance course curriculum for undergraduate and graduate
students that will cover the most recent topics in quantum science and
nanotechnology. The research results will be broadly disseminated through the
talks at national and international conferences and journal articles as well as
in publicly accessible blog posts and educational videos targeting broad
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.