* 1753200
* CAREER: From Substrate to Surface: Quantifying the Impact of Aquatic Vegetation on Exchange Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2024
* Rafael Omar Tinoco Lopez, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 04/30/2024
* USD 499,989.00

This project seeks to understand the effects of flow and vegetation on gas
transfer in natural waters, from the water-sediment interface to the water
surface. Understanding such processes, from substrate to surface, will allow
development of process-based models for management and restoration of wetlands,
estuaries, and vegetated coastal areas, and will inform models of global
greenhouse gas fluxes in natural waters. The research effort addresses
challenges at the interface of Geomorphology, Ecology, and Fluid Dynamics. It is
coupled with an education and outreach plan that will foster a STEM-oriented,
school-to-college pipeline for at-risk young boys; and will develop advanced but
accessible educational material for Universities, agencies, and policy makers
dealing with floodplains, wetlands, and coastal areas
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks integration of the various
impacts of aquatic ecosystems in sediment and oxygen dynamics in natural waters.
An extensive experimental study, using quantitative flow imaging, acoustic, and
optical sensors, will fully characterize coupled water-air-vegetation-sediment
interactions, by monitoring turbulent flows, sediment-oxygen demand, and their
impact on gas transfer. The four unique, state-of-the-art laboratory facilities
to be used will recreate unidirectional and oscillatory flow conditions at a
wide range of spatial and temporal scales, representative of streams, wetlands,
and coastal areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.