* 1753650
* DDRIG: Northern Dene Astronomy
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Chris Cannon, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 05/31/2022
* USD 46,186.00

Paragraph 1&lt;br/&gt;The celestial sphere is perhaps the only realm of the
natural world that has not been significantly altered by humans and is one of
the few constants that social scientists have to work with across all world
cultures. The Northern Dene provides one of the best remaining opportunities in
North America to document and describe an Indigenous astronomy system. However,
the proposed research is particularly time sensitive as recent rapid language
shift combined with modern technology has replaced nearly every aspect in which
astronomy was traditionally utilized, leading to the disuse and erosion of
traditional astronomy knowledge systems. Documentation of Northern Dene
astronomy provides a baseline for comparison of Indigenous astronomical
knowledge across cultures, and is thus fundamental to understanding Dene
conceptualization of the cosmos. Dene astronomy also provides insights into
broader aspects of culture, life-way, and cosmology; hence, this research will
be useful by scholars in related disciplines, including linguistics, cognition,
geography, and astronomy. Astronomy also arouses natural curiosity among
Northern Dene communities and the broader public, and thus can be readily
integrated in school curricula and education outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paragraph 2&lt;br/&gt;This project supports
dissertation research with Northern Dene collaborators in order to better
understand Indigenous concepts of astronomy. Although astronomy is a fundamental
component of all Dene cultures, there has so far been no systematic effort to
document Dene knowledge of the sky. Rapid change in traditional land use has led
to this astronomical knowledge being even more endangered than the Indigenous
languages themselves. This study builds on initial research with the Alaskan
Gwich'in to include additional ethnolinguistic groups within the Northern Dene
region. Field work will be conducted in several communities in Alaska and
Canada, working with Northern Dene tradition bearers who have specialized
astronomy knowledge. This study will provide much needed baseline documentation
on Northern Dene knowledge of the sky, while also seeking to understand how
celestial objects and atmospheric phenomena are utilized by the Northern Dene in
cultural contexts, such as in navigation, time-reckoning, weather forecasting,
and cosmology. Specific areas of inquiry related to the uses of Dene astronomy
include: knowledge about stars and constellations, the northern lights, meteors,
comets, atmospheric halos and sun dogs (parhelia), the sun and moon. All
research will be conducted collaboratively with community members. The results
of the research will be incorporated into ongoing community school curricula
development and public planetarium programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.