* 1753167
* CAREER: New strategy to outsmart antimicrobial resistance: Mastering evolution of beta-lactamases catalytic mechanism through reaction pathways alignment, simulation, and analysis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2024
* Peng Tao, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 05/31/2024
* USD 584,262.00

Peng Tao of Southern Methodist University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
Division to develop new computational methods to model and predict the evolution
of beta-lactamase catalytic mechanisms that lead to dangerous antibiotic
resistant strains. How proteins are evolved is a vital question to answer for
all living systems on earth. Previous studies focusing on protein sequences and
structures provided great insight into protein evolution. However, there is a
lack of understanding about functional mechanisms for proteins, especially for
enzymes. This prevents deeper understanding of protein evolution. To meet this
challenge, Professor Tao and his research group are developing an advanced
theoretical framework and computational techniques to connect the evolution of
enzyme sequences and structure to the evolution of their functions, catalytic
activity, and mechanisms. They focus on beta-lactamases as enzymes that
hydrolyze beta-lactam antibiotics and serve as one main cause of antimicrobial
resistance. This work will provide fundamental understanding about the evolution
of beta-lactamases' catalytic mechanisms, and could help develop a new
generation of antibiotics with low resistance. The award also supports the
development of educational materials to boost basic science education and
outreach on social media. These freely accessible materials will benefit and
shape the next generation of interdisciplinary scientists and engineers from
economically disadvantaged student populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
focuses on developing a theoretical framework to describe enzymatic mechanism
landscapes, which are defined as the structural analysis of aligned reaction
pathways of evolutionarily related enzymes using statistical and machine-
learning methods. This theoretical framework is helping to predict how new
mutations in enzymes could lead to changes in catalytic mechanisms and
activities. New computational methods are being developed by Professor Tao and
his research group to explore enzyme structure-function relations and provide
the missing connection between the evolution of protein structure and the
variations in enzyme mechanism that are less amenable to experiment. They are
also developing online-based chemistry education channels and outreach platforms
to enhance general chemistry education through collaboration with teachers from
other schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.