* 1753661
* Resolving the ecological biodiversity of Asgard archaea  and their role in the evolution of eukaryotes
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Brett Baker, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 07/31/2020
* USD 288,928.00

The processes that led to the origin of complex cellular life containing
membrane-bound organelles, characteristic of all plants, animals and fungi,
(i.e., eukaryotes) is still a mystery. Evidence supports the scenario where
cells of different microbial lineages (archea and bacteria) merged to form the
first eukaryotic cell. Recently, genomes belonging to new lineages of life,
collectively called "Asgard" microorganisms, have been discovered. Surprisingly,
the addition of these organisms to the tree of life have revealed a close
relationship to eukaryotes, suggesting they played important roles in the origin
of eukaryotes. Characterization of these genomes has detected genes previously
only seen in more complex cellular life. Because currently none of the Asgard
microorganism can be grown in the laboratory, this project will harness high-
throughput sequencing techniques for a targeted discovery of these
microorganisms from deep-sea sediments. These data will result in a more
comprehensive catalog of Asgard genomes, and will be used to infer their
physiological capabilities and to understand the genetic composition of their
ancestor. This research will provide new insights into the biodiversity and
metabolisms of Asgard microbes in deep ocean floor hydrothermal communities, and
will add fundamental insights into the origin of complex eukaryotic life. This
project will provide research training for undergraduate and graduate students,
and will include outreach to the general public via the South Texas Science and
public lectures at sciene centers in Texas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently,
genomes (Heimdallarchaeota, Thorarchaeota, Odinarchaeota, and Lokiarchaeota
phyla) belonging to the novel archaeal superphylum "Asgard" have been obtained
from several anoxic environments. Surprisingly, phylogenomic analyses revealed
Asgard is closely related to eukaryotes, suggesting that these organisms are
descendants of the ancestral archaeal host. These Asgard phyla contain a variety
of genes that encode for eukaryotic signature proteins (ESPs). ESPs are similar
to eukaryotic proteins involved in a variety of processes including cytoskeletal
formation, vesicular trafficking, protein translocation, and glycosylation,
suggesting that archaea are the origin of some of the cellular complexity of
eukaryotic cells. Because only few Asgard genomes are currently available, this
project aims to do additional high-throughput sequencing and reconstruction of
genomes from deep-sea sediments to obtain a more comprehensive genomic catalog
of the Asgard superphylum. These additional genomes will be used to better
resolve the phylogenetic relatedness of these archaea to eukaryotes. Researchers
will also catalog the full repertoire of ESPs to better resolve their roles in
the origin of cellular complexity. Finally, this project will resolve the
physiological capabilities of these archaea and model the ancestral state of the
Asgards. This will advance our understanding of the physiological capabilities
of the last common ancestor of archaea and eukaryotes. Determining the modern
and ancestral physiological states of these archaea will transform our
understanding of the origin of eukaryotes.