* 1753704
* Collaborative Research: A Seismic Study of Oceanic-Arc Crustal Construction Processes at the Archetypal Andreanof Segment of the Aleutian Arc
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Daniel Lizarralde, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 760,040.00

This project aims to understand how crust is formed in volcanic arcs above
subduction zones. Crustal formation within volcanic arcs is a profoundly
important process that continually replenishes the mass of the continents, whose
constant weathering and erosion provide the source of elemental nutrients that
drive Earth's biogeochemical cycles. Remarkably, the creation of new continental
material and the recycling of material back into the mantle have remained
balanced on Earth over hundreds of millions of years. Understanding this balance
is key to understanding the habitability of the planet. All of Earth's crust is
created from partial melts of the deeper mantle that rise upward and then freeze
to form the crust. The building blocks of continental crust form when water
released from a subducting tectonic plate lowers the melting temperature of the
mantle, creating magma that rises and accumulates in volcanic arcs. The process
of arc-crust formation has been the focus of many studies, but our understanding
of these process is far from a complete. Questions persist because arc processes
are complex and episodic, they occur over a range of spatial scales and depend
on variables such as the age of the subducting plate and the evolutionary stage
of a given arc, which may never reach a steady state. The study location of this
project is the Andreanof segment of the Aleutian arc. Coincidentally, this
location coincides with the epicenter of the 1957 Great Aleutian earthquake, the
third largest earthquake of the last century and with the largest aftershock
zone of any earthquake ever recorded. Active-source seismic techniques will be
used to image the seismic velocity structure of the entire crust along and
across this arc segment to address many of the unanswered questions of arc-crust
formation. These same methodologies can be used to address questions related to
earthquake and volcanic hazards common to volcanic arcs. The education component
of this project will train a cohort of the next generation of scientists in the
acquisition and advance analyses of these types of
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this grant an active-source seismic
experiment will be conducted in the Andreanof segment of the Aleutian arc in
order to study arc-crust formation processes. Many basic questions about arc-
crust formation processes remain, including the source and variability of
primary arc magmas, where and how these magmas fractionate to produce the
characteristic arc geochemical signatures of crustal rocks, the role of water in
all of these processes, the bulk composition of arc crust and its basic
architecture and similarity to continental crust, the forcing functions for all
of these processes and the temporal and spatial variability of those forcings,
and the mass balance of the entire system. Substantial advance can be made by
focused, multi-disciplinary study of an arc segment that has simple, well known
magmatic and tectonic histories, well studied geochemistry, and sufficient
along-strike variability to capture many of the processes that are believed to
control arc-crust geochemical and structural evolution. The Andreanof segment is
one of very few locations that satisfy these criteria. It consists of an intact,
arc massif formed during three identifiable and dated magmatic episodes; it is
only modestly deformed and exhibits along-strike variability in active volcanism
from primarily basaltic in the east to andesitic/dacitic in the west. The
seismic experiment supported by this grant will consist of one transect along
the entire length of the segment and two arc-crossing transects. Multi-channel
seismic (MCS) data, recorded on an 8-km-long streamer, and ocean-bottom seismic
data, with instrument spacings of 10 to 15 km, will be acquired along each
transect, and these data will be analyzed with advanced tomographic and MCS
imaging methodologies to produce seismic velocity and reflectivity images that
will reveal, for the first time, the full crustal architecture of an intact arc
massif at a segment scale. These images will provide estimates of composition
that will inform models of melt emplacement and fractionation, and enable a
number of specific questions to be addressed, including: What is the bulk
composition, thickness and basic architecture of oceanic-arc crust, How are
variations in factors such as primary magma composition and crustal processing
of magmas expressed in bulk arc crustal composition and structure, and What is
the fate of mafic/ultra-mafic cumulates?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.