* 1753680
* Exploring submarine slope failures with seismic data and physical laboratory experiments
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Brandon Dugan, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 04/30/2023
* USD 291,949.00

Submarine slope failures occur on margins worldwide and can lead to damaging
tsunamis both locally and on distant shores. Geophysical data (bathymetric and
seismic) from passive continental margins document that these failures range
from thin (less than 1 m) to thick (greater than 100 m) units, may have moved
100s of km, and can behave like a fluid or a solid. These analyses combined with
numerical models of submarine slope failures suggest the failures are triggered
when shallowly buried sediments are perturbed by an external stress such as a
change in fluid pressure or earthquake-related shaking. Existing borehole
samples and geophysical data provide a snapshot of what the materials look like
after failure and numerical models provide predictions of how failures started,
yet there is a lack of direct observations of the failure process which affects
the final deposits. This project will characterize failure deposits offshore
North Carolina using existing data from the North American Margin Community
Seismic Experiment. A scaled, physical model with a novel triggering mechanism
will be built to create and visualize failure dynamics. The project will advance
process-based modeling techniques to incorporate how initial conditions,
initiation mechanism, and failure behavior are linked. As part of the broader
impacts a graduate student will be trained across multiple disciplines
(seismology, sedimentology, geomechanics and engineering) as part of this
project. Overall, the project will contribute to society by improving risk
assessment for slope failures and tsunami generation along the US coastline.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will integrate existing field data from the
GeoPRISMS-funded Eastern North American Margin Community Seismic Experiment with
laboratory and numerical models allowing for a process-based analysis of slope
failures that links failure type and dynamics to initial conditions and driving
mechanisms including earthquake shaking and fluid pressure changes. Laboratory
experiments will provide a control on initial conditions (sediment type and
properties), fluid pressures (magnitudes and distribution), and earthquake
sources (location and energy) while initiating slope failures and observing
failure dynamics. Numerical models will simulate the processes observed in
nature and provide a means to link lab-scale experiments with field-scale
observations. The project will address the following hypotheses: 1) differences
between seismic velocity profiles within submarine slope failure deposits and
adjacent, unfailed deposits record different effective stress and strength
profiles; 2) effective stress and strength of sediments at the onset of failure
impact the slope failure type and mobilization behavior of failed submarine
sediments; and 3) slope failure trigger mechanism impacts slope failure dynamics
and evolution, which influences their tsunami-generating potential. The overall
project objective is to describe and characterize links between failure type,
deposits, initial conditions, and driving mechanisms, which will increase the
ability to use slope failure deposits in the sedimentary record to evaluate
driving mechanisms. This will improve our ability to understand the history and
distribution of slope failures and their tsunami potential. The project will
also provide constraints on conditions that may produce large tsunami, which can
inform risk assessment for slope failure and associated tsunami
hazard.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.