* 1753238
* CAREER: Lipid Transport in Membranes
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Ursula Perez-Salas, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 04/30/2023
* USD 629,697.00

Non Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In animal cells, a specialized
layer of compounds combine to form what is called a lipid membrane or lipid
bilayer that not only separates the interior of the cell from the outside
environment but also surrounds inner compartments of the cell such as the cell's
nucleus. Communication through these lipid membranes was thought to be primarily
due to protein molecules with the lipid barrier playing a passive role. However,
recent discoveries show that cells tightly control both the protein and lipid
composition of its membranes to perform a broad range of functions. As a result
this creates very unique and uneven distributions of lipids and proteins across
different membranes. These uneven distributions or asymmetries can only occur if
the cell is putting in additional energy because normal temperature driven
effects will tend to mix lipids uniformly. Even more interesting is that if the
cell fails to maintain this asymmetry, the result can lead to disease or even
cell death. In this proposal the researchers want to answer a key question: What
is the energetic cost of maintaining lipid asymmetry? This question has proven
difficult to answer since multiple measurements have given varied results.
Preliminary findings using a unique advanced technique called time resolved
small angle neutron scattering (TR-SANS) was that cholesterol and other lipids
move very slowly across a single membrane, taking tens to hundreds of minutes to
move, or "flip-flop", across the lipid membrane. Our result on cholesterol is
particularly interesting, and controversial, since the consensus is that the
cholesterol moves rapidly through a single membrane - taking less than a second.
Interestingly, it was recently shown that cholesterol itself is very unevenly
distributed across the membrane and, if cholesterol moves fast across the
membrane, this would mean that proteins are working very hard and using more
energy to keep this necessary difference across the membrane. This project will
investigate the movement of lipids and cholesterol across the membrane?s lipid
bilayer. The results of this study will provide direct information of the
factors influencing lipid and cholesterol distribution across biological
membranes and the energetic cost of maintaining this distribution. Understanding
of membrane regulation and dynamics will therefore be greatly enhanced. The
long-term goal of the project is to address the grand challenge of finding key
principles that govern the movement of lipids between and within membranes.
Ultimately this project seeks to connect how membrane structure is maintained,
how the membrane lipids actively engage during signaling processes, and how this
affects their dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings will be communicated
to the scientific community through publications and conference presentations,
and to the public through general science lecture events in local science
museums and libraries. The principal investigator will train undergraduate and
graduate students in STEM fields. In addition, summer outreach research projects
engaging undergraduate students from colleges based in the Chicago area and
whose backgrounds are under-represented in the physical sciences will be
pursued. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award by the Biomaterials program in
the Division of Materials Research to The University of Illinois at Chicago is
to investigate the transport of lipids in membranes. The great variety of lipid
molecules in the cell membrane suggests they play a complex role in cell
function. Distinct lipid composition amongst different membranes within the cell
suggests directed functionality. Within the plasma membrane itself, there is an
asymmetric distribution of lipids between the outer or exocellular facing
leaflet and the inner or cytoplasmic facing leaflet, and the physiological fate
of cells depends on the strict maintenance of this asymmetry. This uneven
distribution is mediated by concrete lipid transport mechanisms whose function
maintains the identities of the different cellular membranes. Identifying and
understanding these mechanisms is currently a subject of intense study. Reliable
values of passive lipid translocation rates are a necessary starting point for a
detailed mechanistic understanding of the lipid distribution landscape in
cellular membranes, and the purpose of this study is to provide
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using an in-situ non invasive technique: time-
resolved small angle scattering, as well as nuclear magnetic resonance as a
complementary technique, the researchers will directly obtain the flip-flop
rates of lipids and cholesterol in membranes and study changes to the rates in
different biological contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Time resolved small angle
neutron scattering (TR-SANS) is a technique with nano spatial resolution capable
of measuring the time dependent population of lipids, distinguished by
deuteration, in vesicles. Deuteration has the advantages of not altering the
chemical identity of the lipids under study, which have been found to have a
profound effect on how they move across membranes. Further, deuteration of
lipids - particularly of cholesterol - will allow probing membranes as complex
as those found naturally in cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings will be
communicated to the scientific community through publications and conference
presentations, and to the public through general science lecture events in local
science museums and libraries. The principal investigator will train
undergraduate and graduate students in STEM fields. In addition, summer outreach
research projects engaging undergraduate students from colleges based in the
Chicago area and whose backgrounds are under-represented in the physical
sciences will be pursued.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.