* 1753915
* Reciprocal effects of adaptation in the brain's motor and sensory systems
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Hannah Block, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 04/30/2023
* USD 563,609.00

This project will investigate the complex interactions between how we perceive
the world around us and how we move within that world. The researchers will test
how learning a new skill affects the information picked up from the world and
how that information, in turn, affects motor learning. Understanding the
relationship between perception and movement control is fundamental for many
fields. Results could contribute to innovations in motor skill training,
including rehabilitation of sensorimotor disorders after stroke and development
of prostheses, as well as to ergonomics, brain-machine interfaces, robotics, and
tele-operations. The project will advance the NSF's educational goals by
encouraging underrepresented students to consider STEM career paths. Five
undergraduates per year will be involved in all aspects of the research,
including at least three women and minorities through partnerships with programs
at Indiana University. The project will also support the expansion of a
neuroscience summer camp developed by the study team for Indiana high school
girls. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To execute a voluntary movement, such as reaching
out to pick up a pencil, the brain must plan motor parameters such as movement
direction and extent. Importantly, the hand's movement will not be correct
unless the brain accurately perceives hand position, obtained through an
integration of visual information, body position sense (proprioception), touch,
etc. This "multisensory integration" is flexible and can change with learning,
just like motor control, but it is not known whether or how these processes
interact. The project will address this question at both the behavioral and
neural levels and asks whether multisensory integration and motor control share
a common sensorimotor map (a model relating motor commands to sensory
consequences). A combination of psychophysics and reaching tasks will indicate
whether multisensory integration and motor learning affect each other at the
behavioral level. Using transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), the researchers
will examine whether connections between sensory and motor areas of the brain
change in strength when subjects learn a new spatial relationship between vision
and proprioception; this would suggest a shared sensorimotor map at the neural
level. Results will inform a theoretical framework of sensorimotor control that
accounts for both multisensory integration and motor
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.