* 1753687
* EAGER: Microscopic Deployment Algorithms to Achieve Macroscopic Objectives for Spatially Distributed Stochastic Networks of Mobile Agents
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Efstathios Bakolas, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 03/31/2021
* USD 150,002.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will study new
ways to control large networks of mobile agents to accomplish a variety of
tasks. The first challenge addressed by this project is to account for
uncertainty in the position and velocity of each agent. This uncertainty can be
caused by inaccurate measurements or imperfect communications. To capture
uncertainty, this project uses probability distributions to quantify the
collective behavior of all the agents. This is called the macroscopic
description of the network. The second challenge addressed by this project is to
find control laws that achieve a desired macroscopic behavior of the network,
using only distributed algorithms and local information. That is, the project
will find rules by which each agent will control its own velocity, based only on
knowledge of a few neighboring agents, but in such a way that a desired
macroscopic probability distribution is obtained. The local dynamic behavior of
the individual agents is called the microscopic description of the network, and
the goal of this project is to find rules for microscopic behavior that give
rise to a desired macroscopic result. An example is the control of a large group
of autonomous mobile robots that pick up and deliver packages across a wide
geographic region. The macroscopic goal is that, for each point in the region,
the probability density of a delivery robot being available should match the
probability density that a package needs to be picked up. For large numbers of
robots, it is impractical to achieve this macroscopic goal by controlling every
individual robot from a single command center. Instead, to avoid prohibitive
requirements for communication bandwidth, information storage, and data
processing, the computational task should be distributed among the individual
robots -- however, the individual robots can only share data with a few nearby
units. The challenge addressed by this project is for the individual robots to
plan their movements based only on this limited local exchange, in such a way
that the entire network of robots spreads out across the delivery region in a
pattern mirroring the customer demand. This project advances the national
prosperity and helps to secure the national defense by improving the ability to
control large networks of mobile robots for commercial applications such as
package delivery, or security applications such as surveillance and
interdiction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The macroscopic deployment problem is
approached in three steps. The first step is to define a single fictitious agent
that captures the macroscopic state of the multi-agent network. This is done by
choosing the mean and the covariance of the individual states of all the
constituent agents of the network to be the statistical quantities that
determine the probability distribution of the state of the representative agent.
Tools from stochastic optimal control theory are then applied to steer the
network towards areas of high importance. The second step is to solve the
microscopic deployment problem for the constituent agents of the network, by
assigning tasks to different agents based on their suitability to accomplish
these tasks. The proposed solution approach is based on a divide-and-conquer
scheme that is centered around a special class of Voronoi-like spatial
partitions (sub-divisions of the workspace of the multi-agent network). The
expected outcomes of this effort will include 1) stochastic control algorithms
for the solution of the macroscopic control problem, 2) partitioning algorithms
for the computation of Voronoi-like subdivisions of the network's workspace, 3)
distributed algorithms for the solution of the microscopic control problem that
leverage the Voronoi-like partitions and Lloyd's algorithm. The third and final
step is to validate the proposed algorithms via a set of experimental
demonstrations that will take place at the facilities for robotics research at
the PI's home department.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.