* 1753857
* SFS for ACES
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Michel Cukier, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2023
* USD 5,046,316.00

National and personal security have become major concerns as we continue to
increase our reliance on technological advancements. The growth of innovation
must mirror the expansion of trained professionals. The University of Maryland
(UMD), a National Security Agency - Center of Academic Excellence in Research
(CAE-R), proposes to lead the challenge of educating the next cyber workforce
through the creation of the Advanced Cybersecurity Experience for Students
(ACES) Program, the first undergraduate honors program in cybersecurity in the
United States. The CyberCorps(R): Scholarship for Service (SFS) program at UMD
will provide a unique opportunity for 36 ACES students earn their Bachelor's
degree with an ACES Minor in cybersecurity, and prepare them to join the cadre
of cybersecurity professionals in the government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ACES
program aims to provide a unique, multidisciplinary education for a diverse
group of undergraduate students of all majors. The curriculum will allow
students to live together, use embedded, state-of-the-art laboratories, and work
collaboratively inside and outside the classroom. In addition to fulfilling
rigorous, required coursework in topics such as Cyber Policy, Psychology, and
Reverse Engineering, ACES strongly emphasizes experiential learning by providing
opportunities for individual and group research projects, as well as academic
term and summer internships. In local middle and high schools, students will
have an opportunity to work in CyberPatriot teams and participate in CyberSTEM
summer camps (day and residential) and cybersecurity awareness workshops. The
SFS program will enhance the university's goal of training a workforce with a
range of talents, backgrounds, and expertise that can meet the cybersecurity
needs of the government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.