* 1753681
* UMBC CyberCorps Program Renewal and Building Research-Based SFS Relationships between Community Colleges and Four-Year Schools
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2025
* Alan Sherman, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2025
* USD 4,238,255.00

The University of Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC), a designated National Center
of Academic Excellence in Cyber Defense Education and Research, proposes to
continue and expand its participation in the CyberCorps(R): Scholarship for
Service (SFS) program to prepare highly-qualified cybersecurity professionals
for entry into the government workforce. UMBC partners with Montgomery College
and Prince George's Community College to support sophomores at these
institutions. As a part of their studies in community college, students will
help solve IT security problems for their county government through a special
applied research course. Then, they will transfer to UMBC to complete their
four-year degrees. UMBC offers students innovative technical research
opportunities, highly qualified faculty, opportunities for professional
exposure, and productive institutional relationships with numerous nearby
companies, agencies, and government laboratories for internships and job
placement. UMBC's approach to cybersecurity education embraces an
interdisciplinary curriculum and innovative pedagogical approaches. The SFS
program funds projects that address cybersecurity education and workforce
development, including funding to award scholarships to students in
cybersecurity. In return for their scholarships, recipients will work after
graduation for a Federal, State, Local, or Tribal Government organization in a
position related to Cybersecurity for a period equal to the length of the
scholarship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SFS scholars at UMBC pursue a range of
degrees: BA, BS, MS, combined BS/MS, MPS, or PhD through existing programs in
Computer Science (CS), Computer Engineering, and through the Masters in
Professional Studies: Cybersecurity, in the Department of Computer Science and
Electrical Engineering. Qualified students from related fields, programs, and
departments also are welcome, including from Electrical Engineering, Information
Systems (IS), Mathematics, Physics, Education, and Public Policy. Dedicated
cybersecurity tracks exist at the undergraduate and graduate levels in CS and
IS. Students at the UMBC Center for Information Security and Assurance have
special opportunities to engage in mentored research projects at partner
organizations, including Northrop Grumman, John Hopkins University Applied
Physics Lab, Department of Defense Cyber Crime Institute, Laboratory for
Telecommunications Sciences, and the UMBC Office of Information Technology. SFS
students participate in research activities within several labs, including the
UMBC Cyber Defense Lab, where current projects include educational cybersecurity
assessment tools, protocol analysis, software defined networks, and high-
integrity voting systems. Each year, all SFS scholars at UMBC engage in a
collaborative applied research study focusing on some aspect of UMBC's computing
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.