* 1753249
* CAREER: Multiscale Mechanics of Fluid Infiltrated Fault Zones- An Integrated Research and Education Plan
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Ahmed Elbanna, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 05/31/2024
* USD 487,991.00

Earthquakes and landslides are among the costliest natural hazards on earth with
hundreds to thousands of lives and millions to billions of dollars lost every
year. The dynamical instabilities responsible for the onset and ensuing
propagation of these events are linked to fundamental physics- friction,
fracture, heating, and compaction- of fluid filled granular materials and rocks
in the subsurface subjected to extreme geophysical conditions. Events like
Tohoku and Chi-Chi earthquakes have conclusively shown that seismic hazard
critically depends on the underlying fault physics including spatial
heterogeneity in hydraulic properties and pore pressure generation. Advancing
frontiers in micromechanical modeling of deformation and failure in fluid
infiltrated geological materials and computational modeling of earthquake
ruptures in heterogeneous fault zones under realistic conditions are the
objective of this study. This provides a pathway for predictive modeling of
these critical phenomena and development of better-informed seismic hazard
models. Blending perspectives from nonlinear mechanics, statistical physics,
numerical methods, and seismology provides a wide range of scientific and
educational opportunities, with impact on natural hazards policy and
preparedness as well as technical training of the future workforce. Central to
this project is building bridges between the geophysics and mechanics
communities using a set of well-coordinated activities including workshops,
conferences, and social media platforms which will lead to cross-pollination of
ideas and nurturing a new class of scientists and engineers with strong
interdisciplinary training. Professional mentoring of undergraduate and graduate
students, especially from under represented communities is a critical component
of the proposed educational plan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
CAREER project is to develop a plan to advance frontiers in earthquake source
physics using an interdisciplinary research and an interdisciplinary educational
approach. Despite the potentially dominating rule of pore fluid pressure
variations in earthquake source nucleation and propagation, the multiscale
mechanics of fluid infiltrated fault zones is not yet fully understood using the
current modeling and experimental techniques. This study will address this
critical challenge by integrating novel theoretical tools from material science,
mechanics and computation and by developing an educational platform that
nurtures a class of students and researchers who are intrinsically motivated in
working on problems bridging geoscience and engineering. The research component
of this CAREER project aims (1) to theoretically investigate the mechanical
response of fluid saturated gouge layers sheared in the presence and absence of
mechanical vibrations using a novel physics-based continuum viscoplasticity
model based on Shear Transformation Zone theory. The model resolves complex
feedback mechanisms between gouge compaction, dilation, pore pressure changes
and shear heating leading to identification and discovery of complex strength
evolution histories in fault zones connected with nucleation and propagation of
nonplanar shear bands and stick-slip instabilities, and (2) to couple this new
fault zone model with the elastic bulk to investigate earthquake rupture
propagation in complex settings using a new numerical technique that couples
spectral boundary integral and finite element methods. The theoretical models
will be validated against a variety of laboratory measurements and seismic
observations available in the literature. The educational component of this
project aims (1) to facilitate and enrich interactions between material
scientists, rock mechanicians and seismologists, through organization of
interdisciplinary workshops and conference symposia, as well as leveraging
social media platforms for disseminating interdisciplinary research products,
and (2) to inspire students, especially minority and female students, to learn
and participate in interdisciplinary research through various outreach
activities, curricular material innovation, and REUs
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.