* 1753225
* CAREER: Carbohydrate Synthesis with Anomeric Nucleophiles
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Maciej Walczak, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 03/31/2023
* USD 649,999.00

With this CAREER award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Chemistry
Division supports the research of Professor Maciej Walczak in the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Colorado in Boulder. Professor Walczak and his
students develop new methods to make carbohydrates. Carbohydrates, the most
abundant biopolymers, are involved in energy storage in the body. They also
control molecular recognition events in the body. This research develops
versatile methods for the synthesis of bioactive glycosides and glycopeptides.
This research enables comprehensive studies on the function of carbohydrates in
biology, and facilitates the preparation of high-value biological compounds and
pharmaceutical agents. The synthetic approaches specifically enable the
preparation of anti-diabetic drugs and anti-tumor antibiotics. Professor
Walczak's group is well positioned to educate and train students from groups
that are underrepresented in science. Outreach activities focus on improving
science awareness in the local communities, specifically through education at
the high school level and public presentations. The education program integrates
efforts at the department and university levels to create a collaborative
community of researchers working at the interface of chemistry and biology.

This research develops versatile new methodologies for the synthesis of
bioactive saccharides, primarily glycosides and glycopeptides. A majority of
known methods to synthesize saccharides focus on substrates in which the
anomeric position is substituted with an electronegative element. This approach
bears several limitations such as substrate dependence, the need for protective
group manipulations, and incompatibility with free alcohol groups. The central
hypothesis of this NSF CAREER award is that configurationally stable anomeric
nucleophiles are engaged in stereospecific (stereoretentive) reactions under
transition metal-catalyzed conditions, forming carbon-carbon and carbon-nitrogen
bonds with high selectivities. These moieties are independent from the nature of
the substrates and catalysts. Capitalizing on these new conceptual foundations,
three specific aims are pursued: (a) the development of cross-coupling reactions
of anomeric boronic acids, (b) the implementation of new chemical methods for
the synthesis of carbon-glycosides, and (c) the development of new methods in
the synthesis of nitrogen-linked glycoproteins. Successful realization of these
aims yields novel umpolung methods that eliminate the critical problems inherent
to the previous approaches. The synthetic approaches also enable the preparation
of anti-diabetic drugs, anti-tumor antibiotics, glycoproteins, and glycopeptides
under standardized and user-friendly conditions. The research program is also
intimately connected with ongoing educational and outreach activities. An
undergraduate course featuring blended learning supplemented by randomized trial
to improve undergraduate pedagogy is being developed and implemented. The
outreach activities focus on mentoring high-school students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.