* 1753951
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Epigenetic age estimation in human bone
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Brenna Henn, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/29/2020
* USD 31,514.00

Age-at-death estimation is central to bioarchaeological and forensic research,
for reconstructing past population demographics and for narrowing down the
identity of individuals from their unidentified remains. Recent advances in
genetics have led to the identification of DNA methylation markers that change
with age and could be used in new methods of age prediction, but generally using
tissue types that are not always available in archaeological and forensic
contexts. In this doctoral dissertation project, samples of human bone across a
range of known ages will be analyzed to determine regions of the genome that
change most reliably with age. These data will be used to develop a method of
predicting an individual's age from their bones, which may show different
patterns of methylation compared with other tissue types. The protocol and
algorithms used in this project will be made freely available online, and the
project will support graduate and undergraduate training and research in a STEM
discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While age-associated changes in DNA methylation
are well known in the field of epigenetics, most research conducted so far has
been in blood and saliva tissues that can be easily obtained from living
individuals. DNA methylation patterns are known to differ significantly between
tissue types, and epigenetic age prediction models developed for a particular
tissue type cannot be automatically applied to another. Therefore, in order to
extend the applicability of DNA methylation-based age prediction to forensic
contexts, more research on specific forensically relevant tissues is necessary.
In this project, the researchers will first generate a genome-wide DNA
methylation dataset from human bone collected through a body donation program.
DNA will be extracted from these bone samples and their DNA methylation levels
will be measured at over 850,000 sites across the genome using a commercially
available array. This dataset will be analyzed statistically to identify
specific regions of the genome that vary in a strong, predictable manner with
age. The DNA methylation patterns at these regions will be used to develop a
statistical model that can accurately estimate chronological age. Finally, a
protocol to target and measure methylation levels at only these highly age-
associated genomic regions will be developed, which will allow the age
estimation method to be applied at a much lower cost&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
grant is jointly supported by NSF and the National Institute of Justice, Office
of Investigative and Forensic Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.