* 1753453
* CRII: CHS: Enhancing Patient-Clinician Communication through Self-Monitoring Data Sharing
* CSE,IIS
* 06/05/2017,04/30/2018
* Eun Kyoung Choe, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 04/30/2018
* USD 98,731.00

This research aims to understand the enablers and barriers in sharing self-
monitoring data collected from the ever-evolving wearable sensing and mobile
health technology. Self-monitoring data can provide good measures of everyday
health behavior that are often not well captured by traditional methods such as
regular visits to clinicians. However, self-monitoring data is largely
underutilized by patients and clinicians due to many obstacles, including
difficulty in data sharing. Current information technology is inadequate for
patients to easily share their self-monitoring data with clinicians. Based on
the understanding of current challenges and design opportunities, novel
information technology will be designed for assisting patients and clinicians to
effectively collaborate and communicate. The long-term goal is to help patients
be active observers and participants in their own care, and assist clinicians
leverage patients' self-monitoring data in their medical decision-
making.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Using human-centered design approaches,
observations and interviews will be conducted with patients and clinicians to
understand how they currently share self-monitoring data. The focus will be on
workarounds and breakdowns. Based on the findings, participatory design and
iterative design approaches will identify design opportunities that can meet
patients' and clinicians' data sharing needs. These efforts will culminate in
the design of lightweight technology probes that enhance our understanding of
how self-monitoring data sharing should be incorporated into health care and
clinical workflow. Successful completion of this research will provide: (1) a
deeper understanding of patients' and clinicians' barriers toward personal
health data sharing and a set of functional design and information requirements
to address the barriers, (2) light-weight technology probes that embody these
requirements based on participatory and iterative design approaches, and (3) a
needs assessment with probes for learning receptiveness toward self-monitoring
data sharing. This research will advance the field of human-computer interaction
and health informatics by deepening our understanding of how self-monitoring
data collected from wearable sensing and mobile health technology can be
incorporated into clinical care.