* 1753810
* A NEIGHBORHOOD APPROACH TO THE BIOGEOGRAPHY OF PUERTO RICAN TREES
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Maria Uriarte, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 05/31/2023
* USD 561,971.00

The geographic distributions of tree species reflects both physical (e.g.,
geology, climate) and biological processes (e.g., competition, herbivory). These
factors do not act independently. For example, the strength of competition among
trees may be stronger in low fertility soils. However, only a few studies have
examined the simultaneous effects of physical factors and biological processes
on tree growth and survival. Such synthesis is central to predicting tree
species responses to environmental change. This is a critical issue in tropical
forests because these ecosystems are experiencing rapid environmental change and
play a key role in regulating global climate. This research will develop a novel
analytical approach to characterize the joint effects of physical heterogeneity
and local biological interactions on growth and survival of tree species across
the island of Puerto Rico. The island has high tree diversity, marked
environmental and climate gradients, and an extensive amount of existing data,
making this an ideal site for this research. Results from this study will inform
the likelihood of success of several USDA Forest Service initiatives to adapt to
rapid environmental change. Existing collaborations between the researchers and
local organizations will facilitate a direct impact on the management and
conservation of Puerto Rican forests. Data will be made available online and
provided directly to local management agencies, including the US Forest Service
and the Puerto Rico Department of Natural Resources. The researchers also will
organize workshops on the analytical methods at Puerto Rican institutions.
Finally, the project will train and employ a Puerto Rican technician and a
postdoctoral researcher, contributing to STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Range dynamics and community assembly reflect
the interactive effects of regional environmental heterogeneity and local
processes. Yet empirical examination of these interactions is rare. The
researchers will develop a novel functional trait-based, spatially-explicit
neighborhood approach to disentangle local effects of environmental
heterogeneity and biotic interactions on tree growth and survival across Puerto
Rico while accounting for individual trait variation. To do so, they will couple
(a) tree trait measurements across species ranges traits, including traits
related to water use strategies, (b) trait-based neighborhood models of tree
growth and survival derived from data collected in 24 mapped plots, and (c)
generalized joint attribute models that characterize species distributions with
respect to regional environmental gradients using herbaria collections. They
will test the following hypotheses: (1) the negative effect of local biotic
interactions on tree growth and survival is highest at the most environmentally
favorable sites for a species, fostering regional coexistence; (2) the spatial
structure of intraspecific trait variation across environmental gradients
fosters such coexistence. Results from this research will empirically examine
the importance of individual trait variation in mediating regional species
coexistence and test the importance of a stabilizing mechanism in promoting
species-coexistence and diversity in tropical forests. The research will lay a
conceptual foundation for future studies that place local community interactions
within a biogeographic context and transform understanding of the environmental
and biotic factors that mediate forest community assembly at regional
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.