* 1753386
* CAREER:Quantum Many-Body Control with Alkaline-Earth Atom-Arrays
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Manuel Endres, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The ability to create and control large-scale, coherent quantum many-body
systems has wide-ranging implications for both technology and progress in
fundamental sciences. It enables the generation and manipulation of
entanglement, which forms the experimental foundation for quantum computers. It
is necessary for quantum simulation, where highly-controlled experimental
implementations shed light on outstanding questions in condensed matter physics,
quantum chemistry, or high-energy physics. And it is an important building-block
for realizing quantum-enhanced metrology schemes at the heart of future atomic
clocks and sensor devices. Here, this project will implement such highly-
controlled, large-scale quantum many-body systems with arrays of ultracold,
alkaline-earth strontium atoms that are assembled and manipulated in an atom-by-
atom fashion with optical tweezers and controlled via ultra-precise clock state
manipulation. This platform has immediate usability in all three major
directions of quantum science: quantum computing, quantum simulation and
quantum-enhanced metrology. The broader impact of this research stems from the
transformative effect that quantum technologies can have on society. Yet,
quantum physics is not a part of basic education. Therefore, a primary goal of
the educational and outreach program is to make quantum physics more accessible
for a broader audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program directly
addresses the 'experimental quantum many-body challenge' by combining elements
of quantum gas microscopes, atom-by-atom assembly, and optical lattice clocks
into a novel experimental platform with unique capabilities. This combination of
features will enable a host of new developments, including novel atomic clocks
based on single-atom control, quantum-enhanced metrology and quantum simulation
schemes based on Rydberg interactions, or the bottom-up assembly of Hubbard and
orbital-exchange models. Finally, this platform can realistically reach defect-
free arrays of hundreds of atoms by implementing scalable atom-by-atom assembly.
The aim is to combine large system sizes, precision control over individual
particles, and coherent control over interaction
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.