* 1753025
* CAREER: Constructing Conjugated Heteroarene Architectures via Ring-Expansion Reactions with Anti-Aromatic Boroles
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Caleb Martin, Baylor University
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 05/31/2024
* USD 669,667.00

Materials that emit light when electricity is passed through them have a myriad
of applications including LED light bulbs, computer displays, and medical
imaging devices. Conversely, materials that generate electricity when exposed to
light are used in applications including solar energy conversion. While there
are a number of materials that have these properties, there is a challenge in
developing ones in which the light that is absorbed or emitted can be tuned to
specific colors. Dr. Caleb Martin, Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry,
Baylor University, is supported by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the
Chemistsry Division, to prepare materials containing boron and phosphorus or
sulfur that function as organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs) and organic
photovoltaics (OPVs). By varying the amounts of these elements the color of
light that is emitted or absorbed can be selectively changed. These light
emitting/absorbing units are incorporated into polymers to form flexible OLEDs
and OPVs that can be used in a variety of applications. This project also
contains outreach efforts through partnerships with non-profit organizations in
Waco that serve low income and homeless students. Interactive activities are
related to the project with the ultimate goal to help increase the post-
secondary enrollment of low income underrepresented minorities pursuing studies
in the STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's goals are to synthesize
boron containing analogues of benzene and other extended aromatic compounds that
feature boron and a lone pair containing heteroatom as valence isoelectronic
substitutes for a C=C unit in the ring. The synthetic route involves a ring
expansion methodology that takes advantage of the lability of the endocyclic
boron-carbon bond in anti-aromatic borole reagents. The electronic properties of
the boron containing heteroarenes are investigated computationally and
spectroscopically with a focus on fluorescence and band gaps for application in
organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs) and organic photovoltaics (OPVs). Due to
the accessibility of the borole reagents, the initial targets are monocyclic
systems with per-aryl substitution. However, in order to decrease the HOMO-LUMO
gap conjugation is being increased by forming polycyclic systems. Through
partnerships with local non-profit organizations for low income and homeless
students, interactive activities that are related to this project are being
organized. The ultimate goal of this outreach is to help increase the post-
secondary enrollment of low income underrepresented minorities pursuing studies
in the STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.