* 1753916
* Thermal evolution of the Earth: the modes of mantle convection in the Precambrian
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Jun Korenaga, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2022
* USD 346,084.00

Plate tectonics is a special class of mantle convection, being observed only on
Earth among terrestrial planets in our solar system. It is responsible for a
vast array of geological processes, from the generation of continental crust to
the modulation of atmospheric composition. Yet, some fundamental questions about
its history remain unresolved: when plate tectonics began on Earth and how it
has evolved through time. This project aims to resolve the likely mode of mantle
convection in the Precambrian (i.e., after the solidification of the putative
magma ocean in the early Earth to the beginning of the Phanerozoic at 540
million years ago), by building a robust theoretical framework and exploring its
implications for geological and geochemical observations. Reconstructing the
evolutionary path of plate tectonics on Earth is one of the most fundamental
geophysical problems, providing a global context for geological, geophysical,
and geochemical processes, and the radius of the potential impact of this
research would cover nearly all branches of solid Earth sciences. Expected
research results should also find their applications in the physics and
chemistry of terrestrial planets at large and are expected to become part of the
theory of habitable planets. This project will provide support and training for
a postdoctoral associate and a graduate student, as well as summer intern or
thesis projects for undergraduates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned research
has the following five major objectives: (1) Establishing a regime diagram of
mantle convection as a function of internal Rayleigh number, the temperature
dependency of viscosity, yielding criteria, and the internal heating ratio, so
that we can estimate how the mode of convection has evolved in the past, (2)
quantifying the relation between quasi-steady-state solutions and transient
situations, in terms of the mode of convection and heat-flow scaling, so that we
can analyze collectively different numerical approaches to the evolving mantle
dynamics in a unifying fashion, (3) understanding 3-D effects on the mode of
mantle convection on the basis of newly-developed scaling laws and published
simulation results, (4) exploring the influence of the thermal evolution of the
core on surface tectonics by a systematic investigation of coupled core-mantle
evolution models, and (5) connecting internal mantle dynamics with surface
observables, such as global sea level, plate velocity, and geomagnetic field
strength, so that we can build falsifiable hypotheses for the evolution of
mantle convection in the Precambrian.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.