* 1753002
* CAREER: Within City, Across Seasons or Across Borders: The Economics of Labor Movements
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2024
* Melanie Morten, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This CAREER research project will study the economic impacts of labor migration
of the poor. The research will use modern sophisticated methods to study the
benefits and costs of labor movements across countries, within countries, and
within cities. Many of the issues associated with labor migration are likely to
increase in the future and understanding the possible spillover effects from
migration is an important concern in the United States and the world. For
example, many large cities in the world are facing congestion and environmental
stress and whether and how to invest in transportation infrastructure is a key
question to be discussed now. Understanding how to develop policies to maximize
the role of migration as a poverty-reduction strategy has great promise for
development around the world. The results of this research will provide guidance
on policy relating to labor markets, urbanization, and international relations,
thus helping the US develop well-informed policies that enhance economic growth
as well understanding the possible spillover effects from migration. This is an
important concern in the United States and the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal contains three interlinked projects to study internal and cross-border
migration. The first project seeks to quantify the heterogeneity in returns to
migration through a two-stage RCT. Prospective internal migrant will be offered
either "low" or "high" subsidies. Some of those who receive "low" subsidies will
be surprised with a "high" subsidy after they have made a migration decision.
The second project will use an observational panel data and a suite of
experiments to study the economic effects and distributional consequences of a
large public transportation investment. The third project develops and estimates
a binational regional spatial equilibrium model of migration focusing on the US-
Mexico border migration using a dataset of Mexico-US migration flows. Providing
quantitative and rigorous evidence of the benefits and costs of migration is
indispensable now when there is increasing urbanization, movement of people
across borders, and migration is a controversial topic world-wide. The proposed
research will generate new datasets and disseminate the research findings. A
theme running through the projects is the incorporation of microeconomic
estimates and RCTs into spatial general equilibrium models. This method that
also involve primary fieldwork data collection, is new and will help develop the
methodology and estimation approaches to make
progress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.