* 1753770
* Collaborative Research: Concurrent Design of Quasi-Random Nanostructured Material Systems (NMS) and Nanofabrication Processes using Spectral Density Function
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Ganesh Balasubramanian, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 07/31/2022
* USD 412,488.00

This award supports an interdisciplinary research to create a novel concurrent
design framework that unifies the design of functional quasi-random
nano/microstructures and the design of nanofabrication processes to accelerate
the development of robust nanostructured material systems with superior
performance. Quasi-random nanostructures are playing an increasingly important
role in developing advanced material systems with various functionalities. These
structures comprise no periodic repetition of identical unit-cells but a
seemingly random material distribution with underlying spatial correlation.
Compared to periodic designs that usually require expensive and time intensive
fabrications, quasi-random nanostructures can be synthesized by low-cost and
scalable manufacturing processes. However, due to the lack of appropriate
computational design paradigms, there is often a mismatch between microstructure
designs and feasible nanofabrication techniques. Although the testbed is focused
on organic photovoltaic cells, this research will establish the applicability of
the approach for a wide range of microstructural systems where the
properties/performance of interest mainly depends on the spatial correlations
instead of local geometries of microstructures. The broad range of potential
industrial and military applications includes bio-medical devices, ultra-strong
materials, consumer electronics, photonics, and telecommunications using nano-
scale structures/devices. The research also offers unique collaborative
experiences for researchers across the fields of design, nanomanufacturing,
materials, and mechanics. Research will be integrated with education through
cross-university teaching and assessment, and co-located and co-advised student
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concurrent design approach creates a shift
from existing deterministic computational materials engineering to non-
deterministic microstructure design that is compatible with the intrinsic
stochasticity of bottom-up nanomanufacturing processes. The key novelty is to
use the physics-aware Spectral Density Function, a non-deterministic
microstructure representation, as the link between the processing-structure and
the structure-performance mappings in the design of engineered material systems.
The approach facilitates rapid exploration of feasible and compatible processing
and structure solutions, with a significantly reduced design dimensionality. An
atomic resolution high-performance computational exploration will be achieved
using coarse grained molecular dynamics to understand the fundamental transport
mechanisms based on the materials processing dependent evolution of the
structural morphologies. The bottom-up fabrication processes and multiscale
imaging techniques created will offer a platform for validation of the approach,
calibration and validation of computational findings, and deep scientific
discovery. Finally, in addition to the intrinsic robustness of quasi-random
nanostructures, the approach offers robust nanostructured material systems
designs considering not only the variations in processing conditions but also
the uncertainty of the computer model itself.