* 1753982
* The impact of co-infection on host and parasite population dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2022
* Ann Tate, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2022
* USD 648,477.00

This project will improve the ability to predict how disease causing parasites
affect their host (animal) populations and whether disease transmission is
altered when different species of parasite occur within the same individual
host, a process known as co-infection. Parasites, by definition, use energy from
the hosts they infect in order to reproduce and spread to new hosts. While
previous research has made great strides in understanding how traits of single
parasite species affect disease transmission, predicting interactions among co-
infecting parasites remains a research frontier. When two parasite species
occupy the same host, the outcome of infection may not be the same as when each
parasite occurs separately, due to interactions between the parasites. This
project will evaluate the consequences of co-infection for host health, the
spread of disease, and host population biology, using a model organism that
impacts food safety in stored grains. Additionally, this project will provide
scientific training and mentoring to high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students; identify factors that affect the agricultural control of pests and
pollinators; and implement an outreach project to recruit women from under-
represented minorities to fields in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers
will use mathematical models and laboratory experiments to evaluate the effects
of parasite co-infection on a flour beetle (Tribolium castaneum) model host
system. The first objective is to determine the mechanisms through which co-
infecting parasites interact in order to evaluate the impact of co-infection on
parasite growth rates and host infection outcomes. The researchers will
manipulate host nutrient acquisition, alter parasite infection routes, and
quantify the impact of co-infection on host immune response using next-
generation mRNA sequencing. This objective will elucidate the importance of top-
down (immune-mediated) versus bottom-up (resource-mediated) ecological
interactions for structuring parasite communities within the host. The second
objective is to quantify the impact of infection order and the strength of
within-host interactions on the transmission of each co-infecting parasite to
new flour beetle hosts, connecting within-host to epidemiological processes. The
final objective is to develop mathematical models of Tribolium population
biology that predict how co-infecting parasites influence host population
dynamics and parasite persistence, based on the experimental data. This project
will provide novel and generalizable insight into the wider ecological context
of co-infection and the impact of dynamical feedback across
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.