* 1753352
* CAREER: Understanding Spatial Heterogeneity in Biofilms Using Colloidal Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Connie Chang, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 06/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many microorganisms, including
bacteria and algae, form thin films on surfaces known as biofilms. Examples of
these include dental plaque, the slime that forms on ship hulls, and wound-
associated infections. Biofilms contain millions of microscopic cells, and the
individual locations of these cells affect their ability to function. For
example, the location of cells within a wound-associated biofilm affects their
ability to resist antibiotics. To understand how cell location affects function,
their locations must be controlled in three dimensions; however, because the
microorganisms within a biofilm are microscopically small, they are difficult to
manipulate at a single cell level. This CAREER award by the Biomaterials program
in the Division of Materials Research to Montana State University, Bozeman,
supports the investigation of biofilm structure and function by building
biofilms from microscopic modules that can be assembled, disassembled, and
analyzed in a controlled manner. This approach will enable researchers to
synthetically construct multi-species biofilms in the laboratory to understand
how bugs communicate, cooperate, or compete. The proposed work will benefit
society as a whole by uncovering the physical mechanisms behind microbial
virulence and antibiotic resistance. This understanding can lead to new methods
that will aid in controlling these persistent, surface-associated microbial
colonies. Impact in the state of Montana will be provided by a "Soft Materials
Shop" (SMASH), which will be used for both outreach and teaching, and will
strengthen the connection of sciences, engineering, architecture, and art on
campus. This space will be the first in the state of Montana and will be
accessible to the public. This proposal will help prepare Montana students for
future careers in STEM using inquiry-based learning strategies and hands-on
demos, educate the public about microfabrication and engineering, and provide
opportunities for outreach that will engage public audiences from youth to
adults. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biofilms are ubiquitous in the natural world, are
formed by nearly all microorganisms, including algae, bacteria, archaea, and can
be both beneficial and harmful. The spatial locations of microbes in a biofilm
impact biofilm function and physiology; however, methods for structuring
biofilms in three dimensions are currently lacking. The ability to synthetically
construct a heterogeneous, multi-species biofilm by placing microorganisms in
discrete locations within a cultivated environment would allow researchers to
bridge this gap and explore how bugs communicate, cooperate, or compete. To
achieve this, colloidal engineering techniques will be applied to place microbes
in spatially organized three-dimensional locations to understand how spatial
heterogeneity influences structure-function relationships in biofilms. The aims
of this proposal are to create monodisperse capsules of gels and shells to
encapsulate microbes, to assemble capsules into three-dimensional structures,
and finally to create modular synthetic consortia of bacteria to explore
questions related to heterogeneity in biofilms. These constructs will be used to
understand how biofilm behavior such as quorum sensing, matrix formation, and
dormancy arises from heterogeneity in biofilms. This CAREER award by the
Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to Montana State
University, Bozeman, will support the integration of soft matter science into
classes, workshops, demonstrations, and tours within a dedicated space called
"SMASH", the creation of K-8 after-school outreach modules, and an
undergraduate/graduate course on "Soft Matter Engineering". This award will
allow for creative, multidisciplinary collaboration, bringing together students
in art, architecture, engineering, and science on campus to create, prototype,
design, and build. The ideas, workshops, and demonstrations created in this
space will be incorporated into current K-8 outreach efforts and extended to
future outreach efforts to introduce soft matter science, a relatively young
area of research, to students and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.