* 1753268
* CAREER: Signal Crosstalk Within Complex Microbial Ecosystems
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* James Boedicker, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Microbial ecosystems in nature are typically composed of hundreds or thousands
of microbial species, heterogeneously distributed in space and time. New
experimental and theoretical tools are needed to develop a predictive
understanding of the regulatory processes that control the outputs of these
complex cellular networks. Current approaches focus on correlations between the
components of the system (such as genetic composition, expression levels,
metabolite concentrations), however such correlations alone are usually
insufficient to develop strategies for robust control of the state and function
of diverse microbial communities. In this project the PI will use multiscale
approach that combines theoretical predictions with precision experimental tests
to quantitatively understand how individual and groups of cells reach decisions
to coordinate global behavior within microbial ecosystems. Tackling modern
societal challenges related to health, agriculture, and the environment will
benefit from a predictive understanding of how multiple components of a network
work together, particularly for complex networks involving many densely
connected components. To inspire the next generation of scientists to take up
problems on the physics of systems and complexity, the PI has partnered with a
local science non-profit to design and implement hands-on learning activities
related to the biophysics of signal exchange. Students will gain an intuitive
understanding of the physical principles that govern cellular networks,
including insight into how network properties emerge from the behavior of
individuals within a population. Themes of this research will also appear in an
undergraduate general education course focused on training undergraduates from
diverse background, including non-science majors, in essential quantitative
skills intrinsic to the physical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will
examine the exchange of variant quorum sensing signals within diverse microbial
networks to understand how signaling interactions between individual strains
give rise to emergent properties of the network. An artificial neural network
model predicts the impact of crosstalk between cell types on system-level
signaling states. The stability of these signal-driven regulatory states will be
examined in both models and experiments to gauge the potential to direct the
outputs of multispecies networks through perturbations of species composition or
signal exchange pathways. This combination of theory and experiment illuminates
how systems-level behaviors such as robustness emerge from the collective action
of multiple cell types working together.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.