* 1753632
* Collaborative research: The Evolutionary Genetics of Pollen-Pistil Incompatibility and Reproductive Isolation in Zea mays
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Yaniv Brandvain, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 12/31/2023
* USD 361,528.00

Because hybridization between plant species often results in offspring with
reduced fitness, it remains a mystery why hybridization persists and is even
fairly common in nature. To address this fundamental question, this research
investigates genes that control the mating compatibility between individuals.
These genes are distributed differently among populations of corn and its wild
ancestor, teosinte. Although these are parts of the same species, Zea mays, they
represent distinct subspecies and some populations of these subspecies
interbreed easily and others do not. This system serves as a valuable genetic
model to investigate the problem of hybridization and especially an overlooked
conflict between males and females of the plant species. While females that
reject pollen from the wrong species avoid producing low quality offspring
(avoiding hybridization), males with pollen that can fertilize, and produce even
low quality offspring with closely related species or subspecies will have
higher fitness (promoting hybridization). By identifying and studying the genes
underlying mating compatibility in this well-studied and economically important
plant, this project may determine the forces that allow or prevent species from
avoiding hybridization. This research combines computational, mathematical, and
genetic approaches to address these questions. The research team will train
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers in California
and Minnesota. They will also develop classroom materials for K-12 students in
California and offer Biomath summer camps for high school girls in
Minnesota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses how interactions between
the pollen and style shape the ability of a plant to reject pollen from the
wrong species. The project also addresses how pollen may overcome this barrier.
The work begins with a population genetic model of this process, and asks which
parameters allow for females to effectively reject pollen from another
subspecies, and which parameters allow pollen to overcome this barrier. A second
component of the work involves the fine mapping of one of the three gametophyte
factors that modulate cross compatibility between populations of Zea mays
subspecies so that the DNA sequence context around all three gametophyte factors
is known. Researchers will then conduct a series of genetic crosses to identify
the frequency of alternative alleles at the gametophyte factor loci in different
sympatric maize and mexicana-type teosinte populations in the Mexican highlands.
Finally, these alleles will be sequenced, allowing the researchers to evaluate
the predictions of their mathematical model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.