* 1753528
* Analyzing NGO Communications to Understand Contestation and Collaboration with Governments Across Human Rights Issues
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Michael Colaresi, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 05/31/2020
* USD 157,600.00

Human rights organizations (HR NGOs), such as the International Committee of the
Red Cross and Amnesty International, use a range of strategies to improve human
rights and social conditions around the world. Some strategies take the form of
overt and direct criticism of states to punish and deter repression of citizens,
known as "naming and shaming". Other strategies involve positive cooperation
with governments to change legal and de facto protections of rights and
freedoms. To date, we know little about which strategy is more effective,
because systematic research on this topic has ignored direct collaboration
between these organizations and states. Instead, there has been a recent
explosion in the number of social science studies examining the efficacy of
contentious strategies. This research will provide new insight into whether such
cooperative strategies are an effective means to improve human rights and social
conditions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is the first to analyze the
large-scale digital communications from human rights non-governmental
organizations (HR NGOs) to understand the specific issues and contexts where
cooperation can be successfully implemented. The researchers will demonstrate
the usefulness of this approach through quantitative text analysis procedure
analyzing a wide range of digitally available information (i.e. press releases,
published reports, newsletters, and social media posts from multiple HR NGOs).
These are an especially rich source of information as they contain both
cooperative and confrontational signals to states. The research team plans to
build theoretically informed models that predict 1) the issues and circumstances
that provide incentives for government-HR NGO partnerships versus public
criticism known as "naming and shaming," and 2) when particular HR NGO
strategies ultimately lead to the desired changes in state behavior. This
research has the potential to enhance the well-being of society by providing a
better understanding of strategies that improve human rights performance around
the world. It is also poised to make an important contribution in helping to
foster collaboration between the social sciences and other STEM disciplines.