* 1753965
* Ecosystem response to the repeated interaction of disease and fire
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2023
* David Rizzo, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 05/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

This award focuses on the long-term study of interactions between fire and a
forest disease, Sudden Oak Death, in the Big Sur region of California. While
fire is an important part of the ecology of healthy California forests, Sudden
Oak Death is a recently introduced disease that has killed millions of trees in
coastal California over the past 20 years. Disease-killed trees serve as fuel
and may increase the risk for the ignition, spread, and increased intensity of
wildfires. While fire and disease both cause extensive tree death, each
disturbance type results in different types of impacts and recovery of forests.
To that end, the proposed research seeks to determine how multiple, and altered,
disturbances interact to determine the composition of the regenerating plant
community and shape the severity, frequency, and timing of future disturbances.
The threat of wildfire plays a major role in policy decisions in many
communities throughout California and the western United States. The cost of
fighting wildfires has increased dramatically as more people live in locations
in and near forests. Understanding how disease and fire interact to impact
forests is important in fighting fires, protecting communities, and in aiding
the recovery of forests after catastrophic fire and disease
outbreak.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Disease-fire interactions in Big Sur forests will
be examined across an 80,000 ha plot network that was established in 2006 to
study Sudden Oak Death. Large fires burned across the plot network in 2008 and
in 2016, providing an opportunity to study disease-fire interactions at a very
large scale. Initial results from the Big Sur plot network indicate that these
forest ecosystems are moving toward novel disturbance regimes with complex
interactions between disease and fire, impacting tree and shrub species that are
otherwise resilient to either disturbance. Increases in wildfire severity due to
the presence of disease can increase mortality of tree species not susceptible
to disease, alter forest assemblages and biogeochemical cycles, and ultimately,
create the context for how the joint disturbances of fire and disease and will
re-emerge across the landscape. The research approach includes monitoring the
vegetation, pathogens, and soil nutrients of the long-term field plots,
laboratory quantification of pathogens, as well as statistical modeling. The
proposed research plan anticipates that the dramatic tree mortality due to
Sudden Oak Death in Big Sur will continue for many years, thereby influencing
fuel loading and subsequently natural fire regimes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.