* 1753282
* CAREER:  Mesoscale Aggregation and Interfacial Dynamics in Ionic Liquids
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Joshua Sangoro, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2023
* USD 637,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A)
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Joshua Sangoro of The University of
Tennessee, Knoxville is using advanced experimental techniques to study the
structure of ionic liquids, which are liquids composed of positive and negative
ions. Unlike ionic solids (such as table salt, Na+ Cl-), the fluid form of ionic
liquids (also called molten salts) makes them potentially useful for a variety
of technological applications, such as batteries, fuel cells and the solvents
for the synthesis of other molecules. Just as liquid water actually contains
areas that are ice-like in their ordering, ionic liquids can also possess local
ordering of ionic molecules. The extent of ordering in ionic liquids influences
their physical properties (e.g., density, viscosity, ability to conduct
electricity). Professor Sangoro and his team seek to understand how ions
organize in the liquid state, how long the arrangements persists, and how these
arrangements are changed by interfaces such as the ionic liquid-air interface,
or the interface between the liquid and a metal surface(where the metal may be a
catalyst or an electrode for chemical reactions). The Sangoro group uses x-ray
and neutron scattering techniques and a technique called broadband dielectric
spectroscopy to obtain information about the structure and behavior of ionic
liquids. This information may aid in the development of new clean energy and
battery technologies. The main goal of the educational and outreach plans is to
increase student interest in, exposure to, and preparation for careers in
science and engineering, with specific focus on minority students. Professor
Sangoro organizes mentored research experiences for high school students from
underrepresented/minority and economically disadvantaged local groups, by first
introducing engineering undergraduate students to research within the first two
years of college. The research group partners with established NSF-funded
outreach programs at the University of Tennessee to attract and retain
engineering students from underrepresented groups, providing new research and
training opportunities to graduate, undergraduate, and high school students in
order to provide state-of-the-art research opportunities. Professor Sangoro
engages in individualized mentoring for selected K-12 students from
underrepresented groups in the economically disadvantaged groups living in the
East Knoxville area. This CAREER grant enables the research team to provide
hands-on training to both graduate and undergraduate students as well as high
school students who may go on to become future scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on understanding the impact
of mesoscale organization on interfacial ion dynamics in bulk and confined
molecular ionic liquids. Upon systematic variation of the chemical composition
of ionic liquids, the mesoscale organization and dynamics are probed by x-ray
and neutron scattering, dynamic mechanical spectroscopy, and broadband
dielectric spectroscopy. These complementary techniques enable the correlation
of mesoscale structures, and an understanding of their dynamics and the
resulting physical and chemical properties of ionic liquids. The second emphasis
of this research project is on elucidating the correlation between of mesoscale
organization and dynamics within the electrochemical double layers in molecular
ionic liquids. This effort involves development of a new theoretical model to
describe the processes associated with accumulation of ions at interfaces
between ions and solid electron conductors. The third thrust of the project
focuses on experiments to understand the impact of geometric confinement on
mesoscale organization and dynamics. To achieve this, silica nanopores with mean
diameters as small as 4 nanometers are prepared through electrochemical etching
and filled with systematic series of ionic liquids. The interactions between
ionic liquids and the pore walls are intentionally varied while measuring the
dynamics associated with the ions. The series of experiments and computations
leads to a molecular-level understanding of the influence of mesoscopic
organization on interfacial ion dynamics and transport in bulk and confined
molecular ionic liquids. The fundamental understanding gained from these studies
enables rational development of more efficient systems of ionic liquids for
different applications including uses in electrochemical power sources and
devices. The broader impacts of this work include potential societal benefits
from an increased understanding of ionic liquids, as well as training of
students and postdoctoral associates in fundamental science underlying many
electrochemical energy technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.