* 1753730
* RUI: Adult Compensatory Plasticity in an Invertebrate Sensory System
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Hadley Horch, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 07/31/2023
* USD 800,000.00

Non-Technical Paragraph:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most important
questions in neuroscience is how flexible nervous systems remain as they age. In
young organisms, nervous systems are highly plastic; neural cells can change
their shape and their function. Older nervous systems tend to be less flexible,
and large-scale reorganizations are unusual. This research examines adult
plasticity in neural circuits responsible for hearing in crickets, which can
regrow and rewire auditory neural connections after damage. This plasticity
produces functional recovery of hearing loss that is variable among individual
crickets. The goal of this project is to understand the mechanisms that govern
this type of plasticity, and to explain the variability in functional recovery
among individuals. Because these same or similar mechanisms exist in a wide
variety of organisms, what is learned from these cricket experiments will be
generally applicable to circuits in other organisms. The broader scientific
impact of the work will be its contribution to a deeper understanding of the
mechanisms of adult nervous system plasticity and how this knowledge can be used
to promote functional recovery after nervous system trauma. This work will also
have important educational impacts both at Bowdoin College and within Maine.
Undergraduates will be active participants in the proposed scientific research,
and a special effort will be made to identify, support, and retain students from
underrepresented groups. In addition, the PI and her students will participate
in annual STEM outreach activities at local elementary schools and with Wabanaki
middle school students, widening the societal impact of the
funding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Paragraph:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
persistent question about nervous systems is how plastic they remain as they
mature. This research project focuses on one of the rare examples of large-scale
anatomical plasticity seen in adulthood. The adult auditory system of the
cricket Gryllus bimaculatus demonstrates profound structural plasticity after
the loss of an ear, consisting of large-scale growth and branching of dendrites
and axons. These changes result in wavelength-specific physiological recovery
that compensates for the loss of the ear; the extent of recovery in different
crickets is highly variable. The PI and her students will test the hypothesis
that the extent of anatomical sprouting correlates with recovery, as seen in the
strength of physiological responses to auditory stimuli and to behavioral
indications of auditory system recovery. The extent of recovery within
individual animals will be assessed by testing negative phonotaxis,
electrophysiological responses of auditory neurons to sound, and quantifying
dendritic and axonal changes in auditory neurons. Bayesian statistical modeling
will be used to analyze the data across these levels. Experiments will test
whether it is possible to manipulate form and function by altering semaphorin
signaling. DsRNA will be used to manipulate sema and plex levels, and any
resulting changes in morphology, physiology and behavioral function will be
assessed. Given the evolutionary conservation of neuronal strategies for
development and plasticity, what is learned from these experiments using G.
bimaculatus will be applicable to deafferented circuits in a wide variety of
other organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.