* 1753260
* CAREER: High-Dimensional Geometry and Its Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Galyna Livshyts, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 01/31/2024
* USD 425,000.00

The project is in the area of High-dimensional Geometric Analysis, which
comprises a family of relatively new and very active areas of mathematics,
arising at the interface of Harmonic and Functional Analysis, Convex Geometry
and Probability. The primary focus of these areas is the study of high-
dimensionality; the consideration often focuses around geometric objects such as
convex bodies and hypersurfaces, convex and concave functions, as well as random
vectors with certain geometric characteristics. Our experience in low dimensions
seems to suggest that when the dimension becomes very large, the geometric
properties of objects become more and more complicated and difficult to study.
However, many nice, and sometimes surprising, properties arise in high
dimensions. Such properties are informally called ``high-dimensional
phenomenon''. The study of this phenomenon has been crucial for many
applications in computer science, in particular in questions regarding the speed
of certain algorithms, as well as in data science. The educational component of
this project focuses on supporting junior researchers, with the particular
emphasis placed on encouraging female mathematicians. The principal investigator
will organize two workshops for junior researchers, featuring research
discussions during allocated time, and short lecture courses by leading experts
in the field. These workshops are designed to help junior mathematicians to
develop new interests and create new collaborations. In addition, a seminar for
women in mathematics in Northern Georgia is run by the principal investigator
jointly with Yulia Babenko from Kennesaw State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator has been working on
several aspects of the geometry in high dimensions. An important direction of
this project concerns the study of the inequalities of Brunn-Minkowski type.
More specifically, the intriguing question is how those inequalities improve
under certain symmetry and convexity assumptions. The techniques involved in
studying such questions involve ideas from Harmonic Analysis and Convex
Geometry. In addition, the principal investigator shall continue to study small-
ball inequalities and their applications to Information theory. One of the
important objects studied by the principal investigator in the past is the noise
sensitivity of distributions with respect to convex sets, and the principal
investigator shall continue to study this quantity and its relations to the
central problems in the field. Finally, a different aspect of the project
concerns combinatorial properties of convex sets, such as the illumination
number. The principal investigator has studied this number in the past, and is
working on improving current known estimates on this quantity.