* 1753611
* Collaborative Research: NSF/SBE-BSF: The neural mechanisms of language transfer in morphological learning
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2021
* Vedran Dronjic, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 04/30/2021
* USD 53,450.00

The ability to communicate in a second language is of critical importance in
today's global society. But learning a second language as an adult is hard,
especially when it is very different from one's first language. This study will
examine whether greater similarity between the first and second language 1)
facilitates learning in the second language and 2) effects the brain processes
that underlie learning. English speakers and Hebrew speakers are compared on
their ability to learn words in a "new" language, created by the investigators,
that shares features with both English and Hebrew. The investigators use
functional brain imaging to examine whether learning familiar language features
uses different brain systems than when learning unfamiliar language features.
The study will also examine the effect of variability in the training items on
learning. High variability involves training many different words with similar
features whereas low variability training involves repeating fewer words more
times. More broadly, the results will uncover aspects of the brain basis for
second-language learning and will inform methods for improving second-language
instruction. The project will integrate research and education by providing
training to students at all levels from undergraduate to postdoctoral and
includes a visiting scholar program between the US and Israel. The investigators
will also hold workshops on second language learning for local professionals in
both countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to our
understanding of the role of domain-general principles of learning and
consolidation in second-language acquisition. It will examine the relative
involvement of mediotemporal and neocortical learning mechanisms in the
acquisition of a second language, depending on the presence of pre-existing
experience with similar abstract linguistic structures in the first language.
The structure of words varies across languages. In Hebrew, many words have a
three-consonant root, such as the word perax (meaning "flower"), which contains
the root p-r-x (meaning, "to bloom"). In contrast, most complex English words
contain a base and an affix. For example, piglet contains the base "pig" and the
affix "let." This study will shed light on the role of compositional processes
in second-language learners and suggest a mechanism by which transfer from the
first language may affect such compositional processes. Differences in the
linguistic properties, such as morphological structure of the two languages, may
influence the neurocognitive basis of learning. Finally, parameters that can
improve learning and enhance extraction of morphological regularities from new
words will be examined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by a
partnership between the National Science Foundation and the U.S.-Israel
Binational Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.