* 1753900
* Renewal of the Scholarship for Service Program at the University of Alabama in Huntsville
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2025
* Sara Graves, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 06/30/2025
* USD 6,461,437.00

The University of Alabama in Huntsville (UAH), a designated National Center of
Academic Excellence in Cyber Defense Education and Research, proposes to
continue and expand its participation in the CyberCorps(R): Scholarship for
Service (SFS) program to prepare highly-qualified cybersecurity professionals
for entry into the government workforce. UAH partners with Calhoun Community
College, Northeast Alabama State Junior College, and Snead State Community
College to support sophomores at these community colleges for one year, and for
two years of additional support at UAH to complete a bachelor's degree. UAH has
dedicated programs to place SFS students into government service including the
Students Working at the Army in Parallel (SWAP) and the Cyber Force Incubator.
These programs work closely with local government agencies to identify workforce
needs, prepare students, and connect students to internships and post-graduation
positions. Former SFS graduates work in cybersecurity positions at the US Army,
the Missile Defense Agency, Army Corps of Engineers, NASA, and Federal Bureau of
Investigation. The SFS program funds projects that address cybersecurity
education and workforce development, including funding to award scholarships to
students in cybersecurity. In return for their scholarships, recipients will
work after graduation for a Federal, State, Local, or Tribal Government
organization in a position related to Cybersecurity for a period equal to the
length of the scholarship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SFS program at UAH
introduces cybersecurity topics into the curriculum from the freshman experience
through graduate work in the context of specific courses, such as database
systems and operating systems. Many of the courses include practical experiences
to provide students with real-world learning opportunities. The program is
supported by a network security lab in the Department of Computer Science, a
Safety and Security Lab in the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, and a Digital Forensics Lab in the College of Business. An active
learning philosophy is used during laboratory activities to help students
acquire and retain skills. There are more than a dozen research centers at UAH
that offer opportunities for SFS student research including security of big
data, SCADA security, network security, cybersecurity business processes,
safety, aviation security, digital forensics, and automotive security. A variety
of programs at UAH support the pipeline of its SFS program, as degrees are
offered in Electrical and Computer Engineering, Computer Science, Cybersecurity,
and Information Systems. UAH is also able to draw students with different levels
of academic background including community colleges, undergraduate, Master's
programs, and PhD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.