* 1753154
* CAREER: Functional Dissection of Ubiquitination Signaling by Quantitative Chemical Proteomics
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Yue Chen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 02/29/2024
* USD 650,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Yue Chen from the University of Minnesota to investigate
a specific cellular signaling pathway using an innovative new methodology
called, quanititative chemical proteomics. Ubiquitination is a modification of
proteins with a number of biological functions including signaling. For example,
when DNA is damaged, ubiquitination plays a critical role in activating specific
response pathways to initiate DNA damage repair. A newly developed quantitative
chemical proteomics approach is applied to reveal just how this takes place.
Experimental studies are expected to identify novel ubiquitination-dependent
regulatory mechanisms and find previously unknown enzymatic activities in DNA
damage response. During the project, undergraduate biochemistry students train
with interdisciplinary techniques in chemical synthesis and quantitative
proteomics through a fully integrated chemical proteomic training program.
Additional outreach programs promote biochemistry education for high school
students through specifically designed field learning
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research projects integrate the new
isotope-encoded stoichiometry analysis method and chemical proteomics strategies
to functionally dissect ubiquitination signaling pathways. Compared to the
traditional relative quantification, this approach enables site-specific
absolute quantification of ubiquitination prevalence and, therefore, allows the
identification of ubiquitination targets that are stoichiometrically activated
in specific biological processes. This strategy is applied to determine the
dynamic activation of ubiquitination signaling during DNA double-strand break.
Temporal dynamics analysis and functional validation reveal key regulatory
ubiquitination targets that are critical for the activation of specific response
pathways. In vitro and in vivo quantitative analysis determine the substrate
dynamics and specificities of important ubiquitination E3 ligases in double-
strand break and repair. Overall, these studies provide mechanistic insights
into the ubiquitination-mediated signaling and regulatory pathways in DNA damage
and response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.