* 1753021
* CAREER: Interfacing Spins with Photons - Quantum Many-Body Physics with Non-Local Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Monika Schleier-Smith, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 838,729.00

The forces between particles are typically local, decreasing in strength with
increasing distance. Locality restricts the forms of matter that we find in
nature - and harness in technology - to be far less varied than what the laws of
physics theoretically allow. For example, while quantum mechanics permits
information to be stored in correlations shared between distant particles, it is
more natural to store information in individual local "bits." In this project,
to explore the full potential of quantum mechanics, this team will engineer
forces that act non-locally, letting photons carry information between massive
particles at light speed. Potential impacts include discovering new states of
matter and enabling new approaches to computation and precision
sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments will be conducted in a model system
composed of laser-cooled atoms, which can be understood abstractly as spins or
qubits. Effectively non-local interactions will be induced by strongly coupling
the atoms to light in an optical resonator. This team will engineer and probe a
variety of spin models, including an Ising model featuring a phase transition in
computational complexity. They will examine how the structure of interactions
influences quantum correlations and dynamics. They will also entangle atoms in a
controlled fashion, comparing coherent and dissipative approaches to harnessing
atom-light interactions for many-body quantum state preparation. High-resolution
imaging will enable detailed characterization of quantum
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes an educational component with
two key objectives. One educational objective is to develop activities
introducing high-school students to cutting-edge topics in quantum science, with
an eye towards broadening participation in physics. Undergraduate students will
develop and convey these activities, thereby also serving as mentors and role
models. A second objective is to assess the impact of applying a student-
centered, active learning approach in an advanced undergraduate course
(statistical mechanics), in lieu of traditional lectures where students watch
the professor derive complex equations on a
blackboard.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.