* 1753656
* The Fast and Slow Response of the Hydrological Cycle
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Brian Soden, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 03/31/2022
* USD 539,210.00

The hydrological cycle, besides being responsible for the formation of clouds
and producing rainfall, is a key component of the atmospheric energy cycle that
links surface cooling via evaporation to atmospheric heating via latent heating
release in the atmosphere. Changes in atmospheric water vapor and clouds due to
changes in the hydrological cycle also alter the surface-atmosphere exchanges
via changes in absorption and reflection of the incoming solar energy and in
emission of infrared radiation. Changes in the amount of rainfall and the
frequency of heavy rain events have been observed over the last century. These
changes are, in part, a result of human emission of greenhouse gases. Increasing
levels of carbon dioxide, aerosols, and other greenhouse gases causes warming of
the surface and atmosphere, which in turns leads to more evaporation from
(ocean) surfaces and increases of the amount of moisture and clouds in the
atmosphere, as well as more rainfall. The extra heat transferred away from the
surface associated with the strengthening of hydrological cycle warms the
atmosphere further. This together with the stronger greenhouse effect due to
more moisture in the atmosphere leads to a stronger emission of infrared
radiation to the surface, which compensates the surface warming reduction due to
stronger evaporation. These changes can occur on both slow (years to decades)
and fast (days to months) timescales. It is these changes in the flow of energy,
not the increase in moisture, that causes rainfall to increase globally in
response to increasing greenhouse gases. Thus, in order to fully understand and
predict future changes in rainfall requires a better understanding how the
transfer of energy between the surface and atmosphere will change in a warmer
climate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses an innovative method of
computing the effects of an increase in greenhouse gases and aerosols, and a
warmer and more humid climate, on the flow of energy between the surface and
atmosphere. Through this new method, termed radiative kernels, the individual
contributions of different processes can be isolated and their contributions to
the changes in precipitation quantified. In doing so, this research will provide
a better understanding of the physical mechanisms that underlie model
projections of future precipitation change. In particular, this research strives
to better understand the cause of disparities between different model
projections of rainfall change and use this information to improve models and
ultimately provide more reliable projections of future
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of the role of rainfall in determining the
availability of fresh water and agricultural food production, changes in its
amount, distribution or intensity have significant impacts on people and the
environment. In addition, changes in the occurrence of heavy rainfall events
alters the frequency of floods, which cause damage to infrastructure, loss of
property, and loss of life. Predicting future changes in rainfall that stem from
changes in climate therefore represents a key scientific challenge with
important societal benefits. The knowledge gained from this research will
ultimately lead to both a better understanding of the underlying physical
processes that govern rainfall change and improved predictions of future
rainfall change. By increasing the reliability of long term projections of
changes in rainfall, this project will help decision makers plan for adequate
adaptation and mitigation strategies that, in turn, lessen the cost and
consequences of future changes in climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.