* 1753098
* CAREER: Catalysis and Oxygen Atom Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Laina Geary, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2023
* USD 524,681.00

The development of new ways to make chemicals from readily available materials
impacts the pharmaceutical, agrochemical, and materials industries. The research
led by Dr. Laina Geary of the University of Nevada, Reno is developing new
reactions to minimize waste in these processes. These goals are being met by
using a type of reaction known as oxygen atom transfer. These reactions are
being used to make carbon-carbon bonds in new ways. Mechanistic insights are
further leveraged to design new processes. This research is being conducted by
students from the high school to the postdoctoral level. New laboratory courses
at the undergraduate level are also designed to integrate lessons from the
research to the classroom. New mentoring programs foster collaboration between
students at high school, undergraduate and graduate levels and train students to
be better teachers, mentors, and science advocates.

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr.
Laina Geary of the University of Nevada, Reno (UNR) is developing methods to
forge new carbon-carbon bonds, which are driven by the shuttling of oxygen atoms
via transition metal catalysis. Current methods typically utilize high molecular
weight materials as oxygen sinks or donors, significantly increasing waste and
compounding the purification process. The application of low molecular weight,
gaseous molecules in lieu of those oxygen sources provides an attractive
alternate to reducing waste, and exposes a new mechanistic manifold upon which
new methods are being developed. This program is developing both reductive and
oxidative methods based on transition metal catalyzed oxygen atom transfer that
is enabling the conversion of abundant, feedstock materials into new, valorized
compounds. In support of the broader impacts of this research program, Dr. Geary
is spearheading UNR's efforts to support underrepresented high school students
in STEM fields. She is also developing programs that increase research
engagement and scientific advocacy across high school, undergraduate and
graduate levels of education.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.