* 1753383
* CAREER: Probing Oxygen-Mediated Electrochemical Processes of Oxides at High Spatial and Temporal Resolution
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Min Hwan Lee, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 514,144.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Solid oxide fuel cells - devices that produces
electricity directly from oxidizing a fuel - are considered routes for clean and
efficient energy conversion. Since the performance of these devices is largely
determined by the kinetics of the oxygen-based electrochemical reaction
occurring at the air electrode, intense efforts have been made to improve the
electrode performance and better understand it on a fundamental level. While
each elementary process of the reaction is intrinsically a nanoscale phenomenon
dictated by local material properties and geometry, the electrochemical
properties have been mostly analyzed through bulk (volume-averaged)
measurements. To obtain a breakthrough in electrode design, a more thorough
understanding of the process at the nanoscale is needed. This project aims for
new insights about the electrochemical reactions through in situ nanoscale
observations, which is enabled by a novel scanning probe microscopy type
instrument. This project is training undergraduate and graduate researchers
(including underrepresented minority students) for their future employment in
the energy technology sector. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The
performance of solid oxide fuel cells and electrolyzers are largely affected by
the kinetics of oxygen reduction/evolution reactions (ORR/OER). While intense
efforts have been made to understand the underpinning mechanisms of the
reactions, nanoscale processes during the reaction are largely unknown. This
project aims to advance the understanding of ORR/OER processes through in situ
nanoscale observations by leveraging a novel scanning probe-based setup with a
microscale heater. There are three significant aspects of this research: 1)
demonstrating a new high temperature scanning probe-based approach for in situ
nanoscale characterizations of electrochemical surface reaction and charge
transport kinetics under operating oxygen activities; 2) pioneering a novel
time-resolved nanoscale characterization of thermally-activated processes; 3)
providing deeper insight regarding the ORR/OER and related charge transport at
the nanoscale. The project provides extensive research opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students, enhances curricula by incorporating
research into seminars and courses, and promotes effective education for K-12
students from the local and surrounding rural communities in the Central Valley
through the on-campus Engineering Service Learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.