* 1753974
* Collaborative Research: SG: Early evolution of the modern North American freshwater fish fauna: New Late Cretaceous sturgeons, paddlefishes, bowfins, and teleosts from North Dakota
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Eric Hilton, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 04/30/2023
* USD 46,872.00

The Late Cretaceous, from 100 million to 65 million years ago, was a time of
great change for the freshwater fishes of North America. Many older groups of
fishes were going extinct and being replaced by modern groups. But where did the
modern groups come from, and how and why did they replace the older groups?
These questions, among others, are unanswered because the fossil record of
fishes from this time period is extremely poor. This project analyzes newly
discovered, complete fossilized skeletons of freshwater fish from a critical
time period (72-66 million years ago). These fossils are extraordinarily well-
preserved, providing a rare glimpse of complete skeletons. This project will
fill a critical gap in understanding the origin and evolution of modern
freshwater fish. In addition to the scientific merit of this project, there are
several broader impacts. First, the fossils to be described are deposited in
publicly accessible natural history collections, thereby ensuring that they are
available in perpetuity to the scientific community. Second, student training
programs developed around the preparation and analysis of the fossils provides
valuable research and training for budding scientists. Third, results from this
study will be published in scientific articles and presented at professional
meetings and seminars for public audiences. And finally, by using the resources
available at the Field Museum of Natural History in Chicago, the project will
increase public understanding of science. All specimens will be prepared in a
lab where active preparation and study of the specimens can be observed by the
more than 1.2 million annual visitors to the Field Museum, including many K-12
student groups and teachers, and a temporary exhibit of this exquisitely
preserved fossil fish fauna will add an important component to current exhibits
at the Field Museum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the modern freshwater fish
fauna of North America has been intensively studied, its origin, biogeography,
and evolutionary history are still poorly understood, due in part to a lack of
whole-body fossils from Cretaceous freshwater deposits, particularly those
containing articulated skeletons. This study uses exceptionally well-preserved
fossil fish from a recently discovered lagerstatten in the Maastrichtian Hell
Creek Formation of North Dakota, to illuminate the transition between the early
Mesozoic (consisting of extinct orders and families) and the modern freshwater
fauna. Recently discovered blocks containing the articulated, complete skeletons
of many freshwater fish have been acquired by the Field Museum for preparation
and analysis. All fossils will be described and illustrated using a combination
of detailed photographic documentation of all aspects of the anatomy of the
species with matched line drawings clearly showing the interpretation of the
morphology. These data will form the basis of original morphological
descriptions, character conceptualization, and phylogenetic and comparative
analyses of key fish lineages present in the blocks, including the
Acipenseridae, Polyodontidae, Amiidae, Lepisosteidae, and possibly
Teleostei.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.