* 1754126
* RCN: INCyTE: Investigating Nutrient Cycling in Terrestrial Ecosystems: Integrating Observations, Experiments, and Models
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* William Wieder, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,912.00

Very few ecosystems are fertile enough to support high rates of plant
productivity. This is not due to lack of carbon dioxide, whose concentration in
the atmosphere has been on the increase. Rather, it is due to the growth-
limiting effects caused by the lack of other available nutrients in soil,
especially nitrogen and phosphorous. Nevertheless, computer ecosystem models
used to estimate the response of plants to increases in atmospheric carbon
dioxide predict that this environmental change will result in more rapid and
abundant plant growth globally. Such models fail to incorporate the effects of
other limiting nutrients on plant growth. This project will bring together
experimental scientists and computer modelers to explore the effects of
nutrients on plant growth, determine whether nutrient supplies are adequate to
promote the growth predicted by models, and decide how to best represent the
effects of nutrients in global computer models. Research coordination via this
network is important for establishing how the carbon cycle is likely to change
in response to global environmental change, with important implications for soil
fertility and agriculture. The project will train multiple early career
scientists, foster a number of diverse international collaborations, and engage
with broad audiences using multiple scientific and social media
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Research Coordination Network
(INCyTE) will bring together two communities that historically have not
interacted closely: biogeochemical experimentalists and earth system modelers.
The overarching goals of INCyTE are to enhance our understanding of nutrient
cycling feedbacks on the global carbon (C) cycle in general, and to integrate
different investigators, data, and experimental and conceptual frameworks to
improve representation of nutrient interactions and constraints on the global
terrestrial C cycle in Earth System Models (ESMs). While nutrients (nitrogen,
phosphorus and others) have the potential to mediate plant growth responses to
elevated carbon dioxide (and interact with a host of other global changes), only
a handful of current global simulation models even attempt to represent those
interactions and feedbacks. This project will: 1) Identify gaps in
understanding/representation of modeled C-nutrients feedbacks and processes; 2)
Coordinate a number of small-scale, coummunity-based, high-throughput
experiments to address particular hypotheses and identify candidate processes
for further attention; 3) Use network syntheses and community-based experimental
data to enhance model representation of nutrient cycling; and 4) Employ new ESM
inter-comparisons. Scientifically, the proposed work has the potential to vastly
increase the ability to predict if and how nutrients may constrain the global
terrestrial C cycle and enhance understanding of how nutrient-C cycle feedbacks
may influence environmental change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.