* 1754850
* RUI:   Apoplastic lipids in xylem of vascular plants:   Composition, locations, origins, and possible functions
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2018,12/31/2022
* Steven Jansen, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 12/31/2022
* USD 779,441.00

Vascular plants are the only organisms known to transport water under negative
pressure, using solar energy to create the force for moving water from soil to
roots to leaves and out into the atmosphere. How plants can do this without
constantly creating bubbles in their hydraulic systems, which act to block the
water transport is still not completely understood. Engineers have not been able
to replicate water transport under negative pressure, except in very small
amounts over very short distances under idealized laboratory conditions. So how
can trees move vast quantities of water through the xylem (wood) in their trunks
under negative pressure? The goal of this research is to determine the role of
natural oils (lipids) in this process. Lipids have been found covering the
surfaces of xylem vessels in plants. The project will determine the composition,
locations, origins, and possible functions of lipids in xylem of vascular plants
and test the hypothesis that lipids are required for negative pressure
transport. The research will increase the understanding of plant adaptation to
water stress, and could potentially lead to engineered systems that replicate
plant water transport under negative pressure. The research will involve
undergraduate students, including from groups currently underrepresented in the
sciences, and its broader impacts will include education about plant water
transport both in academic courses and public outreach
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has been an axiom of the cohesion-tension theory
that it is the high surface tension of water that protects xylem conduits
against bubble entry. This axiom was recently challenged by findings that xylem
sap of flowering plants contains significant amounts of surface-active lipids
and that surfactants isolated from xylem sap strongly reduced the sap's surface
tension. Moreover, surfactant-coated bubbles were found in sap, suggesting that
plants can transport water in the presence of bubbles, rather than needing to
prevent their formation completely. This research addresses the questions: 1.
Are apoplastic lipids found in xylem of all major groups of vascular plants? 2.
What is the composition of apoplastic lipids in different plants? 3. Where in
the xylem are apoplastic lipids located? 4. Where do apoplastic xylem lipids
originate? The research will use 15 representative species of all major vascular
plant lineages using imaging via TEM, confocal super-resolution microscopy,
atomic force microscopy, and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy, as well as by
lipidomic analyses of xylem sap and xylem tissue using mass spectrometry. The
research will test the paradigm-reversing hypothesis that lipid-coatings of gas-
water surfaces provide the hydraulic system with a degree of protection against
bubbles expanding into embolism and causing hydraulic failure. The proposed
research on lipids in water under negative pressure will contribute to
scientific knowledge not only in plant biology, but also in physics and chemical
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.