* 1754259
* SG: Ecological insights from range-expanding populations
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2018,12/31/2023
* David Johnson, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 12/31/2023
* USD 212,584.00

As the atmosphere and oceans warm, plants and animals are expanding their
geographic distributions. For instance, the fiddler crab recently expanded its
range north of its historic limit of Cape Cod, Massachusetts. While scientists
have documented the range expansion of thousands of species, a big question
remains: What is the impact of these organisms on the new habitats they occupy
in their expanded ranges? Fiddler crabs live in salt marshes, which are
economically important ecosystems that fuel fisheries and tourism. This research
will focus on the impact that fiddler crabs will have on salt marshes in the
newly expanded range (i.e., north of Cape Cod). Findings from this project will
be made available to the public. Middle-school teachers and students in addition
to undergraduate and graduate students will be directly involved in this
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The documented northern expansion of fiddler
crabs (Uca pugnax) is an exceptional opportunity to test the effects of climate-
driven species introductions on ecosystem functioning. In its native range, U.
pugnax influences a range of marsh functioning including primary production,
nutrient cycling, and food-webs. In terms of body size, fiddler crabs follow
Bergmann's Rule (a positive relationship between body size and latitude) with
individuals in Massachusetts being almost twice as large as those in Georgia.
This biogeographic pattern may inform the relative effect of individual
populations on ecosystem function in the context of climate change. The
following hypotheses will be tested in this study: (1.) Fiddler crabs in the
expanded-range populations (e.g., Massachusetts) will have larger per-capita
effects on marsh functioning than those in the historic-range populations (e.g.,
Georgia) because of their larger size. (2.) At the landscape-scale, range-
expanded crabs will have minor effects on marsh functioning relative to historic
crabs because these populations are 10x smaller than historic-range populations.
These hypotheses will be tested using a combination of field experiments and
observational studies along a latitudinal gradient (Georgia, Virginia,
Massachusetts) on a suite of ecosystem processes (e.g., primary production,
decomposition, benthic animal diversity, plant stoichiometry). In addition, the
targeted hypothesis that fiddler crab body size is correlated with ecosystem
impacts will be tested in a mesocosm study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.