* 1754835
* Collaborative proposal:  Coupled biological and photochemical degradation of dissolved organic carbon in the Arctic
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Byron Crump, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2024
* USD 572,375.00

About half of the carbon that moves from land to streams, rivers, and lakes is
lost to the atmosphere as carbon dioxide. Carbon from land is converted to CO2
mainly by microbial respiration and exposure to sunlight. Both processes happen
in sunlit surface waters, but little is known about how they interact to produce
CO2. For instance, previous research has shown that sunlight exposure can either
increase or decrease microbial respiration. In addition, there is little known
about how composition of microbial communities may influence microbial
respiration. Understanding how microbes and sunlight interact is particularly
important in the Arctic where thawing permafrost soils will release large
amounts of carbon from land to water. Advancing our understanding of loss of
this carbon to the atmosphere is critical to understanding the global carbon
cycle. This project takes advantage of recent advances in microbial genomics and
carbon chemistry to improve understanding of carbon cycling in Arctic
freshwaters. This research will also engage high school teachers and students in
scientific discovery and application. The PIs also plan to provide
undergraduates with research opportunities through this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Determining the controls on coupled photo-bio
conversion of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) to CO2 is essential for
understanding the drivers of CO2 fluxes to the atmosphere from inland waters in
the Arctic. To gain this understanding, this project will use experiments to
answer three questions: (Q1) How is microbial metabolism controlled by DOC
chemistry? This question will be answered with incubations of microbial
communities with DOC leached from surface soils and deeper permafrost soils from
two dominant arctic landscapes. Microbial pathways of DOC conversion to CO2 will
be identified by measuring microbial gene abundance and the expression of those
genes, and molecular formulas of DOC that are consumed and produced during
incubations identified by mass spectrometry; (Q2) How does DOC exposure to
sunlight alter how microbes convert DOC to CO2? This question will be answered
by exposing leached soil DOC to sunlight; (Q3) How does the longer-term
adaptation of microbial communities affect the rate of DOC conversion to CO2?
This question will be answered by measuring microbial abundance, respiration,
production, and community composition (species) during the incubations. A
detailed understanding of these processes is critical because conversion of
permafrost soil carbon to CO2 has the potential to create a positive and
accelerating feedback to atmospheric CO2 levels and resulting environmental
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.