* 1754048
* SFS@LaTech: Cyber Engineers &amp; Scientists for our Future
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2024
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2024
* USD 3,264,169.00

Louisiana Tech University is a Center of Academic Excellence in Cyber Defense
Education (CAE-CDE) and Research (CAE-R) and is currently the only university in
the state to hold both education and research designations. Louisiana Tech is
proposing a CyberCorps(R): Scholarship for Service (SFS) program (SFS@LaTech) to
prepare highly-qualified cybersecurity professionals for entry into the
government workforce. The program proposes to support 36 SFS@LaTech Scholars to
complete either a B.S. degree in Cyber Engineering or Computer Science with
Cybersecurity concentration, or obtain an M.S. degree in computer science with
an additional focus on information assurance. The program recruitment and
selection plans are designed to attract a diverse and inclusive mix of Scholars,
targeting awards for 40% of the scholarships to women and underrepresented
groups in this field. The overall objective is to use the SFS@LaTech program to
produce exceptionally prepared cyber professionals that can help the nation
address its critical need for technical leaders in this field and build a
pipeline of graduates to enter positions in government
service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Louisiana Tech has in place a strong set of
academic degree programs and proposed activities for the students in the
SFS@LaTech program. In 2012, Louisiana Tech University established the first
Bachelor of Science in Cyber Engineering degree program in the nation. The
SFS@LaTech program will leverage the pioneering courses developed for this
program, many of which are also available to the Computer Science majors
concentrating in cybersecurity. Curricula include the Introduction to Network
Security course, which culminates in an annual day-long cyber security
competition called Cyber Storm. In this event, student teams compete in a cyber-
ops environment where they test their skills in network defense and attack
strategies. The project will also leverage Louisiana Tech's strong
relationships, through its Louisiana Tech Research Institute (LTRI) and
government agencies. These relationships aim to provide mentored project
opportunities for SFS@LaTech scholars as well as connections to internships and
full-time employment opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.