* 1754869
* NSF-IOS-BSF: Mechanisms of Motor Expression of a Decision
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Hillel Chiel, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Animals and humans must continually respond to a changing environment while
pursuing the goals that allow them to survive and reproduce, whether they are
seeking a mate, fleeing a predator, or eating a meal. To make this possible, the
body and the nervous system must work together to generate appropriate behavior.
Rather than using a central control that specifies all details of the responses
and sets a fixed goal, recent studies suggest that nervous systems generate
appropriate motor responses "on the fly" based on the internal state of the
organism and the immediate environmental context, which may change as the animal
acts, in part due to the animal's own behavior. By studying this problem in an
animal that is tractable to experimental analysis, it will be possible to work
out the detailed neural circuitry that underlies these rapid, flexible and
adaptive changes in behavior, and to track changes in circuit activity as an
animal behaves. To do this, novel technology will be developed that makes it
possible to record and control the activity of many neurons during behavior. The
resulting technology could have a broad impact on the development of novel
brain/computer interfaces, which could lead to new prosthetic devices. At the
same time, working out the details of neural circuitry for adaptive, flexible
behavior will provide designs for creating flexible control of biologically-
inspired robots. The research will train students who can solve
interdisciplinary problems, and is likely to attract students to careers in
science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of motor control in
invertebrates and in the spinal cord of vertebrates and humans suggest that
motor control is not a hierarchy in which a central controller selects motor
responses, but a heterarchy in which motor components are added or removed
depending on an organism's internal state and the immediate environmental
context. To determine how motor components are dynamically assembled, the neural
circuity of the marine mollusk Aplysia californica will be analyzed as animals
feed on seaweed that challenges them with changing mechanical loads. Circuitry
will be studied in intact animals, in a reduced feeding preparation, and in the
isolated nervous system. A microelectrode array will analyze overall changes in
patterns of neural activity using extracellular recordings. In collaboration
with the NeuroNex hub at University of Michigan, a novel ganglion interface will
be developed using biocompatible glassy carbon fiber electrodes, which can
record from multiple sites both extracellularly and intracellularly. The fibers
will be modified to allow them to control neuronal activity as well. The
resulting device could create novel interfaces for neural control in intact,
behaving animals. A neuromechanical model will be developed to predict how
changing activity of key identified neurons affects force output. Novel circuit
designs for flexible motor control will be implemented in biologically-inspired
soft robots. Finally, this project will be used to attract undergraduates and
high school students into interdisciplinary research in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.