* 1754369
* Ectomycorrhizal Fungi and the Enzymatic Liberation of Nitrogen from Soil Organic Matter: Ecosystem Processes and Underlying Molecular Mechanisms
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Donald Zak, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2022
* USD 898,855.00

The rate at which plants can photosynthesize, thereby capturing carbon from the
atmosphere, is limited by a number of factors including the availability of
nitrogen (N) in soil. A century of research has presumed that forest trees can
exclusively use inorganic nitrogen (i.e., ammonium and nitrate) to fuel their
growth. However, recent work has suggested that plants may have access to
additional types of nitrogen in the form of more complex organic molecules
(organic N) also present in the soil. The key to this story is that nearly all
forest trees form symbiotic relationships with fungi that dwell on plant roots
below ground. These fungi act to extend the root system of plants and increase
plant access to limiting nutrients, including organic N. This research will
explore the capacity for certain groups of fungi to provide forest trees with
organic forms of nitrogen. More specifically, this work will explore the unknown
capacity of such fungi to decompose soil organic matter using enzymes, thereby
releasing organic N in soil organic matter for plant uptake. The broad goal of
this research project, then is to understand the extent which these root-
associated fungi are liberating organic N in soil for use by trees. This project
will also provide K-12 teachers with age-appropriate teaching tools to build
students' understanding of forest ecology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent global
level modeling efforts indicate that trees that associate with ectomycorrhizal
fungi mutualists will be fertilized by increasing concentrations of atmospheric
CO2. Other evidence suggests that the large stocks of C in forest soils are a
result of the enzymatic activity of ectomycorrhizal (ECM) fungi. Both models
rest upon the hereto untested general claim that ECM fungi mobilize N from the
large pools of soil organic matter (SOM). However, direct evidence that ECM
fungi can function in this manner is lacking. Understanding the extent to which
these organisms obtain organic N by degrading SOM is contingent on whether genes
encoding enzymes that mediate both the decay of plant detritus and SOM, were
retained during their evolutionary history and are deployed when in symbiosis
with plant roots. Multiple lines of indirect evidence, stemming from whole
genome sequencing and field data indicate that only certain evolutionary
lineages of ECM fungi have the potential to provision their plant hosts with N
that is obtained from SOM. Resolving the saprotrophic physiology of ECM fungi
across a range of spatial scales and soil N conditions, holds promise to resolve
the ecological forces governing where we may expect plants to commonly obtain
growth-limiting N from SOM via the activity of their ECM mutualists.
Accordingly, this project will use a synthetic whole-plant system to measure the
enzymatic expression of genes encoding lignocellulolytic enzymes across a wide
phylogenetic range of ECM fungi, and will also trace organic N into intact
plants. After validating this mechanism in the laboratory, the occurrence of
this phenomenon will be tested using meta-transcriptomic enabled field
approaches. Overall, the research will span gradients in soil N availability
occurring at both the local and ecosystem level scales to improve understanding
of the factors that structure the distribution of ECM fungi that obtain N from
SOM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.