* 1754584
* Harnessing the power of herbarium digitization, crowdsourcing, and phylofloristics to assess and predict phenological responses
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Aaron Ellison, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 08/31/2023
* USD 586,474.00

Global environmental change has transformed our world. In the Eastern United
States, increasing temperatures, for example, have had a significant impact on
the timing of life events of plants and animals. For example, among the plants
of this region, the flush of new leaves and spring flowering times occur more
than two weeks earlier than decades prior. This project uses thousands of
botanical specimens in museums across 16 states to understand the reasons why
certain plants advance the timing of their life events more than others and to
predict how plants will respond in the future. This work is broadly applicable
to agricultural systems and the management of natural areas. As part of this
effort, thousands of citizen-scientists will be engaged in the science of
environmental change. In addition, educational and informative podcasts and
teacher training programs will be developed. Finally, the project will also
train undergraduate and graduate students and will enhance scientific
infrastructure by making collections and their associated data more widely
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A vital resource in the study of phenological
responses to climate change is historical records, especially those residing in
natural history museums. Pressed and dried herbarium specimens, for example,
represent snapshots of plant phenological events (e.g., flowering, fruiting) at
specific places, times, and in association with specific climates. These
specimens can facilitate the assessment of phenological variation across species
ranges, and help elucidate plausible mechanistic causes, as well as highlight
future expected responses. This project will use digitized herbaria to
investigate plant phenology across the eastern U.S. and will address three
specific aims. First, it will crowd-source phenological data from ca. 200,000
digitized herbarium specimens representing 1000 species from the eastern U.S. to
estimate phenological change. Second, it will place phenological responses of
these species in an evolutionary context by using large-scale genomic approaches
to assess whether phenological traits can be predicted from evolutionary
relationships. Third, it will develop models that identify climatic drivers of
phenological responses and integrate these data to forecast spatial, temporal,
and phylogenetic compositions of future plant
assemblages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.