* 1754417
* Collaborative Research: Enhancers and the Convergent Evolution of Limb Deduction in Squamates
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Brant Faircloth, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 07/31/2023
* USD 212,169.00

Although the development of arms and legs is a key evolutionary innovation that
allowed animals to move onto land, many species of snakes and lizards
subsequently lost these limbs. Indeed, limb loss has evolved at least 24 times
among lizards. How limb loss has occurred repeatedly in lizard lineages is a
question that can be addressed with the replicated natural experiments that will
be the focus of this study. This project will reveal whether the same or
different genetic changes are associated with limb loss among these different
lizard groups. This research will combine technologies from different fields of
biology in novel ways to explore this extraordinary example of repeated
evolution and gain new insight into genome function. This project will greatly
improve knowledge of the genes and genetic control elements involved in limb
development. Additionally, in the course of this project, thousands of genetic
regions that are shared by humans and other animals will be characterized.
Therefore, project data will deliver insights that can be applied to better
understand other functional elements within the genomes of humans and different
animals. The methods developed will pave the way for other researchers who wish
to leverage the power of natural evolutionary experiments to understand genome
function. Finally, materials for educators will be developed for use in teaching
students how information is encoded in genomes and how natural evolutionary
experiments can be used to reveal how genetic sequences yield unique biological
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use chromatin-
immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput DNA sequencing (ChIP-seq) to
identify regulatory elements (enhancers) in squamate genomes that control the
embryonic development of the limbs. This information will be used to design
squamate-specific DNA sequence capture baits targeting these regulatory regions.
Additional capture baits will be designed to target the coding regions of genes
active in the developing limbs. Together, these baits will be used to survey
both noncoding regulatory elements and coding exons of key developmental genes
from every lineage of limb-reduced squamates. DNA sequence changes in limb
enhancers and limb development genes will be compared in limb-reduced species
and their fully limbed relatives, and functional changes in regulatory activity
will be assessed in vivo with transgenic mouse reporter assays. This will
provide insight into the relative frequency of regulatory changes compared to
gene coding sequence changes contributing to the evolution of limb loss.
Finally, the functional evolution of an ancient amniote limb-genital enhancer
for the gene Tbx4 will be dissected molecularly by taking advantage of sequence
variation across the multiple lineages of limb-reduced species. This will grant
insight into the fate of enhancers that have lost their regulatory roles and
determine whether these elements are recruited to new
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.