* 1754802
* Quantifying the roles of pollination and post-pollination barriers in flowering plant speciation: a case study of the diverse Neotropical genus Burmeistera (Campanulaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2024
* Nathan Muchhala, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 05/31/2024
* USD 731,385.00

This project will investigate how flowering plants develop reproductive
boundaries among species over time. Animal pollinators are critical to the
reproduction and survival of most flowering plants, including many of our
agricultural crops. Conventional wisdom holds that animal pollinators also have
a primary role in driving the diversification of these species. However, this
idea has rarely been tested in detail and at scale. Researchers will test this
hypothesis using Burmeistera, a flowering plant genus whose 116 species depend
on nectar-feeding bats for pollination. Burmeistera species place their pollen
on different parts of the bats' heads, which may reduce the exchange of pollen
and genes between species. They also have different degrees of genetic
incompatibility with each other. These genetic barriers may reduce the
fertilization success of cross-species pollinations or the survival of hybrid
offspring. Researchers will evaluate which of these reproductive barriers
contributes to each stage of the speciation process in Burmeistera.
Undergraduate and graduate students, including those from underrepresented
groups, will be involved in all aspects of the project and will be trained in
field and laboratory techniques. The project will also support the professional
development of a post-doctoral researcher. Researchers will communicate results
to the public via educational displays at the Missouri Botanical Garden and
bilingual field guides for Burmeistera species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will discover how reproductive barriers evolve during angiosperm
speciation using an integrated experimental and comparative approach.
Researchers will construct a robust species-level phylogeny for Burmeistera
(Campanulaceae, the bell-flower family) using DNA sequence data from whole
plastomes and over 700 nuclear loci. They will then measure pre- and post-
pollination reproductive barriers among pairs of species having different
phylogenetic distances. Assessment will include cross-pollination trials by
captive nectar-feeding bats as well as hand-crosses of species in cultivation.
Researchers will compare these measures within the context of the phylogeny to
test the hypothesis that post-pollination reproductive barriers evolve before
others. They will also determine whether changes in the length of pollen-bearing
and receiving organs of Burmeistera flowers are correlated with speciation
events, which would be consistent with the hypothesis of pollinator-driven
speciation. Project outcomes will include an exceptionally detailed exploration
of angiosperm speciation processes, improved taxonomic circumscriptions within a
poorly-studied Neotropical flowering plant group, and the creation of new
genetic resources and herbarium collections. The project will strengthen
international research collaborations among US, Ecuadorian and Colombian
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.