* 1754102
* OPUS:  Synthesizing field data in a genomic context to elucidate the evolution of phenotypic plasticity and local adaptation
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Johanna Schmitt, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2021
* USD 295,887.00

How does a plant species persist, grow, and reproduce across a wide range of
climates? What is the genetic basis of plant tolerance to climate variation?
Addressing these questions is critical for foresters and crop scientists seeking
to select appropriate varieties for high yield in different climates and
assuring the nation's food supply. The answers are also important for predicting
whether threatened plant populations can persist in the face of environmental
change, or whether introduced species will become invasive in their new range.
Understanding mechanisms of adaptation to variable environments is, moreover, a
fundamental problem in evolutionary biology. The genetic model plant Arabidopsis
thaliana (common name: thale cress) provides a unique opportunity to address
this problem by synthesizing field measurements, genomic data, and geographic
information, as outlined in this project. The results will be valuable to a wide
range of scientists, from plant developmental biologists and population
geneticists to plant ecologists and foresters. The project will provide novel
interdisciplinary research training for a graduate student, and all of the data
will be publicly released to provide a community resource for further analysis
and synthesis.

The research project will leverage data from field experiments with A. thaliana
in which hundreds of genotypes originating in diverse climates across the native
Eurasian range were grown together in common gardens in six sites across Eurasia
and North America, along with known mutants in flowering time pathways. These
unique phenotypic data will be integrated with newly available genomic data to
investigate the genetic basis and adaptive evolution of complex life history
traits such as flowering and phenotypic plasticity (the range of trait values
expressed by the same genotype across different environments). The project will
have three objectives: 1) Elucidate the genomic basis of complex life history
traits and their plasticity in different natural seasonal environments. 2)
Estimate natural selection on life history traits to understand how phenotypic
plasticity contributes to plant performance in different climates. 3) Combine
quantitative genetic and population genomic data to test for a signature of past
adaptive divergence and climate adaptation in plastic life history traits. These
synthetic analyses will be published in several interrelated scientific papers.
Resulting insights will be further integrated with results of previous research
in two major conceptual review papers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.