* 1754083
* Collaborative Research SG:  Symbiont interactions and heterosis in a hybrid social insect
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Thomas Chouvenc, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2021
* USD 116,474.00

The Formosan subterranean termite (Coptotermes formosanus) is a social insect
and a major structural pest. Annually, the costs associated with the damage
caused by this termite and efforts to control it are in the billions. In order
to digest wood, termites such as the Formosan subterranean termite use a
community of symbiotic protist species. The protists are highly specialized to
the termite gut environment and cannot survive outside of their hosts. In
termites, both the king (male parent) and the queen (female parent) pass these
protists to their young. Each termite species harbors a unique community of
protist species. However, virtually nothing is known about how these communities
are maintained. More importantly, little is known about different protist
species' impacts on the fitness of their termite hosts. The discovery of a
hybrid termite resulting from the mating between the Formosan subterranean
termite and the Asian subterranean termite (Coptotermes gestroi), which harbor
different species of protists, provides a unique research opportunity. By
creating hybrid termites, with different gut protists, this research will
greatly improve our understanding of how the communities of protists in termite
guts are maintained. Furthermore, the hybrid termites created by this research
will allow for detailed studies of how gut protists influence termite fitness.
Since hybrid termites occur naturally, this research will also help generate
informed pest control strategies. Graduate students at three universities will
be trained as part of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will
characterize and compare the protist hindgut communities of the Formosan
subterranean termite, the Asian subterranean termite and their hybrids. High
throughput sequencing will be used to identify all protist species from each
mating combination at multiple time points. This will reveal patterns of
coexistence and/or competitive exclusion among the protists. Additionally, the
research will dissect any potential effect of parental gender on symbiont
community composition. The study will also investigate which aspects of termite
biology contribute most to the observed vigor of the hybrids. To do so, the work
will profile the symbiont communities of chimeric colonies. Chimeric colonies
are those in which the parents are hybrids, but symbiont communities derive from
a single host species. These chimeric colonies will be established by swapping
primary reproductives between hybrid and conspecific colonies after they have
lost their protists but before the colonies mature sufficiently to reject
intruders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.