* 1754594
* A Study of Transformations in City Governance Due to the Use of Big Data Analytics
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Michael Schudson, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2019
* USD 13,419.00

This award supports a dissertation research project, a case study of a smart
city in development. The researcher will conduct a year-long, multi-sited
ethnographic study of a Kansas City, where public officials, ordinary residents,
and local entrepreneurs have joined with tech giants such as Cisco, Google, and
Sprint to build citywide fiber-optic broadband and a pilot smart city system.
She will examine how the adoption of big data analytics is transforming local
government practices and civic engagement, and what the implications of such
changes are for social inequality, local governance, and urban policy. It
particularly focuses on what happens when smartness as technical innovation
drives not only the solutions for local problems, but also the methodology of
discovering and defining them. In addition to disseminating the results of this
project in scholarly literature, she will share findings with local stakeholder
groups and in other non-academic venues including opinion columns and guest
posts for popular science and technology blogs such as those hosted by
Scientific American and the Atlantic. In doing so, the results will serve to
inform ongoing public debates around the cultural role of data analytics in the
city. The findings will help technologists and local government officials be
cognizant of the cultural paradigms and political decisions they build into
technical infrastructure and enable discussion about potential alternatives to
these paradigms, informing the future design of actual systems.

The project will serve to provide a better understanding of how cities use smart
technologies. It will allow for a more nuanced critique of urban big data, one
that understands how such data is produced, shared, and analyzed across various
communities; conversely, it will show how cities shape smartness as a socio-
technical construct. It will challenge the view that organizing data-driven
urban systems is a top-down process by showing how civic entrepreneurs are being
encouraged to collaborate with city officials and voluntary organizations
through smart city experiments. It will also examine a new mechanism that drives
the production of social problems in local governance, one in which the adoption
of big data analytics leads to identifying new problems in the city through both
the incentives of the innovation economy, and the epistemologies of data
science. Rather than immediate efficiency gains or systemic advances, city
officials and civic entrepreneurs intend less to solve long-standing problems
than to discover new ones. Their constant hunt for new problems or novel ways of
measuring stands in contrast to expectation that the smart city solves, or aims
to solve, extant urban problems. By demonstrating an on-the-ground account of
new forms of algorithmic city management, this study will reveal how a city
enabled by smart technologies and urban data can engage more effectively with
exclusion and disparities across different population groups.