* 1754235
* I-Corps: Monodisperse Polyethylene Glycol Synthesis Technologies
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2017,04/30/2019
* Shiyue Fang, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 04/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project includes the
commercial availability of affordable monodisperse short and long polyethylene
glycols (PEGs). Areas that will benefit from their commercialization include
organic synthesis, bioconjugation, nanotechnology, pharmaceutical chemistry and
more. Currently, monodisperse short PEGs can be prohibitively expensive. Many
scientists have to devote significant time to synthesize them or have to use
less ideal alternative materials. More seriously, there is no technology to
synthesize monodisperse long PEGs and scientists in the pharmaceutical industry
often use impure PEGs for drug PEGylation (i.e. tagging with PEG).
Commercialization of affordable monodisperse PEGs and their derivatives may
transform the ways researchers and manufacturers conduct their
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project explores the market
potential of novel technologies that can be used to synthesize polyethylene
glycols (PEG) and derivatives in monodisperse form and with much lower costs.
Short PEGs are widely used as linkers in areas including organic synthesis, and
pharmaceutical chemistry. Long PEGs are used for PEGylating pharmaceuticals to
increase water solubility and bio-stability, and to reduce undesirable immune
responses and dosing frequency. Currently monodisperse short PEGs can be
synthesized via stepwise organic synthesis. However, the process requires
chromatography to purify intermediates and product, which consumes large volumes
of solvents and silica gel. The waste to product ratio can be over 1000 to 1.
For long PEGs, they are made by random polymerization, and there is no
technology to make them monodisperse. Therefore, impure PEGs are often used for
drug PEGylation. To overcome the challenges in monodisperse PEG production,
novel technologies based on solid phase stepwise synthesis will be developed.