* 1754363
* Collaborative research:   Regulation of lake productivity by terrestrial dissolved organic matter
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Christopher Solomon, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine O'Reilly
* 03/31/2024
* USD 787,764.00

Lakes are economically and culturally important components of the landscape.
Microscopic algae and aquatic plants strongly influence the benefits that humans
derive from lakes, because they influence water quality and are the foundation
of the food web supporting species important to commercial, recreational, and
subsistence fisheries. The abundance and growth rate of algae contribute to lake
productivity, and lake productivity is affected by inputs of natural and human-
derived nutrients, primarily phosphorus and nitrogen. Lake productivity is also
influenced by inputs of organic molecules from the watershed which compete with
algae for light and, at high concentrations, can result in tea-colored water.
Inputs of nutrients and organic molecules from the watershed vary substantially
from lake to lake and change through time as well. The researchers will study
the implications of watershed inputs for lake water quality, food webs, and
other benefits humans derive from lakes. Their research will experimentally test
and refine a mathematical model of lake productivity and ultimately predict the
response of lakes to watershed inputs of nutrients and organic molecules that
vary across the landscape and through time. The project will support the
training of six undergraduate students, including students from Puerto Rico and
Native American populations. These students will conduct independent research
projects as part of a ten-week field ecology program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers will use replicated mesocosm experiments, a comparative study across
broad natural gradients, and a whole-lake manipulation to test hypotheses drawn
from their mathematical model of lake productivity. First, predicted
counteracting effects of terrestrially-derived organic carbon and nutrients will
be evaluated using replicated mesocosms subjected to supplies of these elements
in varied ratios. Second, the project will use a comparative survey of lake food
web productivity to test predictions for how lake size alters the effect of
terrestrial organic carbon and nutrients. Third, the researchers will embrace
the full complexity of natural ecosystems in a whole-lake manipulation of
terrestrial organic carbon and nutrient inputs. Finally, following refinement of
the mathematical model of lake productivity based on experimental results, the
researchers will use a global meta-analysis to test the general applicability of
the mathematical model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.