* 1754692
* Virulence Evolution After Viral Host Jump and Emergence
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Gael Kurath, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,242,443.00

Whether a newly emerged pathogen will become more or less harmful to its host
over time is key to predicting the severity of disease outbreaks. When new
infectious diseases emerge, the effects on humans, agriculture and wildlife are
sometimes devastating, as exemplified by Ebola, avian influenza, and West Nile
virus. However, other emergent diseases are much less severe, and may even go
unnoticed. The ability to predict the level of harm (i.e. virulence) that an
emergent pathogen will cause is limited. This project will improve our ability
to predict the severity of emerging diseases by identifying the factors that
influence changes in virulence after the infection of a new host species. An
extensive body of work has attempted to address this question. Almost all this
work has the same shortcoming, key data are not available from the very start of
the host-pathogen interaction. Host jumps mark the beginning of a host-pathogen
interaction and they therefore provide the only opportunity to study entire
trajectories of virulence evolution. The fish virus IHNV (infectious
hematopoietic necrosis virus) in rainbow trout and salmon is one of the few
systems where samples are available to look at these changes from the beginning
for two, independent host jumps, making it an ideal research model. Insights
from the study of these host jumps will inform how best to allocate resources to
combat the public health, economic, and biodiversity impacts of emerging
diseases. The project will also involve building capacity for the management of
infectious disease through the education and training of graduate students,
undergraduates, and technicians, with a focus on under-represented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Whether the virulence of a pathogen will evolve upwards or
downward after emergence in a new host, is a foundational question in
evolutionary ecology and infectious disease management. Suitable systems for
such studies are rare because they require 1) an extensive collection of
pathogen isolates sampled before and after host jumps, which span enough time
for evolution to occur, 2) ecologically relevant ancestral and new hosts in
which to do common garden experiments, and 3) the ability to measure virulence
and key fitness components such as transmission potential in these experiments.
The virus IHNV is one of the few pathogens that meet these requirements. IHNV
has been both endemic and epidemic in many salmonid fish populations of the
Pacific Northwest since the 1950s, and made two independent host jumps into
rainbow trout. This research will utilize a collection of 3000 IHNV isolates
that covers the two host jump events and five subsequent decades to pursue four
research foci. (1) Experimental determination of viral virulence throughout
emergence (2) Experimental determination of viral transmission potential
throughout emergence. (3) Whole genome sequencing to determine genetic
correlates of virulence and transmission potential. (4) Mathematical modeling to
dissect the selective forces driving virulence evolution and assess the
evolutionary risks of environmental change. The research is expected to show
that interactions between virulence, transmission potential, and the ecological
setting can be used to explain changes in the virulence of an emerging pathogen
over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.