* 1754630
* ARTS: Uncovering the Desert Darkling Beetles (Tenebrionidae: Pimeliinae): Phylogenomics, phenomics, and biogeography in a megadiverse global radiation
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Aaron Smith, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 01/31/2020
* USD 878,751.00

Desert darkling beetles (Coleoptera: Tenebrionidae: Pimeliinae) are an
incredibly diverse (8,000+ described species) but poorly studied group of
organisms that are found across the world, particularly in desert environments.
Indeed, many species have evolved to survive in some of the driest and hottest
places on Earth, and form a key component of desert ecosystems. The subfamily
includes well known species such as Namibian fog basking beetles (Onymacris
unguicularis, used in biomimicry research) and the North American blue death-
feigning beetle (Asbolus verrucosus), along with thousands of poorly known or
still undescribed species. This research will describe hundreds of species new
to science, explore where these beetles live and how they are related to each
other across the planet, and investigate the various adaptations that have
allowed these beetles to thrive and diversify across the world's deserts. This
project will also train a postdoctoral researcher, two Ph.D. students, and
approximately 15 undergraduate students, as well as facilitating collaborations
and providing training to a diverse group of scientists from across the globe.
Project participants will also be designing and leading hybrid courses between
Northern Arizona University and Namibia's renowned Gobabeb Research Center, and
working to enhance research collections in all participating institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will resolve centuries-old issues in our
understanding of desert darkling beetles by 1) generating DNA data from recently
collected and museum specimens using high-throughput sequencing and target
enrichment methods to recover ~631 genetic loci for approximately 500 species
across the Pimeliinae. Additionally, approximately 300 larval and adult
morphological characters will be scored for each species. Morphological data
will be combined with the molecular data to reconstruct the evolutionary history
of the subfamily. The resulting phylogeny will inform taxonomic decisions and
help place current distributions and life histories within an evolutionary
context. 2) Producing an Open Access electronic monograph of the subfamily using
the mx/TaxonWorks bioinformatics platform and a matrix-based approach to coding
and organizing morphological characters for descriptions, linked to the
Coleoptera Anatomy Ontology (ColAO) to provide explicit definitions and images
for anatomical terms. The monograph will include the first worldwide key to the
Pimeliinae tribes and subtribes, images of specimens and characters,
distribution maps, an extensive catalog of darkling beetle names and literature,
and matrix-based descriptions. 3) Examining historical biogeography,
diversification patterns, and adaptations to xeric conditions across the
subfamily using the resulting phylogeny, over 20,000 georeferenced museum and
modern specimens, and recently developed analytical tools for biogeographic
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.