* 1754587
* Collaborative Research: ARTS: North American camel spiders (Arachnida, Solifugae, Eremobatidae): systemic revision and biogeography of an understudied taxon
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Paula Cushing, Denver Museum of Nature and Science
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 07/31/2024
* USD 540,238.00

Camel spiders, also known as wind scorpions or solifuges, are an important group
of arachnids found in fragile, often threatened desert ecosystems. They are
dominant predators of insects and other arthropods in arid habitats and are also
important prey for many desert species. Solifuges are notoriously difficult to
study since they are hard to find and collect, nearly impossible to keep alive
in the lab, and challenging to identify. Contrary to their name, they are not
true spiders and do not build webs but represent a unique arachnid group with
over 1,100 species known worldwide. With only a few scientists studying any
aspect of their biology, there is a pressing need to train a new generation of
scientists devoted to the biology of this diverse group. This project will
revolutionize the study of this component of the planet's biodiversity by
training young biologists, including high school students, undergraduates,
graduate students, and a postdoctoral scholar. They will use state-of-the-art
molecular tools to better understand the evolutionary relationships among
species in the most common and diverse group of camel spiders in North America,
the Eremobatidae. Another goal of the project is to use camel spiders as a model
system to explore how Earth history events have influenced the evolution and
assembly of species in desert communities. This grant leverages the only
remaining expertise on North American camel spiders to excite a new generation
of scientists who will move this field forward. An innovative and interactive
online identification guide, the Camel Spiders of North America, will be
developed to enable scientists, naturalists, educators, and others to identify
and learn about these little-known animals. The guide will provide a resource
for a broad audience and will support the development and expansion of an
informative new website on camel spider biology
(www.solifugae.info).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the systematic
and taxonomic impediments in the study of camel spiders by using existing
expertise to train students in cutting-edge phylogenomic, biogeographic, and
taxonomic methodology. A recently published multi-locus phylogeny of one of the
largest families of camel spiders, the Eremobatidae, will provide a starting
point for a more thorough analysis using targeted enrichment of ultraconserved
elements, along with novel and underexplored morphological characters thought to
be taxonomically informative. Restriction site-associated DNA sequencing
(RADseq) will be used to generate genome-wide SNP data for the very first
phylogeographic analyses of camel spiders by examining two well-defined species
groups. Extensive fieldwork carried out as part of this project, particularly in
the Chihuahuan Desert, Baja California peninsula, and California Coast Ranges,
will undoubtedly reveal many new species in this family, greatly enhancing the
understanding of arachnid diversity present in these under-explored arid
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.