* 1754216
* Collaborative Research:  Rivers and the Carbon Cycle: A Mechanistic Basis for Dissolved Organic Carbon Removal
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Michelle Baker, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2022
* USD 132,861.00

Streams and rivers are important for the removal of organic matter transported
from land as water moves across landscapes. Many questions remain about how
organic matter is removed from freshwaters. A key challenge is that not all
organic matter is the same. Organic matter dissolved in freshwaters is made up
of many different compounds. These compounds range in age, source, and chemical
composition, all of which can influence how fast they are processed. To overcome
this challenge, researchers will collect real-time sensor data and design field-
scale experiments to measure how fast organic matter is removed by streams. The
project aims to test hypotheses about what processes control the removal of
different types of organic matter from streams and rivers. This is important
because organic matter provides energy that supports food webs, and can pollute
downstream ecosystems. Organic matter processing can also determine rates of
greenhouse emissions from streams and rivers to the atmosphere. This research
will also provide valuable opportunities for high school teachers to engage in
investigations that will enhance their ability to meet Next-Generation Science
standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What processes drive organic carbon removal in
streams, and how does organic carbon removal regulate the degree to which
running waters are biological reactors versus exporters of organic carbon? These
are key unresolved questions in carbon cycle research. This project will develop
a proof-of-concept approach to test the hypothesis that non-additive effects of
mixed organic matter sources (i.e. priming) control organic carbon removal in
streams. Data products will include estimates of organic carbon turnover
distance derived from ecosystem metabolism and stream chemistry, as well as
empirical measures of organic carbon removal from ecosystem-level experiments
that use single-source and mixed organic carbon additions. Project data and
computer source codes will be shared openly via HydroShare and GitHub,
respectively. The research will be conducted at Flathead Lake Biological Station
and the researchers will partner with the Station?s recently funded SensorSpace,
a community facility for construction and testing of novel environmental
sensors, as well as a test bed for integrating sensor-based data into Next-
Generation Science curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.