* 1754903
* Adaptive and disruptive epigenome-by-environment dynamics: molecular mechanisms to ecological impacts
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Benjamin Parrott, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 571,839.00

The developmental environment can have profound impacts on an individual. For
example, in many non-mammalian vertebrates including some fish, most turtles,
and all crocodilians, environmental temperatures occurring during a specific
period of incubation will determine if individuals develop as either a male or
female. Previous findings have revealed a critical role for the endocrine system
and epigenetics, heritable changes in gene function without changes in DNA
sequence, in determining how the environment impacts traits. This project will
determine the mechanisms by which environments and hormone signaling act on
epigenetic processes to shape developmental trajectories and produce phenotypic
diversity. The project focuses on species displaying temperature-dependent sex
determination, to address how temperature induces and coordinates radically
different phenotypic trajectories. The study will support the training and
mentoring of two graduate students and two undergraduate researchers, with
recruiting efforts aimed at under-represented groups in the sciences. The
project will develop a primer focused on communicating common misperceptions
about epigenetics. The findings will be presented to students at area schools as
part of an established outreach program. Together, this work will advance the
understanding of the mechanisms that determine how organisms interact with the
environments and will provide training opportunities for the next generation of
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will employ state of the art
sequencing approaches to advance a developmental- and endocrine-based
understanding of how adaptive epigenetic responses occur in nature, and how
epigenetic responses are disrupted by environmental stressors for which a shared
evolutionary history is absent. The Parrott Lab has previously observed
widespread sexually dimorphic DNA methylation patterning across the gonadal
genome. However, the developmental and molecular processes by which a
bipotential genome acquires a sexually dimorphic epigenome is unclear.
Developmental windows of environmental sensitivity will first be identified by
resolving the temporal dynamics of the DNA methylome during temperature-
dependent sex determination and reproductive development. Combinatorial
treatments of temperature and hormones will then reveal the degree to which
temperature and endocrine signals act on overlapping or distinct regions of the
epigenome. Finally, the project will investigate the influence of environmental
quality on the sexually dimorphic methylome. Given the inherent environmental
sensitivity of temperature-dependent sex determination, it is hypothesized that
environmental variables (other than temperature) also influence this process to
affect the development and subsequent function of the reproductive system.
Together, experiments will reveal how environmental and biological signals are
integrated into developmental processes that result in phenotypic diversity.
Findings from this work will be disseminated in peer-reviewed publications,
presentations at national and international scientific, and more broadly via
outreach activities in partnership with area schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.