* 1754878
* Neuroendocrine Mechanisms Regulating Adolescent Social Development
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Matthew Paul, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Lynch
* 05/31/2024
* USD 670,000.00

Adolescence is a time of remarkable development in social, emotional, and
cognitive abilities. However, it is also a time of increased vulnerability to
mental health disorders and increased sensation seeking thought to underlie an
elevated incidence of deaths and injuries from accidents. These behavioral
changes are accompanied by complex interactions between hormones and the brain,
and a major challenge is to parse out which neural and hormonal factors are
responsible for adolescent behavioral changes and which merely coincide with
them. Activation of pubertal hormones in adolescence is the primary candidate.
In this research project, a new model is introduced that makes use of a
seasonally-breeding hamster species, for which the timing of puberty can be
controlled simply by manipulating day length -- hamsters born and raised in
long, summer-like day lengths undergo puberty early, whereas those born in
short, winter-like day lengths delay puberty by several months in order to
prevent breeding during the harsh winter months. The proposed experiments use
this model to test the role of pubertal hormones in adolescent social behavioral
and neural development. This research will advance understanding of the neural
and hormonal factors that both drive adolescent social development and underlie
the increased vulnerability of this life stage. An additional part of this
project is the principal investigator's oversight of a student-run outreach
program with the Buffalo Zoo to create zoo camps designed to spark children's
interest in the sciences. The inclusion of University student participation
promotes and provides training in science outreach and early childhood science
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests the role of pubertal
hormones in adolescent behavioral and neural development, focusing on play
behavior, the predominant social behavior in adolescent animals, and the
'social' vasopressin (VP) pathway, a pathway recently implicated in adolescent
social development. The goal of Aim 1 is to determine the role of pubertal
hormones in the development of the 'social' VP pathway. Its neuroanatomical
development in the hamster model is being uncovered using immunohistochemistry
and in situ hybridization. Aim 2 serves to determine the projections through
which the 'social' VP pathway regulates play. The role of four key projection
areas is being tested with site-specific infusions of a VP agonist and
antagonist to determine how this pathway regulates social development. Aim 3
involves an initial test of the role of estradiol in early adolescent behavior.
Estradiol levels are measured using enzyme immunoassay in the hamster model to
determine whether day length impacts circulating estradiol levels in juvenile
hamsters. This research program will begin to map puberty-dependent and puberty-
independent neural circuits and specify how they interact to regulate adolescent
social development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.