* 1754142
* Evolutionary inference with interlocus gene conversion
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Jeffrey Thorne, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 564,338.00

In humans and many other species, a majority of the genome consists of repeated
DNA sequences that arose via duplications. A genetic duplication can occur when
an offspring inherits two copies of a DNA sequence from a parent who only has
one copy; these duplicated regions in the genome are called repeats. Following
duplication events, these repeats can subsequently diverge due to mutations that
affect one repeat but not others. However, this divergence can be partially or
completely counteracted by a phenomenon known as interlocus gene conversion
(IGC). IGC increases the similarity of repeated sequences by copying sequence
stretches from one repeat copy into the corresponding region of another. The
role of IGC mutations in shaping how repeated genomic regions evolve through
time is poorly understood. This project aims to develop statistical methods for
quantifying and incorporating the impact that IGC has in shaping genomes. By
doing so, this research will illuminate the forces that shape repeated regions
in genomes and will assist in understanding the biological function of these
regions. Project goals will be accomplished with the assistance of undergraduate
researchers. These students will have the opportunity to visit collaborators at
the University of Tokyo in a cross-cultural exchange. In addition,
visualizations will be created to simultaneously teach the general public about
statistical inference and the forces that shape genomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
variety of likelihood-based statistical tools for studying IGC will be developed
and assessed. One goal is to learn how IGC varies among biological species and
among genes. A focus will be on how IGC is influenced by whole genome versus
tandem duplication. The research will investigate whether there are tendencies
of some repeat copies to be donors and other repeat copies to be recipients
during IGC events. Careful consideration will be made of how to accommodate IGC
in detection of positive diversifying selection, divergence time estimation, and
ancestral sequence reconstruction. The work will combine theoretical
development, software implementation, and testing using a combination of
simulation and empirical data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.