* 1754632
* LTREB:  Collaborative Research:  Cyclic vs. anthropogenic causes of long-term variation in the regeneration of tropical forests with contrasting latitude and diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2024
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 06/30/2024
* USD 20,325.00

Tropical forests are globally important because of their high biodiversity and
large contributions to carbon storage. This project studies the timing and
success of reproduction in tropical forest plants. Tropical species may use cues
of seasonal shifts (for example, in rainfall or light availability) to time the
start of reproduction, perhaps to ensure their seeds are dispersed during
conditions that will be favorable for the growth and survival of young
seedlings. Rainfall, light availability, temperature, and other environmental
conditions influence each stage of reproduction- flowering, fruit maturation,
seed dispersal, and seedling growth. Beneficial conditions for reproduction can
vary within a year, due to seasonality, and among years, due to climate cycles
like El Nino. This project focuses on long term data in order to capture periods
when conditions are better or worse for various types of plants. The research
takes place at multiple tropical forest study sites to separate the effects of
local weather variability from large regional climate patterns. By measuring the
cues tropical plants use to start reproduction and examining which environmental
conditions affect seedling growth and survival, the long-term data from this
project will strengthen our ability to predict the future of tropical forests
and the benefits these forests confer to society. Training of multiple
undergraduate students will occur at the sites, by each of the collaborating
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These long-term studies will enable tests of
hypotheses concerning: (1) what are the environmental cues that induce
flowering; (2) how is reproduction in tropical forests affected by disturbances
such as wind storms, droughts, and by natural climate cycles such as the El Nino
Southern Oscillation, the North Atlantic Oscillation, and the Atlantic
Multidecadal Oscillation, which vary at subdecadal to multidecadal time scales;
(3) how do species with different traits (e.g., small vs. large seeds, soft vs.
dense wood) respond to environmental variation; and (4) how does episodic
reproduction ramify through to the structure of adult populations. This research
approach will effectively close the demographic gap between studies of early
reproduction and the dynamics of sapling and adult tree populations. At each of
the field sites, species-specific flower, fruit and seed rain is recorded
multiple times each year using seed traps. Additionally, all woody seedlings are
recorded in an annual census of hundreds of 1-m2 plots adjacent to seed traps,
at each site. The trap and plot censuses take place within large mapped forest
dynamics plots where all trees &gt;1 cm in diameter are identified and regularly
measured.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.