* 1754171
* NSFDEB-NERC:  Diversity and disease: uniting community and disease ecology to understand how biodiversity affects parasite transmission
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2018,12/31/2023
* Pieter Johnson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 12/31/2023
* USD 719,334.00

Over the next century, two of the most pressing environmental threats will be
the ongoing losses of biodiversity and the increased emergence of infectious
diseases. Key challenges are to understand how these issues are related and to
identify strategies for reducing their effects on human and wildlife
populations. For instance, growing evidence suggests that the diversity of
organisms found in natural habitats can affect how fast pathogens spread,
including those that cause illness in humans. This research will investigate how
changes in species diversity affect the risk of infection and disease in a
threatened group of wildlife: amphibians. Researchers from the USA and the
United Kingdom will work together to better understand how diversity influences
pathogen transmission, using mechanistic models of infection fit to data from
field observations, laboratory experiments, and whole-system manipulations.
Results of the research will be used to assist natural resource managers to
conserve threatened amphibian populations and to develop an interactive exhibit
at the University of Colorado Natural History Museum which will engage
elementary and middle school students. The project will also provide
opportunities for broadening participation in science by involving undergraduate
and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal applies tools and
concepts from community ecology to test the foundational relationships between
biological diversity and parasite infection. Building upon extensive previous
research by the investigators, data from (i) wetland surveys will be used to
understand how communities of amphibians (frogs, toads, and salamanders) and
infectious parasites change along a gradient in biodiversity. Field data will be
combined with results from (ii) laboratory experiments that test alternative
mechanisms through which biodiversity might affect infections to develop (iii)
predictive models that forecast the influence of each mechanism on disease risk.
Finally, model predictions will be tested and refined using a (iv) real-world
experiment in which the presence and abundance of an influential host species is
altered across a natural richness gradient. Results will be compared among
parasite species that differ in the amount of disease they cause in amphibian
hosts. The integration of wetland surveys, multi-scale experiments, and
predictive modeling will fill a key knowledge gap by assessing the functional
relationships between biodiversity and parasite transmission, which are
difficult to discern from strictly observational data or studies of a single
host or parasite species. These efforts will help resolve ongoing debates about
the diversity-disease relationship and build a more comprehensive understanding
of how changes in ecological communities interact to influence disease
risk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.