* 1754839
* NNA:  LTREB:  The Arctic Carbon and Climate (ACCLIMATE) Observatory: Tundra Ecosystem Carbon Balance and Old Carbon Loss as a Consequence of Permafrost Degradation
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Edward Schuur, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2024
* USD 511,140.00

The future trajectory of Earth's atmosphere depends on the response of land and
ocean to a changing environment, especially the potential for substantial
sustained carbon release in high latitude regions like the Arctic. A key
question in understanding how the Earth system will respond is whether there are
tipping points - global carbon cycle surprises - that will make the effects of
environmental change such as sea-level rise, extreme weather, droughts, and
impacts on agriculture occur faster than currently projected by models.
Permafrost carbon, the remnants of plants, microbes, and animals accumulated in
perennially frozen Arctic soil over thousands of years, currently holds twice as
much carbon as the atmosphere, and could be such a tipping point. Release of
just a fraction of this frozen carbon as carbon dioxide and methane into the
atmosphere would significantly increase the rate of future global environmental
change. Each additional ton of carbon released from the permafrost region to the
atmosphere incurs additional costs to society and presents the challenge of
requiring sustained long-term observations to quantify rates and unravel
mechanisms in order to forecast change. This project will establish the Arctic
Carbon and Climate (ACCLIMATE) permafrost carbon observatory, which will use
field observations to measure carbon fluxes, and ecosystem carbon pools in a
tundra ecosystem that is undergoing rapid and irreversible change due to
regional warming. The project will also include training of a postdoctoral
researcher and several undergraduate students, and outreach activities involving
high school students and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Arctic Carbon and
Climate (ACCLIMATE) permafrost carbon observatory uses field observations to
measure carbon fluxes, carbon isotope ratios, and ecosystem carbon pools in a
tundra ecosystem that is undergoing rapid and irreversible change due to
regional warming. Permafrost temperature at the Eight Mile Lake research
watershed in Interior Alaska has been monitored for several decades starting
before permafrost degradation began in the early 1990s. The impact of permafrost
degradation on plants, microbes, and ecosystem carbon balance began to be
documented in the early 2000s. The overall research plan will answer three focal
questions: 1) Does warming and permafrost degradation cause a net release of
carbon from the ecosystem to the atmosphere, and how does the magnitude change
over years to decades? 2) What proportion of this carbon release is derived from
old carbon that comprises the bulk of the soil carbon pool, and will this
increase as thaw progresses? 3) How does change in surface hydrology interact
with thawing to control old carbon losses and the partitioning of carbon dioxide
and methane? Carbon measurements, along with other key ecosystem variables
collected by this observatory, will be organized for benchmarking regional and
Earth System models, and coupled to that process through ongoing synthesis and
model inter-comparison activities. These technical activities will be integrated
with knowledge-transfer activities that link results to the broader scientific
community, as well as to the broader public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.