* 1754596
* Collaborative Research:   Ecomorphological diversification and the origin of phenotypic disparity in crocodile-line archosaurs
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Alan Turner, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 04/30/2023
* USD 418,414.00

Species morphology typically evolves to meet the demands of the environment. In
the fossil record, and among existing species, large morphological changes are
frequently associated with changes in habitat or ecology. However, there remains
little understanding of the general rules that govern morphological change
associated with ecological change. This project will use skeletal and soft-
tissue anatomy as well as detailed 3D shape data to study closely-related,
transitional species to investigate the evolution of morphology and ecology in
the long-lived and fossil-rich group Crocodylomorpha (crocodiles, alligators,
and their extinct relatives). The project will exploit the group's multiple
natural experimentation with extreme environments to develop detailed conceptual
models for major ecological and morphological transitions that will inform on
the rules underlying morphological change. These models will then serve as
predictors for how and why transformations occur, which can be tested in other
groups with similar narratives. Important examples include the initial emergence
of four-limbed vertebrates onto land, how birds took the sky, and the first
steps in the reign of mammals. The innovative technologies, techniques, and
widely applicable conclusions from this research will promote interdisciplinary
work among paleontologists, biomechanists, ecologists, and evolutionary
biologists. The researchers will make their data, digital models, analytical
tools, and essential supplementary files available for wide access. Furthermore,
this project will support associated PhD and Postdoctoral research as well as
foster access to higher education for substantially underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use integrative approaches to
reveal the complexities of ecomorphological changes across major evolutionary
transitions. The study will examine how novel environments put new, often
extreme demands on historical phenotypes by addressing how large-scale habitat
and ecological transitions drive evolution across multiple integrated anatomical
systems. The research will test hypotheses about phenotypic integration on an
evolutionary scale to determine whether developmental rates, sequence
heterochrony, and/or patterns of modularity determine if consistently applied
rules of ecomorphological diversification underlie adaptive radiations. The
outcome will be an unprecedented database of crocodylomorph cranial and post-
cranial diversity that includes contrast-enhanced neural and skeletal tissues,
raw and partitioned CT stacks, and 3D digital models as well as comparative,
intra-clade conceptual models for how predatory vertebrates shift to lives on
the shoreline, within the sea, and toward herbivory. The microCT and cutting-
edge, diffusible iodine-based contrast-enhanced computed tomography imaging, in
addition to a robust morphological phylogeny for analysis of evolutionary trends
using the latest phylogenetic methods, represent potentially transformative
methodologies developed by this research group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.