* 1754862
* Collaborative Research: Managing epidemics in wildlife with acquired resistance
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Taegan McMahon, University of Tampa
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 07/31/2021
* USD 206,276.00

Infectious diseases pose a serious threat to many wild animals. While
vaccination is a successful tool against diseases of humans and livestock, it is
rarely used to control wildlife diseases. This is partly because of a poor
understanding of immunity in wild animals and its impact across a large
population. This award will address these gaps in knowledge by studying the
immunity acquired by frogs against a fungus, Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis
(Bd). Bd infection has caused a severe decline in frog numbers around the world.
Recent studies have shown that frogs exposed to dead Bd become resistant to
future infection. They suggest that the immune system of frogs can be harnessed
to fight Bd. This award combines mathematical theory with laboratory and field
experiments to understand the correlates of acquired resistance to Bd in frogs
and assess the potential for managing outbreaks in wild populations by
stimulating acquired resistance to the fungus. Results of this study will
facilitate the development and testing of a novel, widely applicable theory for
the management of epidemics in wildlife. Consequently, this work will help to
curb losses of biodiversity. Researchers will share their results with groups
working on frog conservation and provide multi-disciplinary training to a
diverse group of scientists. Computer-based teaching tools that illustrate
wildlife disease management through vaccination will be developed and made
publicly available.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;There is poor understanding of
acquired resistance in wild animals and a scarcity of theory underlying wildlife
vaccination. These gaps in physiology and ecology will be addressed in the
current research using amphibians and the chytrid fungus, Bd. Bd is selected for
study because this pathogen contributes to global amphibian declines and the
recent discovery that amphibians acquire immunological resistance following
exposure to dead Bd. This award integrates mathematical theory with laboratory
and field experiments to i) characterize the acquisition and maintenance of Bd
resistance across host life stages, ii) evaluate the immunological mechanisms
responsible for individual resistance and whether their presence predicts
population-level outcomes, iii) determine if resistance can be induced in wild
populations, and iv) if so, can this alter epidemics and host persistence in a
whole-ecosystem experiment populations - an outcome of broad significance for
wildlife conservation. This project links immunological mechanisms and
individual-level traits to population- and community-level disease outcomes. It
advances fundamental knowledge of host-parasite interactions while helping to
curb disease-driven worldwide losses of biodiversity. Results of this research
will be disseminated to conservation partners to help limit the spread of
chytridiomycosis. This research will facilitate the training of a diverse group
of scientists in physiology, ecology, and mathematical biology. Computer modules
that illustrate general and amphibian-specific outcomes of disease management
via acquired immunity will be integrated into teaching and made publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.