* 1754449
* RUI:  Limits to the Effects of Contemporary Evolution on Communities
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2024
* Casey terHorst, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2024
* USD 564,910.00

Ecologists have long investigated how species interacting with one another can
influence biodiversity. Recently, they also have recognized that rapid,
contemporary evolution can alter those species interactions. This project moves
beyond asking if rapid evolution is important to asking when it is important. In
some communities, it may be impossible to understand the ecology without
accounting for ongoing evolutionary change. However, scientists do not yet
understand the underlying rules that govern when evolution strongly influences
species interactions and when it might be reasonably ignored by ecologists and
conservation biologists. This project will investigate two factors that may
limit the effects of rapid evolution on ecological processes: genetic diversity
and dispersal. First, evolution by natural selection requires a diverse set of
genes to act upon, but because genetic diversity may change over time, the
influence of natural selection may also change. Second, the movement of
individuals among habitats may overwhelm the ability of natural selection to
purge individuals that are not well-adapted to a particular habitat. The
research aims to understand how genetic diversity and dispersal shape the
relative roles of contemporary evolution and ecological processes in shaping
biodiversity. Results of this study could benefit society by resulting in
strategies to conserve biodiversity and improve human health. Additionally, the
study will involve a Latina postdoctoral associate, support graduate and
undergraduate students at a Hispanic-serving institution, aid development of
hands-on activities for K-5 classrooms, and continue an Ask the Scientist blog
that pairs scientists with K-12 students in rural
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because studies of the interactions between
ecological and evolutionary processes would be difficult and time-consuming to
conduct using large plants and animals, this project uses a natural microcosm
community as a model system to test hypotheses about genetic diversity and
dispersal in the field and laboratory. The leaves of carnivorous pitcher plants
contain a diverse assemblage of bacteria, protists, and insects that interact
with each other ecologically, but also have very short generation times and
rapid evolutionary responses to changing environmental conditions. This project
will conduct experiments that create contrasting selection environments that
correspond to the conditions in young and old pitcher plant leaves: high
predation/low competition versus low predation/high competition, respectively.
Each experiment will manipulate either the genetic diversity of protists in the
community or the extent of dispersal among local communities. The researchers
will then use a novel mathematical approach to distinguish ecological effects on
community diversity from evolutionary effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.