* 1754101
* The Texas A&amp;M Cyber Leader Scholarship Program: Developing Cyber Leader-Scholars for the Nation
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2023
* John Hamilton, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2023
* USD 4,420,509.00

Texas A&amp;M University is only one of eight institutions nationwide that holds
all three designations available from the National Security Agency (NSA) and
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) as a Center of Academic Excellence in
Cyber Defense Education and Research, and Cyber Operations. The Texas A&amp;M
University, in partnership with the Houston Community College System (HCC),
propose the CyberCorps(R): Scholarship for Service (SFS) Cyber Leader-Scholars
(CLS) Program. The researchers aim to leverage the academic excellence and
expertise at both institutions to develop and mentor a diverse group of 35
undergraduate and graduate students so they may succeed as cyber leaders in
federal, state, local, tribal and territorial government organizations. Through
the implementation of the CLS Program, Texas A&amp;M can share applied research
on effective teaching and learning in cybersecurity for nationwide adoption to
produce an unrivaled cybersecurity workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
cybersecurity curriculum at the university includes management, operational, and
technical courses with extensive hands-on experiences. Texas A&amp;M continues
to enhance its strong academic program with new cybersecurity courses, such as
Cyber-Leadership, Cybersecurity Risk Assessment/Risk Management, Policy, Law,
and Ethics in Cybersecurity, Secure Coding, Digital Currencies, and Digital
Forensics and Incident Response. Professional development activities for
students will include active mentoring, internships, active participation at
workshops, conferences, competitions, seminars, and opportunities to attain
industry certifications. The proposed CLS Program will institute innovative
methods for attracting, mentoring, and developing individuals from those under-
represented in the cybersecurity workforce. In partnership with HCC, both a
designated Texas A&amp;M Chevron-Engineering Academy and a Center of Academic
Excellence in 2-year education, students will be targeted at the community
college level and HCC will assist with outreach into the Houston Independent
School District. Finally, Texas A&amp;M will leverage existing relationships
from our NSA and NSF-funded GenCyber "Teach the Teacher" program and
CyberPatriot mentorship program to educate high school students about CLS
opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.