* 1754785
* RAPID: Ozone Loss Over the United States in Summer: Advancing Innovative Climate-Chemistry Research via In Situ Observations of ClO and BrO on Solar Powered Stratospheric Aircraft
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2019
* James Anderson, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 10/31/2019
* USD 199,998.00

This research includes the deployment of instrumentation to study ozone loss
over the central United States in summer. The instrumentation will be integrated
onto a new generation of solar powered stratospheric aircraft. Ozone loss over
the over the central US in summer could result in an associated increase in
exposure to UV radiation at the surface.

Recent observations have associated certain atmospheric flow patterns and
convective storms over the central U.S. in summer with conditions that may lead
to the amplification in the catalytic loss rates of ozone for the dominant
halogen, hydrogen, and nitrogen catalytic cycles. These observations define for
the first time (a) the frequency and depth of convective penetration of water
into the stratosphere over the United States in summer employing the NEXRAD
weather radar network, (b) the altitude dependent distribution of inorganic
chlorine established in the same coordinate system as the radar observations,
(c) the high accuracy, high spatial resolution temperature structure of the
stratosphere over the US in summer that resolves spatial and structural
variability of temperature, including the impact of gravity waves on the
temperature structure, and (d) the resulting amplification in the catalytic loss
rates of ozone for the dominant halogen, hydrogen, and nitrogen catalytic
cycles. These new observations imply significantly increased risk of ozone loss
over the Great Plains in summer.