* 1754761
* Collaborative Research:  An Integrative Field and Biophysical Model of Thermal Stress, Physiological Performance, and Reproductive Fitness
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2018,12/31/2023
* Jeffrey Levinton, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 12/31/2023
* USD 353,793.00

Animals experience thermal stress at the extremes of their geographic range.
This stress may be compounded by climate change, especially when the geographic
range stretches over a large range of latitude. Many species use behavioral
thermoregulation to ameliorate heat stress. However, these compensatory
behaviors have a cost, as they require the animal to abandon critical behaviors
that may only be performed in the hot and stressful habitat. This study
investigates these survival/reproductive tradeoffs in fiddler crabs, small semi-
terrestrial crabs that occupy shorelines in the tropics and temperate zones.
Male fiddler crabs use visual displays to attract mates in the hot, dry
intertidal zone, but must periodically retreat to a cool, moist burrow to
rehydrate and recover. Each retreat to a burrow requires a cessation of mating
behavior. Periodically the males rereat from the hot reproductive areas to
rehydrate and feed. This study will determine the tradeoff between
thermoregulation and mating performance across a species' geographic range,
using both experimental and modeling approaches, under both current and
predicted future conditions. Finally, the project will utilize the results of
the research on fiddler crabs to increase public interest in science using
public outreach activities and the training students at different levels
including high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Behavioral compensation
for thermal stress can lead to a profound but under-investigated tradeoff, as
thermoregulatory behaviors are costly. Energetic and thermoregulation costs will
generate major reproductive opportunity costs, which can reduce mating success.
This project focuses on the fitness consequences of missed mating opportunities
associated with thermoregulatory behaviors. These missed opportunities are
crucial to understand in the study of mating success in the context of
physiological stress and the differences in costs at different latitudes.
Understanding the associated reductions in fitness are crucial to fully
understand and predict the consequences of climate change on fitness, since
heating in lower latitudes may truncate the benefit of mating owing to the
increased cost of thermal stress. This proposal takes an integrative approach,
combining laboratory measurements, manipulative field experiments, and
biophysical modeling to examine the fitness consequences of behavioral
thermoregulation. This work, and the resulting model, will be broadly applicable
to the study of climate change impacts on ectotherms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.