* 1754437
* Physiology and Genomic architecture of fine-scale adaptation
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Kenneth Able, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 06/30/2023
* USD 945,057.00

Classically, the understanding of how genes influence resistance to
environmental stress was based on the assumption that a few rare genes have
large effects. An alternate idea is that there are many different genes that
occur in many individuals, but each gene has a small effect. Adding up many
genes of small effect ultimately results in a large response. This new idea
changes the study of individual variation, its effects on human health, and the
prediction about the future success of animals and plants. This research tests
these ideas by comparing different populations exposed to different
environmental stressors. Using these populations, the research team will
determine the genetic differences among these populations and connect these
genetic differences to physiological measurements. From these data, the team
will determine the number of genes that influence the response to the
environment and predict how individuals respond to environmental stress. The
prediction is that there are a large number of genes that can alter an
individual's response to environmental stress. If correct, this suggests that
there are many different combinations of genes that work well to respond to the
environment. Such a result would help resolve an unsolved question, why is
genetic diversity so abundant in nature? Additionally, understanding, natural
variation among healthy individuals will provide more accurate forecasts of how
species will respond to a changing world. Finally, in addition to the research
outcomes, the project will enhance educational opportunities for local community
college students and train of graduate students in integrative organismal
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How does adaption to stressful environments work,
does it depend on new mutations or standing genetic variation, involve many loci
of small effect or is it primarily due to a few genes of large effect? A better
understanding of the nature of adaptation to the environment will provide more
accurate predictions of how changing environments will affect species survival.
For ecological and physiological processes, the classic hypothesis has been that
adaptation involves one or a few genes, yet it seems likely that many genes
affect fitness or biological processes that affect organisms' success. Although
there is much debate, a potential major shift in our understanding of adaptive
variation suggests that polygenic soft-sweeps involving many loci cause a
selective advantage. Adaptation involving many loci is possible if many
individuals carry alternative alleles in the ancestral population. With many
alternative alleles at relatively high frequencies, adaptation is faster and
less costly. The research proposed here will provide the necessary empirical
data to address the frequency of polygenic soft-sweeps. In addition, the
research will provide data to predict and quantify adaptive divergence. This
research will specifically examine the temporal variation in high-throughput
sequences among teleost fish Fundulus heteroclitus occupying different
microhabitats and combines these with measures of physiological processes
(CTmax, hypoxic-CTmax and cardiac metabolism). The research team will follow
cohorts through time that occupy different microhabitats. These data address two
goals: 1) determine if significant allele frequency differences across
microhabitats are due to the selective loss of individuals over a single season,
and 2) examine physiological consequences of altered allele frequencies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems, the Division of Environmental Biology, and the Rules of Life
Venture Fund within The Directorate for Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.