* 1754614
* Collaborative Proposal: Intraspecific Trait Variation in Phytoplankton at Different Scales
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Edward Theriot, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 07/31/2023
* USD 449,149.00

Tiny microscopic organisms called phytoplankton form the base of lake food webs.
Phytoplankton determine the health of lake ecosystems, from harmful blooms
reducing water quality to fish productivity. They adapt to the conditions they
live in but are sensitive to changes in the environment, including nutrients,
light, temperature, and grazers. If phytoplankton species have many types with
different responses to the environment, then they are more likely to
successfully adapt to novel conditions. To understand how phytoplankton may
respond to future lake environments, such as warmer and more nutrient-rich
conditions, we need to understand how diverse phytoplankton are and what drives
that diversity. This project will characterize the diversity of phytoplankton
responses, both within and across species, to key factors that determine
phytoplankton growth. The researchers will also use mathematical models to
develop a new theory of what drives the diversity within and among species and
test it with the empirical data. The results will enable better predictions of
how lakes will respond to changing environments. Graduate students and
postdoctoral associates will be trained in multiple scientific approaches such
as lake sampling, laboratory experiments, genomic analyses and mathematical
modeling. Project results will be incorporated into K-12 teaching, including
data exercises for rural schools in Michigan and teacher workshops that provide
Professional Development Credit in evolution at the Texas Memorial
Museum.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will advance our knowledge of
intraspecific trait variation in ecologically important microbes, phytoplankton,
and provide insights into how trait diversity is generated and maintained, both
within and among species. It will use an integrated approach combining the
development of a theoretical framework for predicting intraspecific trait
variation at different scales and tests of this theory though experimental trait
determination and measurements of genetic relatedness among numerous
phytoplankton strains isolated from different lakes. The eco-evolutionary
framework will embed quantitative genetics approaches in a spatial metacommunity
setting. To test the specific predictions from this framework for how
intraspecific trait distributions depend on selection regime and other factors,
the researchers will determine the degree of intraspecific variation (mean and
variance) in key functional traits for several species of phytoplankton from
major taxonomic groups in Michigan lakes of contrasting resource levels and
grazing pressure, creating a gradient of selection regimes. The traits include
resource utilization traits (phosphorus, nitrogen and light), temperature
response traits, and cell size, often considered a proxy for grazer resistance.
Looking at several traits simultaneously, the project will be able to explore
pairwise and higher dimensional trade-offs within species, which has not
previously been done for phytoplankton, and compare them to interspecific trade-
offs. Additionally, the eco-evolutionary models developed to predict
intraspecific variation in multidimensional trait space at different spatial
scales should be relevant for other organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.