* 1754287
* Testing how interactions between plants and soil microbes influence plant community structure along a climatic gradient
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Kerri Crawford, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 12/31/2023
* USD 707,886.00

All plants live with a huge number and diversity of tiny organisms, called
microbes. Some help plants by providing nutrients, whereas others can have
negative effects like causing disease. Ecologists now believe that some microbes
in the soil can determine which plant species can grow in a particular place and
how common those plants can become. Thus, microbes may be an invisible force
determining the health of many plants, including those we depend on for food.
Practically all microbes are sensitive to changes in the environment. This is
important because changes in weather -- decreased rainfall, for example -- could
greatly affect which microbes thrive in the soil and therefore the abundance and
distribution of plants. Plants, in turn, may determine the presence or absence
of certain microbes in the soil, thereby creating a complicated situation in
which plants and microbes affect each other's success. This idea of "plant-soil
feedback" is a relatively new way of thinking about what plants need and their
living arrangements with microbes. This research will test how sensitive soil
microbes are to soil moisture and, in turn, how that sensitivity may impact
plants. The investigator will compare plant and microbial communities along a
gradient of rainfall in Texas and will explore how native and non-native plant
species differ in their interactions with microbes along that gradient. Results
of this work will have direct applications for predicting and mitigating the
effects of drought on an economically and culturally important ecosystem, Texas
grasslands. This research will also provide training opportunities for the next
generation of scientists, including students from underrepresented groups at the
University of Houston, a Hispanic Serving Institution. The investigator will
share her experiences with children in under-served public schools and will lead
educational workshops through local non-profit
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three major components. First, a
greenhouse experiment will test how water availability influences plant-soil
feedback among native and non-native plant species. The experiment will be
paired with root microscopy and DNA sequencing to identify candidate microbial
taxa underlying plant-soil feedback effects, a critical, but often lacking step
in generalizing plant-soil feedback responses. Second, a precipitation-
manipulation experiment in the field will test, for the first time, whether
changes in plant-soil feedback can predict changes in plant community
composition in the different precipitation treatments. Third, a reciprocal soil
transplant experiment will test for generality in plant-soil feedback responses
across a natural precipitation gradient in Texas, which will provide insights
into whether plant-soil feedback responses to climate may depend on historical
climate legacies. Given plant-soil feedback theory's success at integrating
plant-microbe interactions into the framework of plant community ecology, deeper
insights into the factors that influence plant-soil feedback may transform our
understanding of how plant communities are structured and plant diversity is
maintained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.