* 1754274
* Roles of Macrophages in Immunity to Ranavirus, and in Viral Persistence and Dissemination
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Jacques Robert, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 03/31/2023
* USD 713,517.00

Macrophages are a type of immune cells that are indispensable to vertebrate host
immunity and homeostasis. Thus, they often become targets of viral pathogens as
a means of immune evasion and mechanisms of dissemination. Ranaviruses, which
infect amphibians, are increasing in both prevalence and in the range of host
species infected. This raises pressing concerns for biodiversity and
aquaculture, and poses fundamental issues related to evolution of host/pathogen
interactions. Indeed, the remarkable emerging features of ranavirus infections
appear intimately linked to controlling immune responses in many host species,
and growing evidence hints at macrophages as critical for their infection
strategy. The goal of this research is to elucidate the complex roles of
distinct amphibian adult and tadpole macrophage populations in orchestrating
host immune defenses against ranavirus, while serving as reservoirs for
ranavirus immune evasion and dissemination. The hypothesis addressed is that the
ranavirus Frog virus 3 (FV3) targets macrophages to evade host immune defenses
towards viral persistence and dissemination in the frog Xenopus laevis. The
specific aims are to determine the phenotypes and fates of tadpole and adult
macrophage subsets targeted by FV3; define molecular and cellular interactions
of FV3 with tadpole and adult macrophages; and elucidate the roles of
macrophages in host defenses and asymptomatic infections. The work will involve
training of students at all levels, as well as public engagement through
development of interactive programs at a local science museum. The researcher
will also continue to develop and manage a resource for Xenopus immunobiology
reagents and training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Macrophages are both at
the forefront of immune defenses against ranavirus (Iridoviridae) pathogens and
part of ranavirus infection strategies, which is unique among large DNA viruses.
The dramatic worldwide increases in ranges of populations and species infected
raise alarming concerns for biodiversity and aquaculture, and pose fundamental
issues related to evolution of host/pathogen interactions. The overall goal of
this proposed research is to elucidate the complex roles of distinct amphibian
adult and tadpole macrophage populations in orchestrating host immune defenses,
while serving as reservoirs for immune evasion and dissemination. The project
will take advantage of the extensively characterized Xenopus/FV3 model system
that permits reverse genetic as well as mechanistic experimental approaches from
the molecular and cellular levels to the whole organism level. The guiding
hypothesis is that FV3 targets amphibian macrophages to evade host immune
defenses towards viral persistence and dissemination. The specific aims are (1)
to determine the phenotypes and fates of larval and adult macrophage subsets
targeted by FV3; (2) to define molecular and cellular interactions of FV3 with
larval and adult macrophages; and (3) to elucidate the roles of macrophages in
host defenses and asymptomatic infections. These aims will utilize technologies
developed during the past NSF funding period, including RNAi-based and
CRISPR/Cas9-mediated loss-of-function by transgenesis; traceable recombinant FV3
and FV3 knockout mutants deficient for virulence/immunomodulatory genes;
adoptive macrophage transfer into inbred recipients; Xenopus macrophage
cultures; macrophage depletion; and the use of specific Abs against Xenopus
macrophages and FV3.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.