* 1754340
* Environmental regulation of spinal cord development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Laura Borodinsky, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,265,000.00

During development, the cells that form the brain need to produce many different
kinds of neurons in order to generate the complicated neural circuits found in
adults, a process called differentiation. Many different molecules affect the
patterning of the embryonic nervous system; these molecules have been used to
identify biochemical pathways that are part of the developmental programs cells
utilize to acquire their individual neuronal identities. However, the extent to
which the environment intervenes in the functioning of this developmental
program, is an understudied aspect of neural development. This research project
documents ways in which nervous system development is dynamic and sensitive to
the environment in which it occurs, challenging the idea of a predetermined,
rigid genetic program that completely dictates the fate of neural cells before
they are born. A mechanistic explanation for the observed plastic changes (that
the environmental plasticity produces neural circuits that better match an
individual's performance to the particular environment they develop in) is also
tested. The research will assess the influence of temperature on neuronal
differentiation in the embryonic frog spinal cord, and chart the mechanisms
through which temperature differences change the sensorimotor behavior of
developing tadpoles. Understanding these basic mechanisms of nervous system
development will benefit society by contributing to knowledge about
neurodevelopmental disorders and spinal cord regeneration. In addition, this
project will establish an educational program at the K-12 school in Shriners
Hospital for Children Northern California. Children are patients, mostly from
low-income families; they will be offered a school program when they need to
stay long-term at the Hospital, a non-profit organization that cares for the
children at no cost. The project will expose these children to hands-on science
activities and the scientific method. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investigation
hypothesizes that environmental cues modulate embryonic calcium activity in
developing neurons, thus regulating spinal neuron differentiation and the
establishment of effective locomotor circuitry. Using a multidisciplinary
approach, this study will identify the mechanisms by which environmental
temperature modulates calcium-mediated spontaneous electrical activity resulting
in specification of developing spinal neurons. The study hypothesizes that the
cold-sensitive transient receptor potential cation channel M8 (TRPM8)
contributes to the higher frequency calcium spike activity observed at cold
temperatures. Pharmacological and genetic approaches will be implemented to
assess the necessity and sufficiency of TRPM8 in cold temperature-induced
changes in calcium activity. Differentiation and patterns of connectivity of
sensory and motor neuron populations in animals grown at different temperatures
after reaching identical tadpole stages will be examined by immunostaining and
luciferase assay reporters. This investigation will determine the mechanisms
underlying the changes in sensory and motor neuron differentiation by rescuing
the temperature-driven phenotype through imposing counteracting approaches to
the changes in calcium spike activity. To determine the consequences of the
temperature-driven changes in neuronal differentiation on sensorimotor behavior
and to test whether there is interaction between the temperature at which
animals are grown and the sensorimotor performance, embryos will be raised at
different temperatures until tadpole stages when the flexion reflex and the
swimming pattern will be assessed at different
temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.