* 1754697
* Collaborative Research:  Plant discovery in the southern Philippines
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Daniel Nickrent, Botanical Research Institute of Texas
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 07/31/2024
* USD 950,001.00

The Philippines archipelago, comprising over 7500 islands, is known to contain
high levels of unique plant and animal diversity but several of the islands,
especially Visayas and Mindanao in the south of the country, still need to be
intensively sampled. Many animal and plant species, including potential crop
plants, await discovery and description even as extensive areas are threatened
by deforestation. This four-year project will document and describe land plant
and lichen diversity in the southern Philippines through a series of large field
expeditions followed by taxonomic study and formal description. The project team
will document the occurrence and abundance of diverse plant species through a
combination of physical museum collections and high-resolution photographs. All
images and locality data will be placed online in easily searchable formats. The
project will also develop a DNA repository of collections made during the field
expeditions for future genealogical studies. Project data will be used to
assemble species inventories in different areas of the southern Philippines to
both identify biodiversity hotspots and prioritize land management decisions.
Diverse training in field and laboratory methods will be provided to
undergraduate and graduate researchers in Texas and North Carolina to prepare
them for diverse science careers. U.S. high school students will learn about
biodiversity through a project-based curriculum that includes exposure to
collections, digital data, and spatial analysis. Outreach, including online
interactive programs through the Botanical Research Institute of Texas (BRIT),
will disseminate research findings broadly within the U.S. and the Philippines
to both scientists and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This botanical survey of
the southern Philippines will be conducted through eight major field
expeditions. Herbarium specimens will be digitized and freely disseminated along
with associated metadata and images of both living in-situ and museum specimens
derived from the collections generated by the project. Collections will be
analyzed using a combination of morphological and molecular systematic
approaches to produce a diversity of taxonomic products, including revisions,
regional annotated checklists, and multi-entry keys. Project data will be used
to characterize patterns of species richness and endemism and test biogeographic
hypotheses associated with the effect of Pleistocene land conformations on the
Philippine flora. The project will discover new species, rediscover poorly known
species, and document new species records for the
Philippines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.