* 1754595
* Evolution of Parasite Specialization Across an Ancient Agricultural System
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2023
* Nicole Gerardo, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 04/30/2023
* USD 1,061,637.00

All parasites are specialists. This specialization is driven by the need for
parasites to efficiently encounter and infect at least some hosts, which often
comes at the cost of being able to infect others. At a broad-scale, parasite
species adapt to a particular set of host species. At a finer-scale, many
parasite strains specialize at overcoming the defenses of a narrow range of host
genotypes within a species. There is little understanding of how evolutionary
processes of host and parasite adaptation at the fine scale are linked to the
evolution of parasite host ranges at broader scales, in part because few host-
parasite systems are amenable to research at both scales. In this project the
researchers will capitalize on a natural, ancient host-parasite system that
allows for molecular investigation of parasite specialization at multiple
scales. Escovopsis is a diverse genus of parasitic fungus that attacks other
fungi cultivated by fungus-growing ants. Different Escovopsis species are able
to infect different species of cultivated fungi, and at a finer scale, different
Escovopsis genotypes are able to infect and utilize different host genotypes.
Such parasite specificity suggests a dynamic pattern of adaptation and provides
a rare opportunity to identify traits underlying parasite specialization at
multiple scales. As part of this project, classes of undergraduate students will
study parasite evolution through investigation of the parasites' host ranges and
the parasites' genomes, and middle school students will learn about parasite
evolution through an integrated science and art approach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on existing knowledge of Escovopsis diversity and
host range, as well as recently gained insights into the Escovopsis genome, the
researchers will couple experimental assays of parasite-host interactions,
transcriptomics, population genomics and genetic manipulation to explore the
genetic underpinnings of pathogen specialization. Specifically, the researchers
will utilize transcriptomics and functional assays to identify the gene
underlying the parasites' responses to host strains that they can and cannot
infect. They will study the evolution of these genes in light of the evolution
of the rest of the parasite genome through genomic comparisons across species
and across strains within species. Taken together, the researchers will be able
to assess whether similar traits underlie parasite specialization at broad and
fine evolutionary scales in a tractable, ancient host-parasite
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.