* 1754512
* SG:  Microbial Community Coalescence: Disentangling Assembly Processes during Aquatic Mixing
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2021
* Justin Wright, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 02/28/2021
* USD 199,671.00

Microorganisms encompass most of the diversity on Earth, and are responsible for
maintaining the function of various ecosystems, such as in the guts of animals,
in soil, and in water. This research is focused on understanding processes that
control where microbes live and how they respond to changes in local conditions.
A tree exists in a given location if it can survive both the environmental
conditions and interactions with its neighbors at that location, and its
seedlings may disperse to new locations with new environmental conditions.
Unlike trees, microbes frequently migrate as whole communities and in tandem
with their environment, often merging with other microbial communities along
with their respective environments. For instance, wind movement of soil
particles across the landscape or human handshakes result in novel contact of
previously separated microbial communities. This process is termed community
coalescence. The confluence of two water bodies is a clear example of community
coalescence, resulting in a new, united environment with novel interactions
among the previously separate microbial communities. This research will
experimentally identify how aquatic microbial communities interact and respond
to the merger under different environmental conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand how microbial
communities from distinct habitats interact under community coalescence, with
the following specific objectives: (1) Characterize the membership of microbial
communities in the field and their activity at three distinct aquatic
environments where coalescence occurs. (2) In the laboratory, track microbial
community membership and activity in response to experimentally-imposed
coalescence. (3) Analyze experimental data in the context of the patterns
observed in the field. Unraveling mechanisms that determine community membership
following a coalescence event is difficult, since the abiotic and biotic factors
are intertwined. In order to understand the true community ecology of microbes,
it is necessary to separate the environmental and biological factors that
ultimately determine which organisms persist and which do not. To address these
fundamental ecological questions, the research team developed a new approach to
directly measure the effects of environmental factors and biotic interactions,
independently and in combination, on coalesced communities. This project
addresses fundamental concepts in community ecology, dispersal of a massive
number of microorganisms in the context of aquatic systems, and directly
disentangles biotic and abiotic factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.