* 1754567
* Collaborative Research: RUI: How energy economy and muscle properties shape fish swimming strategies in the field
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* David Coughlin, Widener University
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 07/31/2023
* USD 173,149.00

Fish are important components of freshwater and marine ecosystems, are
economically important through commercial fisheries and aquaculture, and have
further socio-economic value in the form of recreational fishing. Relatively
little is known about the details of fish behavior in the field. A major goal of
the project is to develop low-cost underwater video techniques that allow
analysis of fish swimming behavior. This approach has revealed that some fish
use intermittent propulsion while swimming: a swimming mode where short series
of tail beats are interrupted by gliding. Information from field swimming videos
will be combined with physiological techniques in the lab to measure swimming
energy costs and muscle properties. The researchers can then explore the
potential advantages of this swimming style, for example we predict that
intermittent swimming will reduce energy costs. Energy economy is biologically
important for many animals, and low-cost propulsive strategies may also inform
the design and operation of underwater vehicles. Improved knowledge of fish
behavior and physiology can also inform management of fish habitats, commercial
and recreational fisheries, and aquaculture facilities, as well as improve the
design of engineered structures with which fish interact such as fish ladders
and spillways. Additionally, the project will broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM fields by providing research training
opportunities for several undergraduate and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To fully understand the links between
locomotion and fitness, the investigators require information on the following:
1) how animals move in their habitats, 2) the factors that underlie the observed
patterns of movement, and 3) how these factors affect the performance metrics,
such as energy economy, that impact fitness. Field swimming performance data
recently obtained by the Principal Investigators indicate that bluegill sunfish
use an intermittent propulsive strategy for swimming, a behavior rarely observed
under laboratory conditions. Intermittent propulsion is widely used during
flight and may also be common during swimming, although detailed field data are
scarce. Given their accessibility in their habitat, and suitability for
behavioral and physiological data collection in the lab, bluegills are an ideal
model system for exploring the potential benefits of intermittent propulsion
during fish swimming. The project will use 3D underwater videography to provide
the most detailed analysis of fish swimming performance in the field yet
attempted. These data will be integrated with laboratory measurements of muscle
contractile performance to quantify the potential muscle level constraints that
favor intermittent propulsive strategies, and to test long-standing hypotheses
regarding the potential energetic advantages of intermittent propulsion in
swimming fish. The resulting data will be broadly applicable in interpreting
fish behavior in the field and will inform laboratory approaches to ensure
performance is measured in ways relevant to organismal fitness. Additionally,
the project will provide research training opportunities for several
undergraduate and high school students who are recruited from populations that
are traditionally underrepresented in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.