* 1754610
* Collaborative Research: Origin and Evolutionary Divergence of the Pancrustacean Brain
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Gabriella Wolff, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 03/31/2021
* USD 492,662.00

It is still unknown when brains first appeared during the early history of life.
The ways in which major brain parts that are structurally distinctive have
changed over evolutionary time are also poorly understood. These knowledge gaps
are partly due to the fact that fossil brains are rare and have been difficult
to study. This project features scientists from three collaborating laboratories
who will pool their resources to identify a set of invertebrate brain centers
that mediate learning and memory. Structural and functional similarities and
differences among these areas will be established across modern insect and
crustacean species. The major question this research is answering is whether
these brain centers share common genetic and computational attributes due to the
brain?s fundamental organization being inherited by the descendants from a
common ancestor; or, because brains that have arisen independently in different
invertebrate groups are not able to perform certain functions unless brain areas
that give them these same abilities have also arisen independently. These
questions will be answered by precisely measuring the brain structures in
fossilized invertebrate animals and comparing their basic arrangements with
modern counterparts. The broader impact of this research will be to identify
invertebrate proxies of the learning-and-memory brain centers found in
vertebrate animals alive today, including humans. Identification of such proxies
will inform us about how brains have evolved, and will contribute to a broader
understanding of how memory centers are organized. The results will impact
theories of, and research on, neural networks and artificial intelligence, and
at the same time the scientists carrying out this research will develop novel
strategies for identifying genealogical correspondence of brain structures
across a very broad range of species. Brains analyzed for this research will be
digitally reconstructed in 3D and uploaded to an open-source database for
education and research purposes. The research will also provide advanced
neuroscience structural analysis and genomics training to students from diverse
backgrounds.

The neuronal organization and circuit properties of insect mushroom bodies are
well known, as are their functional properties for learning and memory. While
the existence of mushroom-body-like centers exist across arthropods, it is not
known whether these phenotypically or genotypically correspond to the centers in
insects. The planned research will identify mushroom body-like centers across a
broad range of species, analyze their discrete neural arrangements, circuit
organization, and molecular attributes. These comparisons will identify the
species within and outside Arthropoda that possess functional and morphological
correspondences in these structures. Transcriptomics will address whether
phenotypically-corresponding centers share common genomic attributes, and
whether there are unique genetic networks that define arthropod mushroom bodies
or whether these networks differentiate mushroom bodies in different groups of
arthropods such as in insects and crustaceans. The identification of broad
phenotypic and genotypic homology of these centers across a broad phyletic
spectrum would suggest an ancient origin of these learning and memory centers.
Equally intriguing would be results suggesting convergent evolution of learning
and memory centers across taxa.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.