* 1754049
* Understanding the Cognitive Factors and Legal Processes of Expert Opinions
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Anthony Perillo, Indiana University of Pennsylvania Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 334,787.00

Title: Understanding Cognitive Factors and Legal Processes of Expert
Opinions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During trials,
experts are often called to provide their opinion in order to help courts
understand complicated issues. These experts are expected to remain objective
when providing their evaluations, in large part because judges and juries can be
influenced by expert opinions. This project will examine how expert decision
making and legal procedures may lead to bias during forensic evaluations by
experts. Further, this project will study and compare whether experts are
influenced by the party that retains their services to provide expert opinions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes the psychological theories of
cognitive dissonance, framing, and confirmation bias as potential contributing
factors that may bias expert opinions. Using actual forensic clinicians tasked
with conducting mock forensic evaluations, this project will use an experimental
approach to examine expert opinions. Manipulations in the experimental research
design will examine experts "information review strategies to assess how
cognitive dissonance, framing, and confirmation bias may affect experts"
decision making during an evaluation and their ultimate impressions. The project
also will examine the impact of these cognitive factors when experts are kept
blind to the referral source retaining their services. By identifying how, when,
and why expert bias develops during a forensic evaluation, this research can
identify ways to increase objectivity among experts and bring about fairer case
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.