* 1754125
* REPEATED EVOLUTION IN BLACK AND WHITE: DETERMINANTS OF CONVERGENCE IN WHITE SANDS LIZARDS
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Erica Rosenblum, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2023
* USD 600,503.00

In this time of rapid environmental change, it is more important than ever to
understand how living things respond to shifting conditions. How quickly can
species adapt to environmental change? Do different species respond to new
conditions in similar ways? A powerful way to answer these questions is to look
to the recent past. This project uses a striking example of rapid adaptation -
where several species have adapted to the same environmental change - to study
the predictability of evolution. The backdrop for the project is White Sands, a
dramatic gypsum dune field in New Mexico. The dunes are geologically young, and
the stark white sands contrast dramatically with the brown soil of the
surrounding desert. Over the last few thousand years, a number of animal species
have evolved blanched coloration to camouflage with the white habitat. This
project focuses on comparing patterns of evolution in three desert lizard
species, all of which have rapidly adapted to the extreme White Sands
environment. By studying the genomes of the white sands lizards and their
neighboring dark soil relatives - the researchers can understand how quickly -
and how predictably - adaptation occurs in novel environments. White Sands
provides an example of "evolution in action" - a case of evolutionary change
over short, observable timescales. It also provides a setting for education and
outreach. The researchers teach an annual "Lizard Camp" for local low-income
middle school students and an annual "Biodiversity Day" for public school
Kindergarteners, and work with a variety of schools, parks, and publishers to
provide educational materials that instill a sense of wonder about biological
diversity and the scientific process. This project contributes to understanding
rules of how, and how predictably, genetic changes lead to changes in organismal
traits that are important for the survival of species in natural and managed
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is often difficult to disentangle the
contribution of different factors to adaptation in natural systems. However,
White Sands offers replicated adaptation across multiple independent species,
providing an opportunity to understand evolutionary predictability. The project
applies an integrative genes-to-ecology approach to study the factors that
determine the direction and magnitude of evolution in White Sands lizards. The
project has three areas of investigation, focused on factors that influence
whether species will exhibit a shared evolutionary response to changing
conditions: natural selection, genomic architecture, and population demography.
Mark-recapture studies will be used to quantify the strength of natural
selection across species. Whole genome sequencing will be used to determine
whether the genetic architecture of adaptive traits is parallel across species.
Demographic modeling will be used to understand how gene flow affects phenotypic
response across species. The approach explicitly integrates studies across
multiple scales and methods in a single framework. Ultimately the research aims
to reveal the factors that contribute to predictability of evolutionary change
in the natural world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.