* 1754076
* Examining Murder Convictions and Punishment
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2024
* Jeffery Ulmer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 04/30/2024
* USD 344,000.00

Murder is the most serious criminal offense, and murder sentencing entails the
most consequential punishment decisions in society. There has been long-standing
concern about disparity in these most consequential decisions, most prominently,
disparity based on the race/ethnicity and gender of defendants and victims. In
addition, differences in case outcomes related to legal representation raise
issues of adequate and fair representation for indigent defendants. Variation
between locales in punishment outcomes are also central to a major recent
direction of social science research; how discretion in the criminal justice
system is shaped by larger socio-political environments. This proposed research
presents a unique opportunity to delve deeper into these important theoretical
and criminal justice policy concerns. This study's findings would be of interest
across several disciplines, especially criminology/criminal justice studies,
sociology, and legal studies. For cases charged with first, second, or third
degree murder, this proposed project will examine: 1) patterns of disparity in
charging, conviction, and punishment outcomes related to defendant and victim
race/ethnicity, victim gender and age, and type of defense representation; 2)
between-county differences in murder case outcomes and patterns of disparity in
relation to court sociopolitical contexts; and 3) qualitative differences
between counties in their formal and informal norms shaping murder case
processing, focusing on charging and plea bargaining, prosecutorial decisions to
seek the death penalty and to retract the death penalty if sought, and
sentencing decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will compile statistical
data from court and prosecutor files on cases charged with first, second, and
third-degree murder in 18 Pennsylvania counties that account for 79% of the
criminal homicide charges from 2000-2010. These data will be used to examine
individual-level differences in murder case processing outcomes, and between-
county differences in murder case outcomes relative to court sociopolitical
contextual features. Analyses will focus on the following dependent variables:
charging decisions, mode of conviction (conviction or not, and conviction by
guilty plea or trial), and sentence. For first degree murder charges, analyses
will examine whether prosecutors seek the death penalty and whether they retract
that filing, and whether defendants receive the death penalty. Three classes of
statistical models will be estimated: 1) propensity score weighting and/or
matching models to examine individual-level differences between groupings of
defendants; 2) inverse propensity score weighted regression (IPSWR) models to
examine between-county differences in individual-level outcomes on the dependent
variables above; and 3) hierarchical logistic and linear models to examine the
effects of county contextual variables on the dependent variables. In addition,
open-ended, in-depth interview data will be collected to examine qualitative
differences between counties in their formal and informal norms, policies, and
practices shaping their murder charging, conviction processes (especially plea
bargaining), prosecutorial decisions to seek the death penalty and to retract
the death penalty if it is sought, and sentencing decisions. Forty to fifty
individuals will be interviewed in the five counties with the most criminal
homicide cases; interviews will include judges, prosecutors, public defenders,
and private defense attorneys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.