* 1754124
* Predicting the effects of extreme drought on insect herbivore control of grassland ecosystem function
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Nathan Lemoine, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 08/31/2019
* USD 884,979.00

Extreme droughts in North America have occurred with surprising frequency for
the last 2,000 years. Recent droughts of the 1930s and 2012 highlighted the
vulnerability of grasslands to severe rainfall shortages. These droughts
resulted in an estimated $30 billion in damages and caused significant changes
to animal habitat availability, soils, and nutrient cycling. The role of insects
in US grasslands and their responses to extreme drought is poorly understood.
This is an important omission, because insects regulate grassland nutrient
cycling, suppress primary production, and often achieve outbreak densities
during severe droughts (e.g. the Dust Bowl). This award will quantify insect
regulation of primary production and nutrient cycling in US grasslands spanning
the Midwest, from the Rocky Mountains to the Mississippi River. The award will
address drought impacts on grassland insects and how drought may cause harmful
pest outbreaks that could further exacerbate drought conditions. In addition,
this award will train two graduate studies and provide hands-on experience for
multiple undergraduate students from traditionally underrepresented groups.
Finally, this research will produce a comprehensive and modern guide to
grasshopper identification in Midwestern grasslands that will be of use to
managers, researchers, and educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists
of two separate components. A manipulative field study will impose severe
drought at three grasslands across a xeric to mesic precipitation gradient.
Drought treatments will be combined with insect exclosures. Over three years,
researchers will measure aboveground net primary production, nutrient cycling,
plant physiology, plant traits, and insect herbivore densities. These data will
be analyzed to identify the mechanism by which insects regulate production and
nutrient cycling under ambient and drought conditions. A laboratory experiment
will identify how both plant and insect physiology change under drought
conditions. Physiological measurements will be incorporated into mathematical
models to predict nutrient cycling under ambient and drought conditions in
grasslands of the central US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.