* 1754013
* I-Corps: Innovative Single Face Shell Masonry Walls
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2017,12/31/2018
* Francisco Gomes, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 12/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is through the
provision of high-performing lower-cost industrial and commercial buildings. By
delivering a practical, efficient, and site-friendly system of masonry
construction, the single face shell wall system provides contractors,
architects, and engineers a better way to achieve the strength and durability of
building with non-combustible minerals without sacrificing the speed,
flexibility, and ease of modern open-wall construction. The project will provide
market insight contributing to the successful commercialization of single-face
shell masonry walls. Market acceptance of this class of load-bearing building
wall products would accrue substantial improvements to both the embodied and
operating energy profile of low-rise construction, which constitutes the vast
majority of commercial buildings. Inorganic masonry building systems better
resist damage from both fire and water infiltration, the leading causes of
commercial building insurance damage claims, thereby attaining longer building
lifespans. Market adoption of improvements to the thermal envelope and
construction cost of load-bearing wall masonry buildings will have
correspondingly large impacts in the durability and resiliency of the US
commercial construction industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
investigates the market for load-bearing, single-layer, thermally insulated
exterior building wall systems. The wall technology is an open system allowing a
variety of insulation, plumbing, and wiring types to be used in the wall
assembly, leveraging local trade efficiencies and meeting contemporary energy
codes. As with open-wall stud construction, insulation, electrical, low-voltage,
and plumbing rough-ins can all be scheduled, installed, and inspected
independently of the construction of the wall, improving productivity for masons
and reducing construction duration. The wall units can be manufactured by
conventional block production facilities at a rate significantly greater than
conventional hollow block while using a third less cement and aggregate. The
proposed project will assess product-market fit and commercial viability for
this type of wall assembly through interviews with general contractors, project
managers, and preconstruction professionals.