* 1754504
* Unsuspected eukaryotic life inhabits rhodolith-forming coralline algae (Hapalidiales, Rhodophyta), a remarkable marine benthic microhabitat
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2024
* Suzanne Fredericq, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 04/30/2024
* USD 928,161.00

Rhodoliths are unattached crust-forming marine macroalgae (seaweeds) called
corallines that are common in the northwestern Gulf of Mexico and they are the
main foundation for the attachment of other marine life at 45-90 meter depth.
This research will significantly increase our knowledge of algal diversity. It
will also assess whether rodoliths may function as temporary reservoirs for life
history stages of ecologically and economically important microalgae
(seedbanks), or as a safe refuge for species following environmental stress. The
findings will open the door to assess the universality of bloom-forming
microalgae, some of which are of public health concerns, and are found inside
rhodoliths in marine ecosystems around the world. This project will provide
training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students as well as a
post-doctoral researcher and high school students, with attention to
underrepresented groups. Additionally, the investigators will develop unique
outreach programs for the public, and will make all data collected available to
the scientific community and the general public to enable broad-scale
comparative analyses and integration with other data sets. These products will
be important for the fields of marine algal biology, ecology, fisheries and
biotourism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will characterize the rhodolith
microhabitat biota with plastid tufA, 16S V4 and 23S UPA metabarcoding
(amplicon-based environmental sequencing) assays specifically targeting primary
producers using high-throughput sequencing against reference datasets. The study
will also augment reference datasets for various molecular markers through
Sanger sequencing of Gulf algae for facilitated identification of taxa recovered
in the metabarcoding assays. In addition, monographic research of various groups
of algae and an illustrated field guide of rhodolith-associated phototrophs will
be produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.