* 1754389
* RCN:  Intermittent River Research Coordination Network (IRRCN): Integrating Intermittent River Ecology and Hydrology
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Margaret Zimmer, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 12/31/2021
* USD 499,955.00

Life is simply different in the absence of water, especially for life in rivers
and streams. Yet half of the Earth's rivers dry or stop flowing each year. These
streams or rivers are called "intermittent." Intermittent rivers are not well
studied or understood by researchers studying river ecology or river hydrology.
Initial research shows the hydrology and ecology of intermittent rivers are very
different from rivers that always flow. The current scientific understanding and
concepts of streams and rivers is incomplete as it is biased towards the half of
the Earth's rivers that continuously flow. The Intermittent River Research
Coordination Network (IR-RCN) will organize a series of expert workgroups that
will synthesize the growing body of research on intermittent river hydrology and
ecology. These workgroups will produce generalized frameworks that can explain
how intermittent river hydrologic and ecologic systems work. This research is
important because intermittent rivers are often overlooked or excluded from
water management plans due to uncertainty about their hydrologic and ecological
importance. Graduate students will receive interdisciplinary training in
hydrology and ecology and network with intermittent river ecologists and
hydrologists across the globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds will be provided by
this award to form three workgroups on intermittent river hydrology, ecology,
and ecohydrology. The hydrology workgroup will seek to generate new tools to
characterize intermittent river flow regimes, develop a hierarchical scale-based
framework for predicting spatial intermittence patterns, and compare statistical
and processed-based models for prediction of intermittent river streamflow
metrics. The ecology workgroup will synthesize large scale intermittent river
biodiversity and ecosystem datasets to better understand the structure and
function of intermittent river ecosystems. The ecohydrology workgroup will
integrate products from the ecology and hydrology workgroups to identify
hydrologic controls on intermittent river ecosystems and integrate these
findings into our current river conceptual frameworks designed for rivers that
always flow. The IR-RCN will improve the management of intermittent rivers by
enhancing communication and networking among academic researchers and
nonacademic stakeholders, including government agencies and NGOs. Datasets,
methods, materials and projects produced by the IR-RCN will be made open access
on the IR-RCN web portal and deposited in the Dryad Digital Repository for long-
term availability, which will broadly impact the global scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.