* 1754012
* SG:  Identifying patterns of trait variation that arise from competitive interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2018,09/30/2021
* David Vasseur, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 09/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

Competition for scarce resources is a fundamental aspect of life on earth.
Terrestrial plants compete for light, water and soil nutrients. Many birds
compete for access to food and nesting sites, and in the intertidal zone,
shellfish compete for rocky substrate on which to attach themselves. Classic
ecological theory predicts that when competition is important, species can
coexist with others by having traits that differentiate their resource needs
from those of their competitors. In turn, this prediction has led to the
hypothesis that when communities comprise well differentiated species,
competition must be a dominant process. Unfortunately, this hypothesis does not
support key aspects of modern coexistence theory, which has demonstrated that
even very similar competing species can coexist if the competitive advantage is
small. This project will address this scientific controversy by developing a
general eco-evolutionary mathematical model of intraspecific competition in
which competition is explicitly linked to species traits and evolutionarily
stable communities are identified. Ultimately, this work will lead to a better
understanding of the distribution and abundance of organisms in natural
communities and resolve these discrepancies in classic and modern theory.
Additionally, this research will provide research training for a postdoctoral
researcher and an undergraduate student. A teaching module in theoretical
ecology will also be developed for undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of the theoretical work on trait
distributions arising from competitive interactions has assumed that a single
trait (or at most a pair of traits) determines both the niche overlap and any
fitness differences among competitors. Under this assumption, trait
distributions of climax communities generally demonstrate over-dispersion;
however, it has also been shown that clumps of similar species can form at
intermediate time-scales when their fitness differences are small (termed
"emergent neutrality"). This project will employ mathematical models of
competition to compare patterns of trait variation that emerge under modern
coexistence theory to data collected from natural communities. This project will
incorporate a greater degree of biological realism than previous approaches, by
modulating the extent to which niche differences and fitness differences are
controlled by the same trait or different traits. Numerical simulations of a
Lotka-Volterra competition model within an eco-evolutionary framework will be
used to identify evolutionarily stable communities. The patterns of trait
dispersion that develop will be summarized using a variety of metrics to
demonstrate the patterns and mechanisms that underlie climax communities when
traits have varying degrees of control over fitness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.