* 1754061
* Does organic sulfur make a significant and overlooked contribution to sediment sulfate reduction in low-sulfate environments?
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Sergei Katsev, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 07/31/2023
* USD 521,957.00

Sulfur is an ever-present component of living matter. As aquatic organisms grow,
die, and decay, sulfur is exchanged between the organisms and their environment,
cycling between its organic forms in living cells and inorganic forms in ambient
water. An important process in the geochemistry of sulfur is sulfate reduction.
This process, carried out in the environment by microorganisms in the absence of
oxygen, converts sulfate, the oxidized and commonly available form of inorganic
sulfur, into hydrogen sulfide, which is highly reactive and generally toxic to
other organisms. This process has multiple environmental significances: it
regulates the fluxes of important nutrients such as phosphorus and pollutants
such as mercury; it is a pathway by which significant amounts of organic carbon
are converted into carbon dioxide and low molecular weight carboxylic acids; and
it affects the life cycles of commercially important aquatic plants such as wild
rice. Over geological time scales, it is responsible for the formation of iron
sulfides, which are preserved in sedimentary rocks and contain the record of
environmental conditions dating back to the earliest stages of Earth's history.
Present understanding of sulfate reduction, however, has been largely shaped by
studies in marine settings where sulfate is abundant and easily available to
organisms from seawater. The situation is different in freshwater lakes, rivers,
and other low-sulfate environments, which include the oceans of distant geologic
past and sediments deep below seafloor. Organic sulfur appears to be a much more
important source of sulfur for sulfate reduction in these low-sulfate
environments, however the pathways by which it circulates and the magnitude of
its effects in different conditions are unknown. A team of geochemists, organic
chemists, and geomicrobiologists from the University of Minnesota Duluth will
address these questions by studying the sulfur transformations and relevant
microorganisms, focusing on Lake Superior and its largest American tributary as
the study area. They will collect sediments, analyze them for geochemically
relevant sulfur species, measure reaction rates between these different species,
and perform genetic analyses to identify key involved microbes. If the initial
hypotheses are confirmed, the results are likely to transform the current
paradigm of sulfur chemistry in such low-sulfate environments, influencing
several scientific disciplines and providing a foundation for better
environmental management practices. The project will support two beginning
investigators and will train two graduate and several undergraduate students.
Research cruises will provide no-cost support for several collaborative efforts
on Lake Superior. Results, models, and methods will be incorporated into an
innovative Limnology curriculum being developed by the PIs with NSF support.
Findings will be communicated to public through a series of talks, K-12 teacher
education events including a teacher education cruise on Lake Superior aboard
the R/V Blue Heron broadcasted on YouTube, and exhibitions at Duluth Freshwater
Aquarium. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbially mediated sulfate reduction in
aquatic sediments mineralizes organic carbon, generates hydrogen sulfide, and
mediates the geochemical cycles of other elements, such as iron, phosphorus, and
mercury. While organic matter contains a number of sulfur compounds, little is
known of the fate of this organic sulfur pool during mineralization and more
importantly its contribution to the inorganic sulfur cycle that fuels sulfate
reduction. The current paradigm of sulfate reduction involves diffusion of
sulfur from overlying water into the sediments where sulfur-reducing
microorganisms are present. Contrary to the paradigm, modeling and preliminary
results demonstrate that under low-sulfate conditions organic sulfur buried in
sediment may be the dominant source of sulfur for sulfate reduction, and once
mobilized, via microbial biotransformation, may be exported to the overlying
water column. Contributions from organic sulfur may be pervasive in environments
such as oligotrophic freshwater lakes or the oceans of the geologic past. By
characterizing the organic sulfur transformations in sediments across a range of
sulfate and organic carbon levels in Lake Superior and its largest American
tributary, investigators will address the following questions under a range of
environmental conditions: A. To what extent does organic sulfur contribute to
the pool of sulfur that fuels sulfate reduction? B. Does organic sulfur undergo
cryptic, microbially-mediated biogeochemical transformations, and what
microorganisms are responsible for these transformations? They have assembled a
multidisciplinary research team that combines expertise in sediment
geochemistry, organic geochemistry, and geomicrobiology to address these
objectives using sediment characterizations, rate measurements, molecular
characterizations of microbial communities, and modeling. The results will
quantify an important part of the diagenetic sulfur cycle that has received
little attention despite its potential significance in environments such as
freshwater lakes, deep subsurface, and the low sulfate oceans of the geological
past. Verifying the proposed hypotheses may lead to reevaluation of the
geochemical cycles of sulfur and associated elements such as iron and nitrogen,
including cryptic reactions in the sulfate-methane transition zone;
reinterpretation of the origins of the isotopic signatures of sulfur preserved
in both modern aquatic sediments and ancient sedimentary rocks; and conservation
and management practices in sulfide affected water bodies. The project will
generate novel microbial and geochemical data that will be publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.