* 1754986
* RUI:  Collaborative Research:  Molecular mechanisms of dendrite development, maintenance and plasticity: in vivo single-neuron analysis in C. elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Michele Lemons, Assumption College
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 12/31/2023
* USD 239,558.00

Brain development involves the formation and fine-tuning of complex networks of
connections between nerve cells. These connections occur at specialized sites of
nerve cell contact, often formed on thorn-like structures (called spines) that
protrude from the nerve cells. Precisely-controlled structural changes in spines
are important for proper learning and memory. Some neuro-developmental disorders
are the result of improper spine outgrowth, or a failure to properly maintain
spines. These dysfunctions result in abnormalities in nerve cell communication
that decrease learning and memory performance. Preliminary work for the present
project has shown that connections between some nerve cells in the nematode worm
Caenorhabditis elegans have spine-like structures, similar to those in the human
brain. This project will investigate the mechanisms by which spines are formed
during normal development, and maintained throughout life. The research uses C.
elegans worms because of the powerful genetic tools developed in this species
for identifying and understanding molecular pathways that control basic cell
functions. By applying these tools to the mechanisms underlying spine outgrowth
and maintenance, we expect to gain critical novel insights into the requirements
for healthy brain function. Important insights into neurodevelopmental disorders
may also be provided. This research project will also support the training of
future scientists by providing mentored research experiences for undergraduate
and graduate students, as well as local high school teachers. Recruitment for
these activities will emphasize participants from under-represented groups in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most excitatory synapses in the mammalian brain
occur at dendritic spines, which are small actin-rich membrane protrusions that
house neurotransmitter receptors and other signaling machinery. Spines are
essential structures in synaptic connectivity and plasticity, and underlie
important processes of learning and memory. Despite recent progress in defining
molecular mechanisms that regulate spine morphological changes, many questions
about the basic biology of spine formation, maintenance and plasticity remain
unanswered. The role of the extracellular matrix (ECM) in regulating spine
development and maintenance is particularly poorly understood. The present
studies will employ genetic tools available in the nematode worm Caenorhabditis
elegans to identify and characterize molecular pathways involved in synapse
development and plasticity. Preliminary work revealed that excitatory synaptic
contacts onto C. elegans GABAergic neurons occur at spine-like protrusions. This
collaborative project, incorporating expertise from the Lemons, Francis and
B'nard labs, will investigate ECM-mediated mechanisms for guiding dendrite
development and dynamics, as well as applying unbiased forward genetic screening
to uncover novel cellular and molecular pathways that regulate dendritic spines
in vivo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.