* 1754459
* Collaborative Research:  Evolving the mammalian forelimb: modeling musculoskeletal transformation in the forerunners of mammals
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Stephanie E Pierce, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 09/30/2023
* USD 645,605.00

A unique feature of mammals is their many different forelimb shapes and
functions, including highly distinct forelimbs for running, climbing, digging,
swimming, and flying. No other group of animals has such diverse forelimbs, and
the flexibility of mammal forelimbs seems to be a key reason for the group's
success. The first mammal relatives found in the fossil record are over 300
million years old, and are a striking contrast to living mammals: their
forelimbs show a very limited range of shapes and functions. How did the
evolutionarily-flexible forelimbs of mammals evolve from such seemingly
constrained ancestors, and did changes to the forelimb increase the ability of
mammals to explore new ways of life? This research project will use state-of-
the-art techniques, and extensive data from fossils and modern animals, to
reconstruct forelimb structure and function in ancient mammal relatives, and to
test whether changes to the forelimb correlate with increases in their
ecological diversity. The results will deepen our understanding of the evolution
of a quintessential characteristic of mammals, and its role in the evolution of
animals as distinct as bats, moles, whales, horses, and humans. Dissemination of
the research will occur through a series of educational online videos produced
by the award-winning YouTube Channel "The Brain Scoop". The series will include
three episodes describing different stages of the research, and two episodes
that describe the results and their significance. Audience responses to the
videos will be used to evaluate the effectiveness of online videos as a tool for
science education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern mammals display remarkable
ecomorphological diversity, which is underpinned by exaptation of the forelimb
to serve novel functions (e.g. flying, running, swimming, and digging). In
contrast, the ancestors of mammals - the non-mammalian synapsids - are
generalized terrestrial tetrapods with seemingly limited ecological scope. The
mammalian-style forelimb, including a fully mobile scapula, ventrally oriented
ball-and-socket shoulder joint, and "upright" limb posture and movement, is the
result of a profound reorganization of the ancestral synapsid musculoskeletal
system. Drawing from the extensive synapsid fossil record, this project
integrates a diverse set of methodological techniques to pinpoint how
morphofunctional transformation of the forelimb influenced the tempo and mode of
phenotypic evolution of the synapsid clade. Rigorous morphometric analyses will
quantify shape disparity in forelimb skeletal elements and identify major shifts
in morphology. Cutting-edge biomechanical analyses will correlate morphological
shifts with functional transformation. And, advanced phylogenetic modeling
techniques will determine whether shifts in morphology and function resulted in
increases in diversification rates. Key products include a new comprehensive
metatree of Synapsida, an extensive geometric morphometric dataset, and 3D
musculoskeletal models of ten taxa at phylogenetically informative stages of
synapsid evolution. Combined, this project will build a robust comparative
framework to quantify musculoskeletal transformations in extinct animals and
provide a unique evolutionary perspective on an integrated anatomical module of
significant adaptive value.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.