* 1754590
* Collaborative Research:  SG:  Exploring the effects of UV light on floral pigmentation
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2018,11/30/2019
* Matthew Koski, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 11/30/2019
* USD 145,960.00

Plants experience many stresses, including extreme temperatures, drought, and
ultraviolet (UV) light. UV light is a harmful to DNA and proteins. In flowering
plants, pollen is particularly susceptible to UV damage, but dark pigments in
flower petals may protect the pollen by absorbing UV light. The intensity of UV
light reaching Earth has increased greatly during the 20th century and may
continue to increase, especially in some regions. This project explores whether
protective pigmentation in flowers has increased in response to increasing
amounts of UV light. Because flower color is important for attracting
pollinators, understanding how it may have changed is necessary to understand
how effectiveness of pollination may also have changed. Pollination
effectiveness, in turn, is important for the economic success of many
agricultural crops and for the ecological well-being of all flowering plants.
This project will also provide research experiences and mentoring for students
from underrepresented groups, and will engage the general public through
outreach activities at multiple events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will
test the prediction that temporal increases in UV-B radiation have driven
increases in UV-absorbing pigmentation in the petals of flowers. Because UV-B
has increased most in polar and temperate regions during the last century, they
predict that species with polar and temperate distributions will display larger
increases in UV-absorbing pigmentation than sub-tropical species. Additionally,
the researchers will test the prediction that species with pollen-bearing
structures exposed to sunlight will respond to changes in UV-B, while those with
pollen structures recessed within the flower (protected) will not. Researchers
will use herbarium specimens and bioclimatic databases to gather data on flower
pigmentation and abiotic conditions for 75 diverse taxa with different
geographic distributions. They will also sample color across a 55-year time span
and will use comparative models to assess whether rapid changes in UV-B have
elicited rapid change in flower coloration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.