* 1754019
* Biomass Burning Flux Measurements of Trace Gases and Aerosols (BB-FLUX) Using Solar Occultation Flux (SOF) on the Wyoming King Air
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Rainer Volkamer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 02/28/2023
* USD 1,073,141.00

The BB-FLUX project is part of a larger collaborative effort (WE-CAN) focused on
the study of the emissions and evolution of western U.S. wildfire plumes. A
field campaign is scheduled to take place in the late summer of 2018 near Boise
Idaho. The emission fluxes of a number of gases will be measured and compared
with model predictions. The results will provide significantly improved
quantification of wildfire emissions and provide important new information to
fire and fuel managers, and to air quality regulators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
University of Colorado airborne Solar Occultation Flux (SOF) instrument will be
used to calculate quantitative fluxes for a large number of gases. Measurements
will be made simultaneously above the aircraft, during aircraft transects below
plumes, with fluxes being quantified using the mass balance method. The project
combines remote sensing of CO and other trace gas columns by SOF (e.g., H2O, NO,
NO2, NH3, HONO, HCHO, small VOCs, CH3OH, HCN, HCOOH, other small acids),
temperature and humidity profiles, and plume injection height (Lidar), with
select in-situ sampling (CO, CO2, H2O, O3, wind speed, particle size
distributions).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BB-FLUX has the following four objectives:
1) quantify emission fluxes of CO, CO2, other gases, and particle volume for
different fuel types (boreal forest, temperate forest) and burn conditions
(flaming, smoldering); 2) characterize plume injection height from plumes that
travel decoupled from the ground (top of boundary layer, free troposphere), and
evaluate predictions by atmospheric models; 3) study radical sources and
secondary plume chemistry that leads to secondary production of O3 and changes
in the particle size distribution as plumes age. Finally, SOF column
measurements complement the detailed in-situ sampling of emission ratios on the
C-130 aircraft. By probing similar fires using both aircraft, this project 4)
explores synergistic benefits of remote sensing and in-situ observations to
quantify speciated total emission fluxes from
wildfires.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.