* 1754090
* CyberCorps (R): Scholarship for Service (SFS) Program at Purdue University Northwest
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2023
* John Sands, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2023
* USD 3,578,689.00

Purdue University Northwest (PNW), a National Security Agency/Department of
Homeland Security designated National Center for Academic Excellence (CAE) in
Cyber Defense Education, in collaboration with Ivy Tech and Moraine Valley
Community College (MVCC), two CAE-2Y institutions, propose to jointly establish
the Purdue Northwest Cyber Defenders Program (PCDP) to recruit, prepare, and
support 18 PCDP Scholars at PNW to successfully transition to federal, state,
local, tribal or territorial government employment as cybersecurity
professionals. This project aims to make a significant contribution to the
development of an innovative cybersecurity education system that can train an
unrivaled cybersecurity future workforce through the CyberCorps(R): Scholarship
for Service (SFS) program. Recruiting students and exposing them to real-world
cybersecurity research and practices will motivate them to develop practical
expertise in this critical field and allow them to leverage their experience as
they enter the government workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
establish a seamless pathway for students from MVCC and Ivy Tech to continue
their higher education in PNW's CAE-4Y cybersecurity program. Mechanisms include
new program articulation agreements, curriculum sharing, elective course
recommendations, and extra-curricular activity collaboration. The short
distances between the 3 institutions make this goal achievable. The PCDP will
optimize recruitment by maximizing faculty involvement and information
accessibility; developing plans to recruit underrepresented students (e.g.,
African American, Hispanic, female); and articulating plans to create a student
pipeline for the long-term sustainability of PCDP program. The pathway created
by this project can provide a practical national model for the transfer of
community college students to a bachelor degree program, which will help to
greatly improve the four-year program transfer rate for community college
students. The success of PCDP program will establish a model for other STEM
disciplines in the areas of student outreach, recruitment, mentoring, and
placement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.