* 1754816
* Collaborative Research: Testing Mechanisms of Microgeographic Adaptation
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Paul Hohenlohe, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2023
* USD 203,667.00

One goal of evolutionary ecology is to understand the processes that lead to
species becoming better adapted to their local environment. Studies of local
adaptation have historically focused on geographically separated populations,
where adaptive differences are maintained by limited dispersal of individuals
between populations. Growing evidence, however, suggests that adaptive evolution
can occur over small spatial distances. How this fine scale, adaptation arises
and is maintained remains unresolved, despite applications for human health,
agriculture, and biodiversity. On Santa Cruz Island, the Island Scrub Jay has
two morphologies. Birds in pine habitat have long and thin beaks where as those
in oak habitats have short and deep beaks. These differences are known to
facilitate feeding on pine cones versus acorns, but how such adaptive genetic
differences are maintained over very small geographic distances is unknown. The
researchers will collect data on the genomes of individuals from both types of
habitats to test if the same set of genes are differentiated between pine and
oak populations, and how other regions of the genome change spatially across the
island. These measurements will be coupled with telemetry studies that track how
birds move and use oak and pine habitats. In addition, vocal experiments will
test if males prefer females that originate within their habitat. The data
obtained from this work will then be used to develop general models that can
inform the conditions under with adaptive differences in can occur. Such models
would be of interest to conservation managers that manage this and other unique
or rare species. Additionally, the project will produce a learning module for
high school classroom use, and will provide research opportunities for both
undergraduate and graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cases of
microgeographic adaptation challenge classical evolutionary theory that posits
adaptive divergence should be constrained by gene flow, leading to a
reassessment of the spatial scale at which evolutionary processes occur. The
research team has recently discovered replicated, adaptive divergence in jay
bill shape in adjacent oak and pine habitats, despite gene flow between these
adjacent habitats. This pattern occurs across habitats separated by less than
one kilometer. The researchers will test alternative hypotheses about how
divergent selection, dispersal, and non-random mating shape adaptive divergence
in bill morphology. In Aim 1, they develop population genetic models that test
the interacting effects of selection, gene flow, assortative mating, and genetic
architecture at different spatial scales. In Aim 2, they will test for divergent
selection by measuring selection gradients, examining patterns of genomic
divergence, and by identifying candidate genes associated with variation in bill
morphology. In Aim 3, they will use a combination of population genomics,
telemetry, and transplant experiments to test for population genomic structure
and if dispersal is non-random In Aim 4, they will test if divergence in bill
morphology is correlated with vocalizations and facilitates assortative mating.
Collectively, the proposed work takes an integrative approach in a tractable
study system. This research has broad implications for understanding both the
spatial scale at which adaptive divergence occurs, and the conditions that allow
individuals within a single population to diverge across heterogeneous
habitats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.