* 1754996
* Consequences of host plant toxicity across monarch butterfly ontogeny: milkweed challenges from feeding to flying
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2023
* Rudolf Schilder, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 04/30/2023
* USD 897,840.00

The decline in North American populations of the Monarch butterfly has been
linked to the loss of their milkweed host plant along US and Mexican migration
routes. This has resulted in significant milkweed replanting efforts by national
initiatives and local enthusiasts. While meritorious in its conception, these
replanting efforts tend to use a variety of milkweed species that can vary
dramatically in their level of toxicity to Monarch larvae. Moreover, it is
unknown how exposure to such varying levels of toxicity as larvae may affect the
ability of surviving adult Monarch butterflies to establish viable populations
and migrate to Mexican overwintering sites. Using NSF funding and leveraging a
large-scale collaborative network of Monarch scientists, the researchers will
quantify such effects by examining milkweed-Monarch interactions throughout
their life history, under both controlled laboratory- and natural settings. In
addition to Monarchs, this project will generally inform habitat restoration
efforts aimed at offsetting population declines in other beneficial insects, as
consequences of larval dietary history for adult traits important to population
health are poorly understood in most insects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemical
ecology research on plant-insect herbivore interactions has abundantly focused
on the proximate effects of plant defenses and toxicity on insect larval stages.
Since insect larvae tend to cause most damage to plants, this focus makes sense,
but as a result only limited information is available on indirect, i.e., beyond
the larval stages, effects of host plant toxicity on adult insect traits
important for population growth and dispersal. The proposed work will address
this gap in knowledge by linking variation in plant defense biochemistry
experienced by larvae to adult insect fitness outcomes. Using the iconic Monarch
butterfly as a focal species, the PIs aim to quantify how variation in toxic
traits among ten milkweed species (i.e., Monarch host plants) affect larval
growth, adult fecundity and migratory ability, in laboratory and natural
contexts. To achieve this aim, they will use an integrative approach that
combines state-of-the-art methods in chemical ecology, organismal energetics,
biomechanics, and leverage a citizen science driven collaboration with several
laboratories located along the annual Monarch's migration routes. This work is
pertinent to the focal species as replanting efforts aimed at restoring suitable
habitat to combat Monarch population declines use multiple milkweed species
without consideration for how larval exposure to varying milkweed defensive
chemistry affects Monarch population dynamics and migration. In parallel, this
project will generally inform science and habitat restoration efforts aimed at
offsetting population declines in other beneficial insects, as consequences of
larval dietary history for adult traits are poorly understood in most
insects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.