* 1754182
* SG:  The roles of plant resource strategy, pathogens and mycorrhizal fungi in plant invasions- a belowground test of the Resource-Enemy Release Hypothesis
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Douglas Frank, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Dudgeon
* 04/30/2023
* USD 200,000.00

Some introduced plants are aggressive and fast-spreading, and can be harmful to
both natural ecosystems and society by interfering with crops, wildlife, and
native species of conservation concern. Despite their large economic impact, it
remains unclear why some introduced plants become invasive and others do not.
One possibility involves how plants interact with soil fungi. Most plants have
beneficial fungi associated with their roots, which are vital for nutrient
uptake. However, the roots of plants are also often attacked by harmful fungi.
This project aims to uncover how the interactions between beneficial and harmful
root-associated fungi influence the success of non-native plants relative to
native plants. This project will provide research training for undergraduate
students including both laboratory and greenhouse methods. Additionally, the
researchers will engage in outreach to K-12 students, as well as the public, to
inform them about invasive species and plant-fungal
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine the linkages
between soil fungal communities and plant resource strategy within the context
of the Resource Enemy Release Hypothesis, which predicts that nonnative species
that have escaped their natural enemies in a new range will have relatively
higher productivity as compared to native species, and that this advantage
increases with resource availability. This research will test whether plant-
fungal relationships differ systematically between fast and slow-growing
species, using a well-studied Eastern North American invasive shrub system.
Additionally, the research team will test whether differences in plant-fungal
relations depend on a plant's co-evolutionary history with soil fungi, or
alternatively, whether differences in plant-fungal relations apparent in
invasive species are due to their overall bias toward fast growth. Multiple
native and invasive plants, representing congeneric pairs with a range of plant
growth characteristics, will be included in the study to control for phylogeny.
In the greenhouse, plants will be subjected to two complementary inoculation
experiments to test the relationship between each plant and its soil microbial
community, and to test the mycorrhizal responsiveness of each species. DNA
sequencing will then be used to characterize the response of root-associated
fungal communities to differential conditioning by plant hosts, with emphasis on
pathogen and mycorrhizal communities in greenhouse and natural field
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.