* 1754286
* Molecular basis of cold tolerance
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Elena Gracheva, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 01/31/2024
* USD 900,000.00

How do organisms sense and adapt to cold temperature? Cold tolerance, a special
aspect of temperature sensitivity, is a key physiological capacity pertinent to
all animals. Molecular mechanisms that contribute to the detection and
modulation of cold sensitivity under normal and adaptive conditions are yet to
be fully elucidated. This project aims to look at the general problem of cold
sensitivity from a novel perspective - through studying cold-tolerant animals,
thirteen-lined ground squirrels and Syrian hamsters. In addition to their
ability to withstand deep cold during hibernation, squirrels and hamsters are
cold tolerant even in the summer active state. This project seeks to understand
the cellular and molecular basis of cold tolerance by performing a side-by-side
comparison of physiological mechanisms in the squirrels, hamsters and mice. This
research will highlight evolutionary changes that shaped cold tolerance and
elucidate basic principles that underlie physiology of cold perception in
vertebrates including humans. This project takes a multidiscplinary approach,
involving behavioral paradigms, live-cell imaging, cell biology and in vitro
biophysical analysis of ion channels to address this fundamental biological
question. The PI will also run an innovative "Sensory Physiology Club" as a core
outreach activity. The mission of the Club is to promote scientific education in
human and animal physiology among school students from middle- and high schools.
This activity will teach aspects of sensory biology and neural mechanisms
underlying perception of sensory stimuli to school-aged children from
Connecticut, New York and Massachusetts. An established collaboration with the
Yale Pathways to Science and SCHOLAR programs, will serve to recruit
participants and to monitor long-term impact of this
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major goal of this study is to understand the
molecular basis of cold sensitivity in mammalian hibernators, thirteen-lined
ground squirrels and Syrian hamsters. A comparison of cold-sensitive and cold-
tolerant animals will reveal anatomical, physiological, and genetic factors that
support hibernation, a unique thermo-adaptive process. To investigate the
abundance of temperature sensors in somatosensory system in active hibernators
and compare it to mice, a non-hibernating species, histological analysis and
live cell ratiometric calcium imaging of primary sensory neurons will be
employed. It is known that Nav1.7 is a voltage-gated sodium channel responsible
for initiation and propagation of action potential in somatosensory neurons. The
proposal will test biophysical properties of squirrel and hamster Nav1.7
orthologues using electrophysiological recordings in heterologous cells and in
neurons. Successful completion of this proposal will highlight molecular and
cellular basis of cold tolerance and reveal a novel Nav1.7-mediated mechanism
controlling cold temperature adaptations in mammalian
hibernators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.