* 1754106
* LTREB:  Long-term ecosystem responses to directional changes in precipitation amount and variability in an arid grassland
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Osvaldo Sala, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2024
* USD 519,999.00

In the American Southwest, rainfall patterns are changing, and are likely to
continue to change in the coming decades. Major droughts and floods will occur
more often and will be more intense. These changes are likely to have a large
impact on grasslands and the ecosystem services they provide. Scientists have
studied grassland ecosystems and the plant species that live in them for many
years. Predicting the future of grasslands as the environment changes remains a
challenge, however, because it is very difficult to understand causes of
patterns using observations alone. Controlled experiments can uncover what
causes changes in grasslands with enough confidence to predict their future as
they begin to experience conditions never seen before. It is also difficult to
predict long-term changes using only short-term experiments. This project will
expand on decade-long field experiments in which rainfall amount and variability
were manipulated to learn how grassland ecosystems are likely to change. Results
from these experiments will yield new understanding that will provide guidance
to managers of drylands in the Southwest United States, and around the world.
This project will also train a new generation of scientists, many of whom are
members of underrepresented minority groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is guided by two hypotheses about endogenous and exogenous phenomena that
interact with each other to generate dryland responses to changes in amount and
variability of precipitation. (1) Endogenous biogeochemical and demographic
phenomena mediate abrupt or continuous changes in populations, communities and
ecosystem processes. (2) Exogenous phenomena, such as El Ni√±o events that occur
with low frequency, interact with endogenous mechanisms to affect system
resilience, leading to changes in population dynamics and ecosystem processes.
This project will capture the impacts of infrequent exogenous phenomena and the
cumulative effects of endogenous factors on populations of desert species,
communities and ecosystems. The project will build upon two extant experiments
located in a Desert Grassland in New Mexico: (a) manipulation of rainfall amount
(80% reduced precipitation, ambient, 80% increased) crossed with changes in
nitrogen availability, and (b) manipulation of rainfall variability (control,
enhanced variability by 50% and 80%). Long-term manipulations of precipitation
amount are accomplished using rainout shelters coupled with irrigation systems.
Different levels of nitrogen availability are achieved via fertilization.
Manipulations of precipitation variability are conducted by flipping drought and
irrigation treatments from year to year in the same plots. Response variables
include above and belowground net primary production, species composition, net
nitrogen mineralization and leaf nitrogen isotopic ratios. This research has the
potential to transform understanding of long-term ecosystem responses to changes
in patterns of precipitation, which is critical to assessment of how ecosystem
services are likely to change over the coming decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.