* 1754605
* Collaborative Research:  Phylogenetics, hybridization and speciation in Habronattus jumping spiders (Saliticidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Damian Elias, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 06/30/2024
* USD 638,235.00

One of the major goals in biological research is to understand the processes
that generate different species. Recently, biologists have suggested that the
sharing of genes and traits between different species (hybridization) may play
an important, but overlooked role. If true, this not only calls into question
our understanding of how species form, but changes how we evaluate the
relationships between species. In this project, researchers from San Diego State
University and UC Berkeley will link studies of phylogeny and behavior to
understand the role of hybridization in the evolution of a large genus of
jumping spiders (Habronattus) from North America. The team will develop genomic
resources to reconstruct the evolutionary relationships between species and to
statistically test for the presence of hybridization in driving biodiversity
patterns. Additionally, because hybridization occurs only when individuals of
different species mate with each other, the team will examine the mating
behaviors that control the exchange of genes and traits between separate species
thus allowing insight into the mechanisms that drive larger evolutionary
patterns. This project will advance our understanding of how species and
populations of animals change and how we evaluate their evolutionary
relationships. Research findings and techniques will be used to develop freely
available statistical tools for scientists, online biodiversity databases, and
educational spider-centric computer games to teach key aspects of systematic
biology, in particular sexual selection and speciation. Two postdocs, one
doctoral student, and multiple undergraduate students at three separate U.S.
institutions will be trained on this project. Undergraduate students will play
important roles in research, with high potential for independent
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance Habronattus research,
and the field of introgressive hybridization biology, in multiple ways. At both
phylogenomic and phylogeographic scales the researchers will quantify the
balance between tree-like divergence and reticulate evolution, addressing
whether phenotypic evolution is better explained by introgressive hybridization
rather than a tree-based model. Phylogenetic comparative analyses will be
conducted to ask whether courtship complexity is correlated with rates of
lineage diversification, introgression, and chromosome evolution. Finding
widespread introgression concentrated in groups with the most complex courtship
would contradict expectations of animal communication theory. Genomic-scale data
will provide a consistent, objective framework for interpreting species limits,
unbiased by male ornament "conspicuousness". At the behavioral level, the
researchers will address the proximate mechanisms behind introgressive
hybridization, addressing whether hybridization is best explained by errors in
species recognition or selection for novel phenotypes. Large empirical genomic
and phenotypic datasets will promote the development of new computer program
modules to map phenotypic characters impacted by introgressive hybridization or
incomplete lineage sorting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.