* 1754280
* SG:  Linking above and belowground interactions in highbush blueberry.
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2023
* Alison Brody, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 03/31/2023
* USD 199,528.00

Over 80% of all terrestrial plants form close relationships with soil-dwelling
fungi called mycorrhizae (mycor, "fungus" and rhizae, "roots"). These fungi
garner nutrients from the soil and exchange them for carbohydrates obtained by
plants during photosynthesis. The vast majority of these plants also rely on
animals for pollination. Plant interactions with these mutualists may be
intertwined in important ways, but have most often been studied separately. This
research will examine how mycorrhizal fungi affect plant traits important to
pollination, and how the environmental context affects these interactions. These
questions will be examined in an agricultural species of great economic
importance in the United States - the highbush blueberry (Vaccinium corymbosum).
Additionally, through existing farm-to-plate programs, relationships with K-12
teachers, and new collaborations with an agricultural outreach program, school
children will be engaged in activities to learn about the importance of healthy
below- and above-ground organisms, and high school and college students will be
engaged in scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will examine if
mycorrhizae affect floral traits important to pollinators in host genotype-
specific ways. Additionally, the identity and relative abundance of mycorrhizae
will be examined for effects on floral trait expression in the host.
Mycorrhizal-driven differences in floral traits will be explored for their
effects on pollinator visitation and resulting pollen limitation. The links
among mycorrhizae, floral traits, and pollination are hypothesized to depend on
pollinator abundance, diversity, and identity. The work will capitalize on
state-of-the-art molecular tools to understand if plant response to mycorrhizal
fungi is dependent on the identity of fungal communities, and entail extensive
field experiments to understand the importance of the native pollinator
communities as well. To examine these hypotheses, highbush blueberry of two
different cultivars (genotypes) will be inoculated with a commercially available
inoculum or with soils containing native fungal spores and grown in pots in a
common garden. Once they flower, plants will be placed at six farms in Vermont
alongside existing blueberry bushes. Floral traits will be measured on each
plant. In addition, a pollen limitation experiment will be conducted to examine
if mycorrhizal inoculation affects pollen limitation. Experimental plants, as
well as others growing at each site, will be observed and the number and
identity of bee pollinators will be recorded to assess site-specific differences
in pollinator communities. The data will be gathered over three years, analyzed
and widely distributed to scientists and to farmers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.