* 1754731
* Weevils of Sonora: Discovering species distributions and historical patterns of symbiont associations
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Edward Gilbert, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 06/30/2023
* USD 613,248.00

This project addresses a gap in our understanding of insect biodiversity within
and adjacent to the southwestern United States. The Mexican State of Sonora
shares a 375 miles-long border with Arizona, and has a large biodiversity of
insect fauna that remains very poorly known. In the case of beetles in the
weevil superfamily, less than 100 species have been documented, yet nearly 1,000
species - many of them new to science - are expected to occur in Sonora. Weevils
are economically important; thousands of species have either detrimental (crop
pest) or beneficial (biocontrol) ecosystem impacts. This project will create a
new collaboration between researchers and students at Arizona State University
and two Mexican universities, with the goal of thoroughly sampling the weevil
diversity of Sonora and publishing the results in a dynamic and openly
accessible on-line checklist. Longstanding questions about the evolution of
weevil diversity, and its relationship to their gut-inhabiting bacteria and host
plant diets, will also be addressed. The project will mentor two doctoral
students and undergraduate students in the concepts and methods of modern
systematics and biodiversity data science. A multi-faceted education and
outreach program will include the creation of a flashcard-based K-3 textbook on
regional insect diversity and functional natural history.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes an extensive field work and
collection curation component, expected to yield at least 5,000 unique
species/locality instances of research-ready specimens in the weevils
(Coleoptera: Curculionoidea). Field-to-data dissemination workflows will benefit
from further improving the Symbiota software platform, with new options to
publish data packages to external journals. The checklist will include updated
taxonomic names, all specimens, species distribution maps, host plant records,
images, species profile pages, and an interactive identification key to the
Sonoran weevil genera as currently recognized. A well-structured metagenomics
sequencing study of the gut content of more than 100 species in eight targeted
weevil lineages will identify both their plant hosts and bacterial symbiont
profiles. This dataset will facilitate the discovery of numerous symbiont
clades, and test novel hypotheses regarding the relative impact of weevil
phylogeny, biogeography, host associations, and other environmental gradients on
the weevils' observed symbiont profiles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.