* 1754465
* LTREB RENEWAL:  Reconciling Innovation and Adaptation During Ongoing Range Expansion
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Alexander Badyaev, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2024
* USD 535,851.00

In plants and animals, past and present forms and functions are linked across
time and space. This fundamental principle underlies the continuity of life on
Earth. It also shapes contemporary adaptations. Yet, despite the importance of
this principle, scientists know little about how current adaptations in animals
are shaped by past functions, random events or current necessities. This
research addresses this question directly, by studying a common bird species,
the House Finch. Over the last century, House Finches have successfully
colonized much of North America. As a result of their ongoing colonization,
House Finches are now found in a wide range of habitats. They have evolved
diverse, yet precise, beak shapes that enable them to thrive in new
environments. Capitalizing on a unique network of long-term study populations
that span diverse habitats and histories, the researchers will trace the origin
of developmental mechanisms that produce such versatility. The key benefit of
this work is that it allows us to decipher how a species history shapes and
predicts its current adaptability and future survival. The highly visible nature
of bird invasions helps ensure continuing public participation in this research.
In addition, the researchers will take advantage of well-established local media
contacts, and collaborations with a range of tribal, rural, and naturalist
groups to engage public audiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For evolution to
proceed, maintaining currently adaptive traits must not prevent innovation in
the same traits. Although such a system must be in place for traits to evolve,
its organizational principles are largely unknown. In this project, the
researchers focus on a natural system where it is possible to directly observe
how the past influences the development of new adaptations. As House Finch
populations have expanded across North America, they have created a network of
recently established populations that differ in the amount of time each
population has been established in a new environment. These populations allow
the researchers to simultaneously observe how complex beak architecture evolves
to different habitats as it happens. Specifically, by exploring patterns in
transcription and growth factors known to regulate beak development, the
researchers can gain insight into how the past influences adaptive evolution.
The contrast between the patterns observed in transcription and growth factors
provides crucial insight into the mechanisms behind historical continuity of
past and present functional forms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.