* 1754054
* Renewal: CyberCorps Scholarship for Services at Hampton University
* EDU,DGE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2025
* Chutima Boonthum, Hampton University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2025
* USD 2,502,208.00

Hampton University, a designated National Center of Academic Excellence in Cyber
Defense Education (CAE-CDE) proposes to continue and expand its participation in
the CyberCorps(R): Scholarship for Service (SFS) program to prepare highly-
qualified cybersecurity professionals for entry into the government workforce.
This program will allow Hampton University to continue to produce highly skilled
cybersecurity workers and address the lack of students (particularly from
underrepresented communities) that are pursuing graduate degrees. The goal of
the scholarship program is to support the development of cybersecurity
professionals, both undergraduate and graduate levels at the Information
Assurance Center at Hampton University (IAC@HU). The SFS program funds projects
that address cybersecurity education and workforce development, including
funding to award scholarships to students in cybersecurity. In return for their
scholarships, recipients will work after graduation for a Federal, State, Local,
or Tribal Government organization in a position related to Cybersecurity for a
period equal to the length of the scholarship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SFS
Hampton University Graduate Education and Training Scholarships in Information
Assurance (HU GETS-IA) program aims to support the development of cybersecurity
professionals. SFS scholars will work closely with highly qualified faculty
mentors to contribute relevant and innovative cybersecurity research. As part of
their training, participating students are expected to develop their own
research interests in collaboration with a faculty advisor. Program components
include: (i) promoting the SFS program and developing internship and employment
contacts through participation in conferences and job fairs; (ii) requiring
scholars to attend professional and skills development events in computer
science and cybersecurity; (iii) providing mentorship to scholars; and (iv)
requiring participation in at least one cybersecurity competition and
publish/present at least one paper or poster with original
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.