* 1754783
* Cell differentiation regulates intestinal tight junctions
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Ronaldo Ferraris, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-New Jersey Med
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 611,973.00

The major functions of the small intestine include absorbing nutrients from food
and acting as a filtration system, selectively allowing the passage of useful
substances into the blood stream while preventing the loss of body fluids and
the entry of harmful materials. The millions of intestinal cells are held
together by junction proteins that work simultaneously as a filter and as a
glue. Most intestinal cell are absorptive cells, and it is assumed that cell-
cell connections made by this cell type determine the overall porosity of the
intestine. However, there are several other types of mostly nonabsorptive cells
whose filter properties are completely unknown but may contribute significantly
to intestinal porosity, and this project will elucidate the function of those
cell types. Tissues made of just one intestinal cell type will be synthesized
and tested to determine the unique composition and porosity of filters made by
only that cell type. The project will advance the fundamental understanding of
how cell differentiation and composition affect the filtering capacity of the
vertebrate intestine. The results will be relevant to human health because
almost all allergic, inflammatory, and infectious diseases of the intestine
allow nonselective movements of materials that can lead to illness and death,
but there is no information on whether these diseases uniquely or equally affect
the filters made by different cell types. Results will be disseminated via
scientific publications, magazine articles, and blogs in public websites.
Research, mentoring, and teaching opportunities will be provided to
international collaborators, a postdoctoral researcher, graduate, undergraduate
and high school students, and local teachers, leveraging programs at the
institution that target students from underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Small-intestine stem cells continuously differentiate into
absorptive enterocytes as well as secretory enteroendocrine, Paneth, goblet and
other cell types that form tight junctions sealing paracellular spaces. The
composition and barrier properties of junctions of stem-cell and secretory-cell
types are virtually unknown, as permeability can presently only be determined in
epithelial sheets composed mainly of enterocytes or of nonphysiological
immortalized cells. This project employs innovative techniques that not only
control in vitro differentiation of stem cells to produce primary cultures
called enteroids comprised mainly of one cell type, but also force
dedifferentiation of mature cells to reacquire stem-cell characteristics. This
remarkable technical advance enables the planned experiments that test the
hypothesis that differentiation of stem cells into absorptive and secretory
cells alters the expression and location of tight-junction proteins, resulting
in significant, cell-type-dependent variation in paracellular permeability of
macromolecules. The role of the major junctional proteins occludin, tricellulin,
and zonula occludens 1 in determining cell-type-dependent paracellular
composition and permeability will be examined. High school, undergraduate, and
graduate students and post-doctoral trainees will participate in this project
which applies a modern approach to studies that increase knowledge of how cell
differentiation and nonenterocyte junctions contribute to the barrier function
of vertebrate epithelia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.