* 1754679
* Collaborative Research:  Elucidating the chemical plasticity of fine roots in response to soil heterogeneities and developing a better parameter to forecast fine root decomposition
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Nishanth Tharayil, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2024
* USD 637,217.00

Plants adapt to their soil environment through changes in patterns of root
growth and chemical composition, which influence how plants take up nutrients
and water. Poor understanding of how roots respond to stress is an obstacle to
understanding plant responses to environmental change. In addition, how quickly
roots decompose affects how nutrients are recycled from dead root tissues, which
can further influence plant growth. However, current models of root
decomposition are based on what is known about the breakdown of aboveground
parts of plants, like leaves and stems. Furthermore, little is known about how
root chemistry varies with local soil conditions which limits understanding of
how plants respond to nutrient poor soils, or how this in turn influences soil
nutrient recycling. This research will study how soil conditions and microbes
influence root chemistry of important forest tree species in eastern North
America. Results of this research will also improve models of root decomposition
by incorporating root chemical composition. This project will also provide
several benefits to society. It will create workshops for high school students
and a summer course and curriculum development materials for K-12 teachers. It
will also provide training for undergraduates, graduate students and a
postdoctoral researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fine roots (less than 2mm
diameter) have a disproportionately large influence on plant adaptation and key
ecosystem processes, yet they remain one of the least understood components of
Terrestrial Biosphere Models. Commonly used parameters, such as element ratios,
that predict decomposition of aboveground tissues fail to adequately predict the
decomposition of fine roots. The central hypothesis of this proposal is that
this disconnect is due to the unique chemical construction of roots, which is
shaped by their immediate biotic and abiotic soil environments. The PIs propose
to investigate the chemical plasticity in fine roots of different tree species
developed under different soil resource availabilities and associations with
different species of mycorrhizal fungi. The PIs will link observed chemical
plasticity to decomposition dynamics of fine roots using decomposition
experiments and by utilizing advanced imaging and spectroscopy techniques. The
PIs propose to develop parameters that incorporate root chemistry to improve
predictions of fine-root decomposition. The proposed project would be one of the
first attempts to obtain a comprehensive understanding of the molecular-level
chemical profile of fine-roots that facilitate plant stress adaptation, and to
develop robust parameters to predict fine-root decomposition and soil organic
matter formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.