* 1754721
* Unraveling mechanism and ecological role of non-proteinaceous ice nucleation activity in a Gram-positive bacterium
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Boris Vinatzer, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 05/31/2023
* USD 722,112.00

Some bacteria have the surprising ability to catalyze the freezing of water.
These bacteria may even contribute to the formation of precipitation in clouds.
Little is known about how and why bacteria acquired this ability, which in
scientific terms is called ice nucleation activity. In this project, scientists
will study the bacterium Lysinibacillus parviboronicapiens, which was recently
isolated from precipitation and which secretes a yet unidentified molecule with
ice nucleation activity. The scientists propose to identify the genes that are
necessary to synthesize this molecule, to study where the bacterium typically
lives, and how it benefits from ice nucleation activity. One of the long-term
goals is to understand the detailed mechanism this molecule uses to nucleate
ice. This knowledge could improve our ability to predict amount and frequency of
precipitation or to influence weather increasing rainfall during droughts or
preventing damaging hail storms. The educational outreach components of the
project are three-fold: the science of ice nucleation will be disseminated and
taught to Appalachian high school students to increase knowledge and stimulate
interest of possible scientific opportunities in their future; under-represented
undergraduate students will participate in research programs; and graduate
students will receive advanced training on ice nucleation, be mentored
throughout their graduate school career, and produce data that can be
disseminated via scholarly publications. The project will be evaluated on its
effectiveness to not only conduct the proposed research activities but its
ability to train and disseminate information to the three target
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pure water super-cools to
approximately -40°C before it freezes. Only in the presence of particles with
ice nucleation activity (INA), called ice nuclei, can water freeze at warmer
temperatures. Ice nuclei in clouds in non-tropical climates catalyze the
freezing of water droplets that become precipitation. Circumstantial evidence
points to biological ice nuclei as contributors to ice nucleation in clouds.
Besides a single type of bacterial INA protein, little is known about biological
INA molecules and about the evolution of INA and its role in the life cycle of
organisms. Lysinibacillus parviboronicapiens (Lp) was recently identified as the
first Gram-positive bacterium to have INA. Initial characterization of the INA
of Lp revealed this activity to be heat-resistant, proteinase-resistant,
secreted, and water-soluble. This project has the following objectives: 1.
Identify and characterize the biosynthetic pathway of the Lp INA molecule and
characterize the molecule itself, 2. Unravel the evolutionary history of the
underlying biosynthetic pathway, 3. Determine the role of the molecule in the
ecology of Lp. Accomplishing these objectives will provide new knowledge of how
organisms can change the environment in which they live. Because of the
hypothesized role of ice nucleation in atmospheric processes, this project may
also improve our understanding of how bacteria influence amount and intensity of
precipitation and, therefore, help elucidate the possible role of bacteria in
influencing earth's climate. Training of undergraduate and graduate students,
outreach and education to high schools, and assessment of the training and
outreach components complement the experimental aspects of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.