* 1754204
* LTREB renewal:  Progressive Responses to Environmental Change Across Multiple Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Bruce Hungate, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 449,954.00

This project investigates how four different ecosystems in the southwestern U.S.
respond to changes in temperature and precipitation. This is important because
temperature and precipitation have strong effects on ecosystems. The main
effects are on the flow of carbon, the supply of nutrients, the types of soil
microbes, and the growth of plants. However, the exact rate and magnitude of
change are unknown. This project will investigate a key knowledge gap by using
experimental treatments that reduce precipitation and warm soil. This experiment
has been sustained for almost two decades. This project will support the
completion of the experiment in the next five years. The main question is
whether the initial responses to shifts in temperature and precipitation are
consistent over time, or whether the ecosystems adjust to the new conditions. In
addition, this project will support scientific workforce training. Undergraduate
and graduate students will be trained in methods of data collection and
analysis. Outreach activities will be conducted with broad audiences through
local non-profit groups. Finally, data will be provided online about primary
production, plant community composition, and ecosystem carbon and nutrient
balance, in open access format.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will extend a
unique long-term experiment conducted across multiple ecosystem types, extending
the timeline to over two decades. This experiment occurs along the C. Hart
Merriam elevation gradient, extending from the forested slopes of the San
Francisco Peaks to the woodlands and deserts of the Colorado Plateau, a region
identified for its high sensitivity to climate. The project follows up on an
earlier hypothesis that change in temperature and precipitation will elicit
progressive reductions in primary production in semi-arid ecosystems that are
sustained on decadal timescales. In other words, primary production may
increasingly decline in response to the interactive effects of drought and heat.
Here, two mechanisms will be tested that could drive this change: shifts in the
plant community and changes in the nitrogen cycle. The prediction is that the
combination of these two effects modulates long-term carbon and nutrient balance
responses to experimental warming. Because these progressive effects operate on
the timescales of community change and biogeochemistry (years to decades),
measuring them requires continuing this long-term dataset. In this case, two
decades will be sufficient time to see experimental responses of total ecosystem
carbon and nitrogen balance. It is likely that that these responses will vary
among the biomes represented along the elevational gradient, with the variation
largely explained by the magnitude of the progressive effects. Testing these
progressive effects across ecosystems ranging from desert grasslands to
coniferous forests will fill critical knowledge gaps in ecosystem
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.