* 1754264
* Molecular mechanisms for signal-receptor functional coupling in pheromonal systems
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Jocelyn Millar, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Renn
* 02/29/2024
* USD 960,388.00

Successful mating is essential for the survival of most animal species. For many
species, the decision with whom to mate depends on information communicated via
the release of 'pheromones', a complex blend of chemicals that are released by
one animal to be sensed by another. Therefore, understanding how pheromones
affect mating behaviors has broad implications for animal behavior and
evolutionary biology. Because pheromones communicate precise information, the
links between pheromone production and perception are expected to be relatively
stable within species. However, previous studies suggest that pheromones are
remarkably flexible, and can change rapidly as new species evolve. One possible
explanation for this apparent puzzle is that some shared genes co-regulate the
independent processes responsible for pheromone production and perception. These
shared genes could provide a path for the evolution of pheromone signals without
losing the link between pheromone production and perception. This hypothesis
will be tested by taking advantage of the fruit fly courtship ritual as a model.
Studies will focus on genes that encode proteins that function as pheromone
receptors in the nervous system, as well as regulators of pheromone cuticular
production, and their possible role in pheromonal differences between males and
females and across related fruit fly species. In addition to training
opportunities for high school and undergraduate students, the broader impacts of
this project will include genetics and neuroscience outreach and education
activities associated with the public education system in the St. Louis region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mating pheromones are essential for the
maintenance of species boundaries in diverse animal taxa. However, it is
puzzling how, as closely related species diversify, pheromones could evolve
without fitness costs associated with their decoupling from related mate choice
behaviors. The goal of this project is to test the hypothesis that mating
pheromone production and perception are genetically linked via the action of
pleiotropic genes. Specifically, the project will test the hypothesis that
members of the Gustatory receptor protein family in Drosophila play a role in
the sensory perception of specific cuticular pheromones as well as in the
regulation of their synthesis by acting as regulatory autoreceptors in the
pheromone-producing oenocytes. Approaches will include a combination of
behavioral, chemo-analytical, and state-of-the-art CRISPR/Cas9-dependent genome
editing approaches to establish a genetic linkage between the perception and
production of pheromones, to investigate the role of pleiotropic chemoreceptors
in regulating the female pre-to-post-mating phenotypic switch from attractive to
repulsive pheromonal profile, and the role of pheromone receptor evolution in
promoting assortative mating and speciation in the genus Drosophila. Findings
will provide novel mechanistic insights into the regulation of mating behaviors
by pheromones in particular, and the evolution of mating signals in general. In
addition to diverse genetics and neuroscience outreach activities in the St.
Louis region, the investigator and co-workers will use studies of mating
behaviors as training opportunities for high school and undergraduate students
in experimental design, behavioral and genetic data collection and analyses, and
scientific presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.