* 1754015
* Collaborative Research: Religion-Related Bias Victimization: Addressing a Blind-Spot
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2021
* Christopher Scheitle, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 06/30/2021
* USD 239,547.00

Evidence suggests that crimes targeting individuals based on their religion are
on the rise. This harms not only the well-being of victims, but also the well-
being of their communities and the nation. Existing data assessing criminal
victimization and bias-motivated crimes do not adequately measure the religion
of victims or the role of religion in bias-motivated crimes. This project will
provide new data by conducting a nationally representative survey of adults to
assess their experiences with victimization and whether they perceived that
religious bias was a motivator for their being victimized. This project will
provide much-needed information to assist law enforcement, communities, and
policy-makers in better preventing religion-related crimes and serving the
victims of such crimes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will field
a survey using a nationally representative sample of 1,000 US adults along with
oversamples of several minority religious groups totaling 1,200 additional
respondents. The survey instrument will utilize both original questions along
with questions drawn from existing surveys. The instrument will measure
individuals? experiences with criminal victimization with a specific interest in
whether religion was perceived to be a motivator for the offender(s) and the
impact of the experience on the victim. The project will augment the survey data
by attaching indicators from the U. S. Census that reflect community
characteristics such as racial composition and median household income. Use of
the 2010 Religious Congregations and Membership Study will permit attaching data
on the religious composition of respondent neighborhoods. The data generated
from this survey will be analyzed using regression models predicting outcomes
such as the risk of victimization, fears of victimization, and the impact and
responses to victimization. Findings will inform theories in several
sociological subfields including the sociology of religion, criminology and
collective action.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.