* 1754079
* Assessing Eyewitness Identification
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Steven Penrod, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 06/30/2021
* USD 199,817.00

This project will build a database summarizing the results of over 1,000 facial
identification studies published in the last five decades. Using this database,
the project will address four research questions: 1. The effect of 80 factors on
facial identification performance will be summarized. 2. The generalizability
(application) of findings from eyewitness laboratory research to actual
eyewitness performance will be examined by testing whether variations in
research methods affect patterns of research results. 3. The implications of new
witness performance measures (based on signal detection theory) will be assessed
to see if they provide an adequate account of research findings as compared to
prior performance measures. 4. The pattern of relationships among more than 60
indices of eyewitness performance proposed by various researchers will be
investigated. It is anticipated that these measures are highly redundant and
eyewitness performance can be fully reflected in a handful of readily understood
measures.

This project will build a comprehensive database of facial identification
research that includes over 1,000 studies published in the last five decades; it
will expand the database constructed by Penrod and his colleagues in 1986 and
2002. Using this database, four research questions, which are crucial for better
understanding eyewitness performance, will be addressed. These questions are as
follows: First, the effect of certain independent variables in facial
identification research that influence identification performance will be
investigated. The accumulated database includes approximately 80 independent
variables that facilitate a review of the relative contribution of each variable
to identification performance. This will not only help summarize findings from
previous literature on facial identification, but also suggest a direction for
future research by revealing valuable variables deserving particular attention.
Second, the generalizability of findings from eyewitness laboratory research to
actual eyewitness performance in the real world will be tested. Some researchers
warn of the risk to the generalizability of eyewitness research results because
of methodological homogeneity across studies and low external validity in
research methodology. To test the generalizability of finings, this project will
investigate whether research methodology (e.g., participant type, stimulus type,
experimental procedures, etc.) moderates the effects of independent variables on
eyewitness performance and if so, whether laboratory research under-estimates or
over-estimates real-world performance. Third, the implications of a new signal
detection model for eyewitness performance during lineups and test its validity
through analysis of the cumulative database will be tested. Past eyewitness
research based on signal detection theory has generally focused on
identification of a guilty suspect (i.e., hit rate) and an innocent suspect
(i.e., false alarm rate) while ignoring filler identifications (which carry
costs such as "burning" witnesses, missing perpetrators, and failing to clear
innocent suspects). In contrast to past research, the proposed signal detection
model will clarify the theoretical and practical importance of filler
identifications in eyewitness performance. Finally, the psychometric structure
of indices measuring eyewitness performance with the cumulative database will be
investigated. Although researchers have frequently used very few selected
indices (e.g., DR, PPV and others) to measure eyewitness performance, there are
more than 60 indices measuring or relevant to eyewitness performance. It is
anticipated that eyewitness performance is reflected in a handful of components
and that each index measures one or multiple components to a different degree.
The project aims to reveal how the various indices relate to one another, that
is, reveal in accessible terms--what components of eyewitness performance these
indices measure, and arrive at suggestions about which (preferably accessible)
metrics best characterize which aspects of performance.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.