* 1754392
* Collaborative Research:  How do shifts from migratory to sedentary behavior alter host-parasite dynamics?
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Sonia Altizer, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 05/31/2024
* USD 423,342.00

Every year, billions of animals migrate long distances. If animals with
parasites are less likely to reach their destinations, then migration may allow
populations to escape habitats where parasites build up over time. Understanding
how animal migration affects the spread of disease is important to predicting
disease risk, including to humans. This study focuses on monarch butterflies as
a model system and explores the impacts of parasites on butterfly populations
that migrate and populations that have recently lost their migratory habits.
This study will also examine how non-migrating populations may influence the
risk of having parasites by the migrating forms in areas where they come
together. Field and experimental studies will also examine how these microscopic
parasites influence how long butterflies live and their flight ability. Through
the high visibility and public appeal of monarchs, this project will support the
participation of citizen scientists on a continental scale. The investigators
will also mentor and train undergraduate and graduate students and will develop
web and classroom based educational materials on host-parasite relationships and
animal migration. This work will provide additional opportunities for middle
school students and support k-12 activities. Finally, this work will inform
efforts to conserve monarch butterflies and our understanding of how migration
may influence the importance of parasites across many systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a monarch butterflies and protozoan parasite system,
the goal of this study is to examine how migratory and sedentary behaviors
influence transmission risk and severity of infection. Research activities will
integrate (i) an analysis of continent-wide citizen science databases to monitor
monarch butterfly abundance and infection; (ii) field and experimental studies
to test how monarch migratory behavior depends on non-native milkweeds and
infection status, and to quantify parasite transmission rates; (iii) molecular
genomics to ask whether genetic changes in sedentary populations might reinforce
the loss of migratory behavior; and (iv) mathematical modeling to track how host
and parasite populations respond to migratory vs. sedentary strategies.
Information on the mixing of non-migrants and migrants, inferred from stable
isotope analyses of field-collected monarchs, will inform mathematical models of
interacting sedentary and migratory populations, to explore the consequences for
disease spread and the persistence of migratory populations. The project will
develop theory for how overlapping migration strategies alter, and are
themselves affected by, parasite infection, and will shed light on the evolution
of migration by characterizing genetic changes that accompany the recent
formation of sedentary populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.