* 1754894
* Collaborative Research: Identifying the basis of fitness against protozoan grazing in cyanobacteria: From quantitative genomics to molecular mechanisms
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Bianca Brahamsha, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 07/31/2023
* USD 532,517.00

Cyanobacteria are important photosynthetic microorganisms in aquatic
environments, where they occupy a central position at the base of the food web.
In addition, certain species produce toxins and are capable of forming harmful
algal blooms. Occurrences of these blooms are expected to increase in the future
due to eutrophication and increasing temperatures. One of the factors
controlling cyanobacterial populations is predation, but very little is known
about the biochemical and genetic mechanisms governing the interactions between
cyanobacteria and their predators. The researchers will identify cyanobacterial
genes that affect their susceptibility to predators in order to understand
predation mechanisms. This knowledge will be useful in guiding the management of
recreational and drinking freshwater resources, and that of large scale outdoor
culturing of cyanobacteria for biotechnological applications, which is often
hampered by predators. Because toxic algal blooms are of general public
interest, the researchers will incorporate aspects of this project into their
teaching and outreach presentations to engage students and the public in the
process of science and its application to environmental problems. They will also
develop a module of classes for underrepresented high school students that will
introduce them to the presence, abundance, and role of bacteria in aquatic
environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project concerns physiological
mechanisms underlying the resistance of cyanobacteria to predation by protists.
Specifically, the main objective of this project is to identify genes and
processes governing the fitness of the unicellular cyanobacterium Synechococcus
elongatus under selective pressure by amoebal and ciliate predators. The
investigators have developed laboratory model systems to study grazing
interactions and will study these interactions with state-of-the-art random
barcode transposon mutagenesis (RB-TnSeq) and omics approaches, as well as
genetic, biochemical, and physiological methods. Their preliminary work on
amoebal grazing has pointed to the importance of several components of the cell
surface in increasing fitness under grazing conditions. The investigators will
build upon these preliminary findings and identify the mechanism of grazing
resistance to amoebal predators in S. elongatus O-antigen mutants and other
mutants disrupted in genes identified by RB-TnSeq. They will perform similar
analyses to identify genes and processes affecting cyanobacterial fitness in the
presence of a swimming ciliate grazer. These comparative studies will provide
major insight into cyanobacterial strategies for evasion of predators. The
investigators will also incorporate the research into modules for high school
students and involve undergraduates, graduates and postdoctoral scholars in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.