* 1754024
* Integrating genetic, morphological, behavioral and demographic data to investigate primate life history
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2023
* Susan Anton, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2023
* USD 359,016.00

Interpreting the human and primate fossil record is complicated by the fact that
typically only skeletons and teeth are preserved. Yet many important aspects of
primate and human biology are linked to variation in soft tissues, such as the
degree of fat storage required for development and growth, or the degree of
muscle development required for locomotion or within-species competition. In
this project, the researchers will investigate the relationships among
skeletons, soft-tissues, and reproduction across the lifespan, in the rhesus
monkey population of Cayo Santiago, Puerto Rico. The project will advance
knowledge about fundamental relationships among form, function, and behavior in
non-human primates, which can inform our understanding of past primate and human
biology. The project is an important part of research initiatives between New
York University (NYU) and the Caribbean Primate Research Center, Puerto Rico,
and builds on current initiatives to preserve and curate the Cayo Santiago
skeletal collection as a valuable biological data resource. In addition,
educational and public access programs will provide many opportunities for
underrepresented minority students to participate in STEM research, both in the
continental US and in Puerto Rico.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The usual absence of
soft-tissues from the fossil record presents a big challenge for assessing
reproductive life histories from skeletal data in order to estimate the
phenotypic variation on which natural selection acted, and to reconstruct the
evolution of our species. This study will combine soft-tissue measurements of
two entire social groups with detailed analyses of the entire Cayo Santiago
adult skeletal collection, demographic, genetic parentage, and behavioral data,
collected over more than six decades. The researchers will determine whether and
to what extent variation in skeletal traits relates to fleshed measures of body
size, body mass, body fat, and muscle size in two groups; determine the genetic
and environmental sources of variation in both skeletal and soft tissue traits,
and; determine the extent to which skeletal markers and soft tissue markers
predict differences in fecundity and longevity in both females and males. The
methods will combine morphometric measurement of both soft and hard tissues with
quantitative genetic approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.