* 1754326
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Effects of N and P deposition on stoichiometry, structure, and function of whole-aquatic ecosystems (Bromeliaceae and Sarraceniaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Angelica Gonzalez, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Human activity has more than doubled global nitrogen and phosphorus input to the
biosphere. Nitrogen loading from fossil fuels and fertilizer is much larger in
North America and Europe than in the Southern Hemisphere. Phosphorus loading
comes mostly from agriculture. It is smaller in the Northern Hemisphere, but
especially important in the tropics. In tropical forests of Central America and
Asia, however, nitrogen input is increasing and will continue to do so in coming
decades. Changes in the input of these critically important elements are
profoundly changing ecosystem structure and function. Ecosystem responses to
these changes remain poorly understood. This project will fill this knowledge
gap by studying the miniature ecosystems that exist within pitcher plants. These
plants are widely distributed across the tropics. They are useful as model
environments to study the effects of changes in nitrogen and phosphorus inputs
on ecosystem structure and function. This research will use pitcher plants to
advance our understanding of ecosystem responses to environmental changes.
Results of this work will inform management of ecosystems subject to changing
nitrogen and phosphorus loading. It will also train graduate and undergraduate
students, and will engage large numbers of high school students in the
scientific process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will quantify elemental
patterns by conducting standardized field surveys of phytotelmata ecosystems
across large geographical gradients of nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P)
deposition. Leaves of tank bromeliads and pitcher plants form compartments that
fill with rainwater. These compartments capture leaf litter and arthropod prey,
which provide the energy to support a persistent food web of invertebrates.
These systems provide an opportunity to test for nutrient deposition effects on
the standing stocks and fluxes of nutrients for the whole ecosystem and within
different ecosystem sub-modules (e.g., bromeliad and pitcher tissue, periphyton,
water, and macroinvertebrates). This study will reveal whether whole-ecosystem
stoichiometry reflects local availability of N and P, or whether stoichiometric
ratios are buffered across deposition gradients. Overall, the well-defined
aquatic habitats created by phytotelmata and their broad geographic distribution
allow the researchers to examine large-scale patterns of diversity,
stoichiometry, and ecosystem function in a relatively invariant habitat. This
research will give insight into the geography of N and P within and across
replicated whole ecosystems. It will also test the ecosystem-level consequences
of increased nutrient inputs at scales difficult or impossible to achieve in
more traditional aquatic habitats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.