* 1754895
* Collaborative Research: Meteor Plasma Formation and Dynamics with Implication for Radar Measurements
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Robert Marshall, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Alan Liu
* 08/31/2023
* USD 198,989.00

Earth's upper atmosphere is densely populated by molecular, atomic and ionized
meteors. These particles are important for maintaining the conductivity of the E
region ionosphere (~90-150 km). They can be sensed using radio and optical
methods, and therefore provide a great deal of information about the state of
the upper atmosphere and the extraterrestrial environments of their origin.
However, current estimates of total meteoric input are accurate only to within
approximately two orders of magnitude. It is important to improve upon such
estimates, since meteor chemistry affects Earth from roughly 150 km above the
surface all the way down to the ice cores. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will apply radar data and first-principles computer models to trace the
evolution of meteor plasma in the ionosphere. The project will support a full-
time graduate student and an undergraduate. The Principal Investigators (PIs)'
work will yield knowledge of the types of meteors that contribute most to
Earth's upper atmosphere. This information is important to Space scientists,
engineers, and astronomers. Spacecraft designers need to know the distribution
of particle orbits and masses in order to mitigate potential hazards. Meteor
population characteristics provides greater understanding of the evolution and
composition of the outer solar system. The PIs and co-PI will continue their
efforts to share their knowledge and enthusiasm about space and meteor science
with the larger community through outreach to K-12
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.