* 1754740
* A Methodological Study of Big Data and Atmospheric Science
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Elisabeth Lloyd, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,738.00

This award supports a two-year project that investigates fundamental
methodological aspects of Big Data in atmospheric science. The PI, in
collaboration with scientists at the National Center for Atmospheric Research
and several research assistants (a post-doctoral fellow and some graduate
students), plans to establish some basic foundations, understandings and
analysis of the relative merits of a variety of methods in the analysis and
application of Big Data within atmospheric science and modeling. The main
questions to be addressed by the researcher and her collaborators include the
following. How do practices and technologies for data collection, dissemination
and use affect the production of scientific knowledge? What is the role of
theories and hypotheses within research practices and data analysis? If data-
driven research constitutes a distinctive mode of knowledge production, how is
that knowledge best delivered? The researcher intends to establish a philosophy
of Big Data in atmospheric science; she plans to disseminate the results of her
research to different audiences by producing several papers for diverse
professional journals. The researcher also intends to formulate and communicate
any knowledge for policy that might result from her Big Data research. She also
plans to train a post-doc and some grad students so that they may serve as
resources for policy makers to facilitate effective application of atmospheric
science to public policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and her collaborators will
examine what is involved in moving from the Big Data context of the outputs of
multiple atmospheric models involving terabytes of data, to the applications and
reduction of that data to a particular city's request for specific temperature
forecasts, and how this analysis might become more automated through analysis of
Big Data in a way not being done at present. This fundamental problem facing the
regional modelers in modeling groups around the world is that there are tens of
thousands of city and regional planners who need information from the regional
weather models, but the information these users and impact-personnel need is not
available to read off of the model without the help of the scientists who
created it. They need translators between the models and the impact-personnel
and users. One modeling group the PI would be working with at the National
Center for Atmospheric Research is attempting to develop automation of various
kinds to answer a range of questions from users and impact-personnel, automation
that reduces Big Data into small and specific answers to specific questions that
avoids various pitfalls and peculiarities of the models. That is, they are
trying to build Big Data software systems that could act as translators. These
problems are significantly exacerbated by the data being Big in one way or
another, and they find that the available Big Data analytics are not helping
them in the way they ideally could. The PI and collaborators propose to
highlight, clarify, and define more precisely what exactly this group and others
could use in their applications to social contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.