* 1754893
* The dynamics of embolism formation and  repair in xylem conduits: from bubble scale to loss in plant hydraulic  transport capacity
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Gabriel Katul, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 06/30/2022
* USD 597,758.00

A clear understanding of water usage and resistance to mortality following
drought is necessary across tree species. However, despite decades of research,
describing plant water movement remains a formidable scientific challenge, and
in the absence of this fundamental knowledge, sustainable management of forests
will be impossible. All type of plants, including hardwoods and coniferous
trees, have core bundles of vascular tissue inside their stems. These
circulatory vascular bundles are composed of hollow conduits known as xylem, or
wood, that are specialized to transport water efficiently while allowing maximum
resistance to drought (hydraulic safety). Sufficient water transport in plants
is not guaranteed when water demand increases during hot and dry days. Under
those conditions, water in wood becomes highly unstable and trees can die once
an air bubble enters and spreads inside those hollow cells. By integrating
modelling activities with visual and physiological processes related to air
entry and air bubble formation in wood, plant water transport and resistance to
drought will be established. The primary impacts of the proposed project will be
to advance discovery in the field of water relations and hydraulic architecture
of vascular plants by predicting tree mortality following drought, while
promoting training for the next generation of scientists and educators. Results
from this research can be directly used in future predictions of vegetation
responses to climate. The findings here will also be of interest to policy
makers, plant breeders and land managers concerned with potential drought
impacts on productivity and distributions of certain
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this project is to link
the dynamics of embolism formation and removal under tension in xylem of woody
plants starting from the bubble scale and integrating the resulting dynamics
along individual conduits to arrive at whole-plant vulnerability to cavitation
curves. The specific objectives are to 1) measure and model the timescale
required for the gas phase induced by cavitation to fully embolize an entire
xylem conduit; 2) investigate the conditions under which bubble formation can
spread from one conduit to another; 3) investigate the possibility of bubble
resorption under tension to occur; and 4) determine the relation between
embolism formation and loss of hydraulic conductivity. To achieve the project
objectives, a series of science questions will be addressed: Research question 1
(bubble scale): what are the mechanisms and dynamics of embolism formation and
removal in a single xylem conduit? What is the time required for a gas bubble to
completely fill and to drain a conduit for varying conduit structures and xylem
tensions? Research question 2 (conduit connectivity): Is the time needed for the
embolism to fill a conduit dependent on conduit size, and the rigidity of the
end-wall pit membrane? Research question 3 (Up-scaling to whole-plant): Do the
dynamics of bubble formation in a single conduit explain the whole organ
vulnerability to embolism curves. The formulation of bubble formation and spread
in transpiring plants will represent a major step forward as the theoretical
computational methods, and experimental techniques are now ripe for making this
progress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.