* 1754376
* Phylogenomics to advance understanding of world mosquito diversity and vector ecology
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Brian Wiegmann, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,192,081.00

This project expands knowledge of genetic interrelationships and biological
diversity in world mosquitoes. Comparison of genes and genomes allows greater
insight into the basic biology of mosquitoes, their capacity to carry or resist
disease transmission, and their response to environmental factors that affect
their impact on human and animal populations in domestic and natural conditions.
The project expands genomic sampling for mosquitoes broadly throughout the
group, with special focus on diverse, but as yet unstudied, species sampled
worldwide. The project will further the development of interactive data systems
that provide species identification, a comparative framework for species
comparison and identification, and an interactive data archive and retrieval
system for information on mosquito genes, biology, pathogens, and geographic
distributions. The project will train numerous graduate and undergraduate
students in US institutions and connect with K-12 teachers and students through
museum exhibits, professional development workshops, and classroom kits.
Additionally, the project will engage the public in the process of doing science
through citizen science efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genomic sampling will be
carried out from mosquito specimens held in museum repositories and from field
collected samples. Anchored enrichment processes will be used to generate
genomic data to identify monophyletic lineages and establish relationships
within and among all higher culicid taxa, from specific to family level. The
project will use comprehensively sampled phylogenetic estimates for mosquito
clades that contain taxa that have crossed ecological boundaries to address
evolutionary questions about domestication, and accompanying habitat- and host-
shifts that appear to drive the evolution of major disease vectors. Lastly, the
project will further expand the development of an existing species and pathogen
biodiversity database (VectorMap), to include a data-enabled, interactive
phylogeny of World mosquitoes that provides a contextualized interface for
evolutionary studies of mosquito ecology, evolution, species interactions and
taxonomic identification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.