* 1754152
* Collaborative Research: Red carotenoids as signals of respiratory chain function
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Geoffrey Hill, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 486,000.00

Carotenoid pigments are among the most common colorants in nature. They provide
coloration to many animals, and carotenoid coloration has long been documented
to be a reliable signal of individual health and vitality. The basis for this
connection between color display and individual quality (or fitness) remains
speculative. This NSF-sponsored project will test the hypothesis that production
of red pigments is tied to core energy production in the powerhouse of the cell-
the mitochondrion. For this study, researchers will study wild-caught copepods,
Tigriopus californicus, which are a type of tiny shrimp with red coloration that
they derive by altering yellow dietary carotenoids to red pigments. Evidence
suggests that this conversion takes place in the mitochondrion. The authors will
use genetic and chemical treatments to disrupt cellular respiration and measure
the effect on red coloration. Establishing carotenoid coloration as a signal of
mitochondrial function has important practical implications. If carotenoid
coloration is a signal of mitochondrial function, then it could be used for
environmental monitoring. Carotenoids are also widely distributed as health
supplements with possible benefits in fighting cancer, macular degeneration, and
even aging. Understanding the mechanisms of carotenoid use and distribution in
non-human animals will help inform their use as health supplements in people.
Copepods also present an ideal system in which to engage grade-school students
in science and through outreach programs we will use experiments showing the
diet dependency of copepods to engage young people in the process of
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carotenoids are common components of living
systems, playing key roles in free radical scavenging and production of yellow,
orange, and red coloration. Despite extensive research showing that carotenoid
coloration is dependent on an animal's condition and is sensitive to
environmental perturbations, the mechanisms that link carotenoid coloration to
condition and health remain poorly understood. This project will test the
hypothesis that production of carotenoid-based red coloration in animals is
intimately tied to electron transport system (ETS) function. Tigriopus
californicus (TC copepods) have red coloration that they derive by oxidizing
yellow dietary carotenoids through the same pathways used by vertebrates that
display red coloration. Tightly controlled experiments using TC copepods will
test the effects of hybrid-induced ETS dysfunction on the production of red
coloration. Chemical treatments that target specific components of the ETS will
be used to dissect the specific mechanisms underlying the linkage between
mitochondrial function and carotenoid metabolism. If ornamental coloration is
dependent on the mitochondrial membrane potential and closely linked to ATP
production, then carotenoid coloration signals something fundamental about an
animal. Moreover, if production of red carotenoid coloration depends on the
fundamental health and functionality of an animal, then humans can assay the
health and condition of individual animals and populations of animals by
quantifying red coloration. Copepods also present an ideal system in which to
engage grade-school students in science. Through outreach programs, experiments
will be used to show the diet dependency of copepods and to engage young people
in the process of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.