* 1754929
* Collaborative Research: Along Strike Variation in Shallow, Offshore Strain Accumulation and Slow Slip at Hikurangi Subduction Margin, New Zealand
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Spahr Webb, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 03/31/2024
* USD 398,533.00

Subduction zones are regions where one of Earth's tectonic plates slides beneath
another. The zone of slip between the two plates is a geologic fault where the
motion of the lower plate is imperfectly transferred to the overlying plate
through frictional processes allowing for unreleased strain to build up in the
upper plate. The abrupt release of built-up strain in the upper plate causes
earthquakes, which can be large on subduction zones because of the size of the
slip region. These great earthquakes cause damage both from the shaking itself
but also because of the flooding of seawater from a tsunami. Recent events in
Sumatra in 2004, Chile in 2010, and Japan in 2011 all demonstrate the
devastating hazard associated with these events. Subduction zones also lie
offshore the US coasts along Northern California, Oregon and Washington State
and another along Alaska and the Aleutian Islands. Both of these subduction
zones have experienced great earthquakes in the past and will do so again in the
future. A goal of this project is to better understand the geophysical processes
at work at subduction zones and to improve the quantitative assessment of
potential hazard. This project will deploy a combination of seafloor geodetic
sensors to track the slow buildup and possible release of seafloor motion
offshore of a New Zealand subduction zone. The New Zealand Hikurangi site was
picked because the subduction zone is shallow and can be imaged more effectively
with seafloor geodetic instruments. This site also has a history of rapidly
repeating slow slip earthquakes that provide insight into the slip process.
Broader impacts of this project include training and support for a graduate
student in the research. The project leverages international efforts by New
Zealand and Japanese research teams who will occupy adjacent seafloor geodetic
sites. The project will also transfer operational know-how for how to conduct
seafloor geodesy experiments to NZ research counterparts, enabling them to
collect measurements at these critical sites during this proposed project and
continue in the future past the end of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will measure deformation near the trench of the New Zealand Hikuangi
subduction margin over a four year period using the GPS-Acoustic (GPS-A) method.
The GPS-A site will be established in the Hawkes Bay area to provide critical
measurements centered between GPS-A sites in the northern and southern parts of
the margin established using Japanese and New Zealand funding. This central site
is near the transition from an apparently strongly coupled margin to the South,
and a nearly uncoupled margin in the North. The project will implement the more
efficient and cost-saving Wave Glider platform for the GPS-Acoustic
measurements. Permanent seafloor benchmarks will be installed for horizontal
positioning to ensure the time series of positions can be continued into the
future, past the end of this project. An array of absolute pressure gauges will
also be deployed for two years to measure the offshore extent of slow slip
events observed from land arrays beneath the Hawkes Bay area, a region thought
to have experienced many &gt;8 magnitude earthquakes in the past based on
paleoseismology. The array is expected to detect vertical uplift and hence the
spatial extent of at least one large slow slip event in this region during the
deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.