* 1754425
* Collaborative Research: From demography to diversification: population-level drivers of phylogenetic speciation dynamics across squamate reptiles
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Gabriel Costa, Auburn University at Montgomery
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 04/30/2022
* USD 219,877.00

Species diversity varies dramatically across the tree of life: some groups of
organisms, such as beetles and flowering plants, contain far more species than
most other groups of organisms. Understanding how and why some groups have come
to be more species-rich than other groups is a central and unsolved problem in
the life sciences. One class of explanations for these differences in species
numbers involves the rate at which new species arise. Using tools from genome
biology and computational data science, this project will identify the
mechanisms that lead to different rates of species formation and quantify their
importance in a major group of vertebrate animals. The project will provide
training in genomics, geographic information systems, computational biology, and
biodiversity science for students and researchers at the undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral levels. Genomic resources and new scientific software
developed for the project will be made publicly available, and a museum exhibit
will highlight the ways in which genomics and computer programming are changing
the way scientists study and understand the diversity of life forms on
Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce a novel synthesis between
population biology and large-scale patterns of species diversity by integrating
next-generation population genomics with a phylogenetic comparative perspective
on lineage diversification rates. The project will quantify the genomic signal
of several population processes to address how rates of population splitting and
persistence influence speciation rates as measured on time-calibrated
phylogenetic trees. These objectives will be supported by estimating
phylogeographic and population genomic parameters across many species of
squamate reptiles that vary in rates of speciation, and by developing new
methods to link these parameters to diversification rates on phylogenetic trees.
The project will also assess how organismal traits (life history, dispersal
biology, population size) contribute to demographic processes that can influence
the formation and persistence of incipient species. The project will provide a
bridge between biological processes that occur at two very different timescales
and will provide an understanding of how changes in populations at ecological
timescales affect changes in biological diversity at deep (million-year)
timescales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.