* 1754627
* Systematics and evolution of migration in Clupeiformes (Herring, Sardines, Shad, Anchovies, and their allies)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Devin Bloom, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 07/31/2023
* USD 699,310.00

Migration is a widespread phenomenon among animals. One of the most spectacular
types of migration, which occurs in fish such as salmon, eels, shad and
sturgeon, involves movement between rivers and oceans to feed and reproduce.
Many of these migratory fishes are important to their ecosystem and for
recreational and commercial harvests. However, the evolution of migration and
its consequences for species traits remains mysterious. The group of fishes that
includes herrings, sardines, shads, and anchovies (Clupeiformes), is an
excellent model for studying migration because it includes a large number of
migratory species, many of which are of economic importance. Surprisingly, the
evolutionary relationships and taxonomy of these fishes is poorly understood.
The goal of this project is to use DNA sequence and anatomical data to generate
a tree of life for Clupeiformes, and use this group as a model to understand the
evolution of migration. The project will determine which traits are associated
with migration, and how these traits evolve differently in migratory fishes
compared to non-migratory fishes. The broader impacts of this project include
training for a postdoc, two graduate students, high school teachers and first-
generation undergraduates from underrepresented groups in STEM disciplines,
including current and former military members and community college transfer
students. In addition, this project will revise the taxonomy of Clupeiformes,
including discovery and description of new species, provide taxonomic keys for
their identification, and develop an open, online database of all migratory
fishes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will generate a comprehensive
phylogeny of Clupeiformes using genome-scale data and morphological characters
to investigate the evolution of diadromy and its impact on lineage and
phenotypic diversity. Using targeted exon capture, the project will sequence
&gt;1000 loci for phylogenetics and investigating the molecular evolution of
diadromy. Morphological characters will be identified in understudied systems
such as the gill arches, brain case, and soft tissue using dry skeletons, whole
specimens, digital CT-scanned images and clear and stained specimens. The
molecular basis for adaptation to a diadromous life history will be determined
by testing for differences in rates and patterns of selection in osmoregulatory
and vision genes. State-dependent diversification and sister comparison analyses
will be used to test whether diadromy drives differences in rates of lineage
diversification. Rates of morphological evolution will be estimated using
maximum likelihood and Bayesian methods that incorporate missing taxa and
uncertainty in parameter estimates and phylogeny. Using functional traits
related to locomotion and feeding, the project also will determine whether
migratory fishes reside on distinct macroevolutionary adaptive peaks associated
with locomotion and feeding. Comparative methods will be used to determine the
best-fit models of evolution for various traits associated with diadromy, and
test to whether these traits are under strong selection. This project will
reveal the macroevolutionary dynamics of diadromy across multiple biological
scales and resolve the systematics and taxonomy of
Clupeiformes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.