* 1754647
* Collaborative Research: LTREB: A natural laboratory for studying biodiversity, ecosystem function, and responses to environmental change from Amazonian lowlands to Andean treeline
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Miles Silman, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 06/30/2024
* USD 384,818.00

Where a species lives - its geographic range - is affected by climate and the
interactions it has with other living organisms. There is a complex set of
factors that influence species ranges, and how these factors change with respect
to changing environments depends on the life history stage of long-lived
organisms, such as trees. Range shifts in plants that occur through differential
mortality versus recruitment are complex processes, requiring long term data on
the demography of both adults and the early stages of development for proper
predictive modelling. This research replaces descriptive studies with a
mechanistic understanding of species and ecosystem responses to environmental
changes along elevation gradients by combining long-term field data with state-
of-the-art demographic and environmental modeling. The results will advance our
understanding of species range shifts, which is important to land managers and
species conservation efforts. The study will also train US undergraduate and
graduate students in STEM disciplines, and advance K-12
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research advances mechanistic knowledge of
species- and ecosystem-level responses to environmental changes based on
structural and chemical functional traits. Data gathered from field plots are
coupled with advanced demographic modelling and airborne and satellite remote
sensing to understand how the environment controls tropical forest species
distributions, community composition, and ecosystem ecology. The research
approach couples a large, traditional data set of forest plot inventories, which
includes high precision and high temporal resolution growth and mortality data,
with meteorology, structural and chemical traits, and remote sensing. A series
of hypotheses centered on linking vital rates to species responses to ongoing
and episodic environmental variability, as well as scaling individual species
responses to ecosystem performance and function will be addressed with this
research. The research centers on questions of tree distributional ecology,
demography, and forest ecosystem ecology requiring long time-series to
understand effects of ongoing environmental change and to detect responses to
transient environmental change. Mechanistic answers to these questions in
systems of long-lived organisms, such as trees, require understanding variation
in vital rates conditional on environmental variables, which in turn require
long time periods for accurate estimation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.