* 1754656
* Collaborative proposal:  Combining NEON and remotely sensed habitats to determine climate impacts on community dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Roland Kays, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 06/30/2023
* USD 240,000.00

The impact of environmental change on biological communities will depend on
interactions involving the local habitat and species that interact with one
another - as each species responds directly to environmental conditions, it
indirectly affects all of the species with which it interacts. Species
interactions complicate our ability to predict organismal response to
environmental change, because each species experiences habitat complexity at a
different scale - from flightless insects to large vertebrates. Current species
distribution models used to anticipate community responses to climate predict
species in isolation from one another, ignoring interactions. This research
approach will advance ecological forecasting methods by a developing a new
modeling approach that analyzes the combined responses of species to climate,
habitat, and one another. The study offers a framework for synthesizing
environmental and biological data across the National Ecological Observation
Network (NEON) network, one that can be exploited by the scientific community
for integration with their own analyses. The project will engage the public
through citizen-assisted identification of animal images. New data on large
mammals and seed production from NEON sites will be made available to the
community, and forecasts of community responses to climate will be made
available through a web site. A workshop will be offered for training of
advanced doctoral students, postdocs, and academic and agency scientists in the
use of the modeling tools and NEON data. The study will train two graduate
students, including a program in science communication, and involve four
undergraduate students in fieldwork. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
synthesize taxonomically diverse communities that are monitored in NEON (ground
beetles, vascular plants, small mammals, birds) with new data on mast, and large
mammal surveys. Mast is one of several habitat variables that interacts with
climate variation. A focus on the mast system of pulsed seed and fruit
production from trees includes vertebrate consumers, as well as indirect
interactions with arthropod competitors and vertebrate predators. Remotely-
sensed imagery and the NEON airborne observatory will be used to characterize
habitat diversity. New sampling at NEON sites for large mammals and seed
production will add key components that allow us to evaluate the community
dynamics of masting tree systems at broad scales. Results of this analysis will
be used to forecast community change and reorganization, including prediction
and attribution of climate risk by species and habitat and how it is shared
across species groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.