* 1754484
* Collaborative Research:  The ecological significance of nitrogen fixation in perennial grasses
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2018,07/31/2023
* G. Philip Robertson, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 07/31/2023
* USD 127,947.00

This award will provide new insights into biological nitrogen fixation in
perennial grasses. Nitrogen fixation is the process by which microbes convert
nitrogen gas in the atmosphere to a form that can be used by the plant to make
proteins, DNA, and other compounds crucial for life. This process is well-
documented for legumes, i.e. plants that house nitrogen-fixing bacteria in root
nodules, but it can also occur for grasses where a wide range of bacteria appear
to fix nitrogen by a process known as associative nitrogen fixation. Many
details of associative nitrogen fixation remain unknown, including its ecosystem
importance, the microbial taxa that fix the nitrogen, and the ecological
relationships driving its occurrence. Associative nitrogen fixation has
potential significance for many ecosystems, and in agriculture it may help to
meet the fertilizer requirements of perennial grasses grown for forage and
bioenergy. If perennial grasses could get most of their nitrogen from biological
fixation, it reduces the need for synthetic fertilizers, which reduces both
costs to farmers and the negative environmental consequences associated with
synthetic fertilizer use. The goals of this research are to determine when and
how much associative nitrogen fixation occurs in perennial grasses, identify the
microbial taxa fixing nitrogen, and explore the relationship between the plant
and nitrogen-fixing microbes. The project will also provide research experiences
and develop teaching materials for K-12 teachers and students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will use stable isotope tracers to trace the
nitrogen in switchgrass, a well-studied perennial grass native to North American
prairies. They will trace labeled dinitrogen gas into switchgrass tissues and
surrounding soils, as well as into the DNA of the nitrogen-fixing microbial
taxa. Carbon will be traced from photosynthesis through the plant and into
microbes, which will show whether the nitrogen-fixing microbes are receiving
carbon from the plant or from the soil. Finally, the active nitrogen-fixing
microbes will be sequenced, with the resultant genomic data providing insights
into the functions of the plant microbiome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.