* 1754745
* Adaptive Evolution of Gene Expression and Alternative Splicing
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* John Pool, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2023
* USD 760,731.00

A single gene often encodes numerous proteins by assembling different components
from the original DNA sequence. These proteins have different functions. Thus,
the number and type of proteins produced from a gene, i.e., gene regulation, are
important aspects of how an organism functions. The investigators will look
across the whole genome in natural populations of the fruit fly that have
adapted to different temperature environments. By comparing gene regulation
among these populations, they will learn how gene regulation changes as
organisms adapt to their environment. The project will provide an unusually
complete view of the causes, mechanisms, and consequences of the evolution of
gene regulation. It will also inform how insects adapt to novel environments.
Thus, they will also learn about the factors that limit the geographic ranges of
insects that are agricultural pests or disease vectors. Broader impacts of this
project include extensive training of young scientists, including members of
underrepresented groups in science. The project will also strengthen scientific
connections between U.S. researchers and their counterparts in Africa. Finally,
the team will improve the quality of scientific reference material available to
the public online.

The fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster originated from warm regions of Africa;
this research focuses on three parallel instances of adaptation to colder
climates. The project includes the collection of RNA sequence data from three
pairs of warm- and cold-adapted populations that encompass these three climate
transitions. By applying a population genetic framework to this data set,
population differences in gene expression and alternative splicing that were
most likely driven by local adaptation can be identified. Crosses between warm-
and cold-adapted populations will allow these changes to be classified as either
cis-encoded at the affected gene, or trans-encoded by another gene. For cis-
encoded cases of adaptive expression or splicing evolution, patterns of genetic
variation can illuminate key details of natural selection's mode of action.
Researchers will use existing population genomic data to test whether selection
favored new mutations or standing genetic variation. The project also entails
the genetic mapping of cold tolerance differences for each population pair. The
combination of mapping results, population genomic analysis of existing data,
and the above RNA sequencing results will identify notable candidate genes for
local adaptation via cis-acting changes in gene regulation. Probing the
interface between genetic adaptation and the thermal environment will test
whether gene regulatory changes alter or maintain ancestral regulation, and
whether such changes result in gene regulatory networks that are less buffered
against perturbation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.