* 1754022
* SG:  An experimental test of the role of chromosomal inversions in adaptive evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2020
* Mohamed Noor, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2020
* USD 200,000.00

As organisms reproduce and replicate the DNA in their chromosomes, regions of
DNA sequence can get reversed relative to that of the original chromosome.
Offspring inherit copies of the chromosomes bearing the original or the inverted
sequence. In some natural populations, inverted chromosomes can become
abundantly distributed. This suggests that they may confer an advantage to the
organism that has them. This research will provide the first experimental test
of an important hypothesis that would explain why these DNA reversals can
proliferate. Inversions often have large effects and are common in many species,
including humans. Understanding their persistence and spread is important to
basic research and applied research including medicine and agriculture. This
project will also support the development of online tools to help teach basic
genetics and evolution principles at the high school
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A decade ago, the Kirkpatrick-Barton mathematical
model was proposed to explain how natural selection would allow new inversions
to spread in natural populations. Although never experimentally verified, this
model has been invoked to explain the spread of inversions in a wide variety of
species. This project will experimentally test this model using populations of
Drosophila melanogaster fruit flies. The researchers will use genome editing
tools to experimentally create an inversion that captures alleles known to be
associated with adaptations to particular environments. The researchers will
monitor the pace with which the chromosomal inversion spreads in replicated
experimental populations and compare this pace to detailed model predictions.
The results should either provide a strong experimental confirmation of this
popular model or identify deviations that would suggest a rethinking of how and
why chromosomal inversions spread in natural
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.