* 1754949
* RCN:  Buildig an Organismal Systems-type Modeling Network - OSyM
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Dianna Padilla, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

A central mystery in biology is how animals maintain the myriad of complex
functions of life, while responding to changing environments. This includes how
animals maintain function of all of their component systems (for example the
nervous system, muscle and skeletal systems, and others) through development.
This also includes how animals respond to their environments throughout their
lifetimes and across evolutionary time. Understanding the mechanisms that
underlie these responses is a major challenge in biology. This information is
not only needed for a basic understanding of biological systems, but also
because our ability to predict the features that make animals resilient or
inflexible to changing environments is poorly developed. Predicting how animals
will respond to environmental change is critical. Around the world this change
is impacting many animal species, including those that humans depend on for
dietary protein, crop pollination, and ecosystem services. The unprecedented
pressures from expanding human populations, habitat destruction and
fragmentation, ocean acidification, and environmental change are rapidly
changing the environment in which animal species live and understanding and
predicting how animals will respond is critical. This project will bring
together biologists, engineers, and mathematicians to answer these questions. In
addition, this project will provide opportunities for scientists, especially
those typically underrepresented in these fields, to attend workshops and
participate in research exchange programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Animals are
complex systems of interconnected elements (modules) operating at multiple
spatial and temporal scales. Discovering systems-level attributes that make
animals resilient or sensitive to change presents a grand challenge for biology.
Knowledge of these attributes and the underlying mechanisms controlling them are
necessary for predicting how animals will respond to short- and long-term
changes in internal and external environments. However, traditional approaches
in biology are inadequate for the task. Significant advances can be made by
incorporating tools from other disciplines, particularly applied mathematics,
engineering, and modelling, but, mechanisms are needed for cross-training and
facilitating collaborations at all professional levels among these diverse
fields. The creation of the Organismal Systems-type Modeling (OSyM) Network
will: 1) Provide mechanisms to build and broaden the community of organismal
biologists, mathematicians, modellers, computer scientists, and engineers using
integrative, systems-level approaches to investigate stability and change in
organismal animal systems and 2) Facilitate development of effective
collaborations and the exchange of approaches, skills, and ideas among this
community. OSyM will advance discovery and understanding while promoting
training and learning through research exchanges and workshops for researchers
at all levels, especially those from groups underrepresented in STEM fields.
Developing a quantitative understanding of the complex functions and
interactions of many aspects of organismal biology requires development of new
mathematical and engineering tools. By having engineers, mathematicians,
modellers, and biologists working together to solve complex problems, advances
will be made in each of these fields, likely leading to development of new bio-
inspired devices, materials, and applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
was co-funded by the Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics and the
Integrative Ecological Physiology Programs within the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.