* 1754756
* Nitrogen fixation and its coupling to methane dynamics in the peat moss (Sphagnum) phytobiome of northern peatlands
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Joel Kostka, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,150,001.00

Peatlands are wetlands that lock away huge amounts of carbon as thick peat soil
deposits. Referred to as a "carbon bank", scientists believe that the carbon
stored in peat is at risk of being released to the atmosphere in response to
environmental change. Mosses often dominate plant production in peatland
ecosystems, which are concentrated in northern regions where the environment can
become extremely cold and is nutrient poor. Similar to humans or to other
plants, mosses contain a diverse microbiome, microbes that are intimately
associated with the plant in a symbiotic relationship, that help the host to
grow and thrive under extreme conditions. The plant host provides the microbiome
with a stable environment in which to live and in turn the microbes are believed
to help mosses acquire nutrients such as nitrogen and carbon. For example, some
microbes convert nitrogen gas from the atmosphere into a form that moss plants
can use. Similarly, there are microbes that can also help mosses acquire carbon
from the conversion of methane (natural gas produced in wetland soils) to carbon
dioxide. This research will determine how much and how fast nitrogen and carbon
are metabolized by peat moss microbiomes, as well as the implications for the
growth of peat mosses and carbon storage in northern peatland ecosystems in
Minnesota and Canada. Taking advantage of a large whole ecosystem experiment,
the project will further examine the response of peat mosses and their
constituent microbiomes to environmental change. This project will provide
fundamental research on how microbiomes aid the growth of peat moss plants,
which may store more carbon than any other plant on Earth. Results of the
project will be used to improve predictions on whether peatlands will act as a
net carbon source or sink in response to ongoing environmental change as well as
the potential use of plant microbiomes as a natural biofilter for methane
produced in landfills. This research will also serve society by teaching the
next generation of scientists about the important ecosystem services that
wetlands provide and the role of microbes in maintaining these services. At
least two graduate students, two undergraduate students, and a postdoctoral
researcher will be involved in all aspects of the project. Two signature
activities will be used as instruments to communicate project results to the
public. A 5-day workshop in a Georgia wetland will train 16 middle and high
school teachers on developing lesson plans for teaching ecosystem science in the
context of conservation, restoration, and global environmental change. Project
results will be disseminated to the public through an annual interactive
activity at the Atlanta Science Festival (which reaches 20,000 people per
year).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the research is to investigate
the role of the peat moss microbiome in regulating peatland carbon (C) and
nitrogen (N) cycles and the resilience of peatlands to environmental change.
Objectives are to: 1) quantify in situ rates of nitrogen fixation and
methanotrophy, and elucidate the contribution of keystone microbial associates
mediating these processes in the peat moss microbiome, 2) determine the response
of nitrogen fixation and its coupling to methane(CH4) dynamics to perturbation
of environmental change drivers in the laboratory and in a large-scale whole
ecosystem experiment in the field, and 3) leverage datasets from two long-term
field sites to estimate the microbiome contribution to ecosystem N and C budgets
as well as model the response of microbiome function to perturbation of
environmental change drivers. Working hypotheses include: H1: N fixation is a
predominant N input to northern peatlands; H2: The dominant nitrogen fixers are
methanotrophic bacteria and cyanobacteria; H3: Methanotrophs that also fix N
represent a substantial CH4 sink; H4: Net primary production by peat mosses is
directly supported by N acquired from nitrogen fixation and methane-derived C
from methanotrophy; H5: Peat moss productivity and its response to environmental
perturbations will be largely determined by plant-microbe and microbe-microbe
interactions; H6: Increases in temperature and CO2 will result in lower rates of
N fixation due to decreased peat moss productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.