* 1754224
* Collaborative Research:  Reverberating Responses to Trophic Cascades across Ecosystems: from Land to Streams and Back Again
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Colden Baxter, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 05/31/2023
* USD 467,388.00

The many interconnected relationships between predators and prey in a food web
can link seemingly distant organisms and processes. This study explores how the
influence of top predators in a terrestrial environment is linked across
ecosystem boundaries to impact primary production and food webs in aquatic
environments. This study also explores how aquatic ecosystem responses to
predators can reverberate back out of the stream to impact terrestrial predators
that rely on the export of emerging adult insects from the stream. Cross-
ecosystem food web connections will be studied at three different National Parks
(Zion, Rocky Mountain, and Yellowstone National Parks), thereby providing
replication at large spatial scales and leveraging the opportunities that
National Parks provide to educate the public about food web ecology and the role
of top predators in structuring our ecosystems. This research will be the first
of its kind to investigate reverberating effects of trophic cascades whereby
indirect effects may cross ecosystem boundaries (terrestrial to aquatic) and
then subsequently reverberate back to animals and plants in the original
ecosystem (aquatic back to terrestrial). This work will provide a more complete
picture of how the loss of top predatory species worldwide may be indirectly
influencing many distantly connected species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous
investigations have demonstrated the indirect role of top predators (e.g.,
wolves in Yellowstone Park and mountain lions in Zion National Park) in control
of riparian vegetation along streams. In addition, streams and riparian zones
are connected by well-understood processes of material and organism exchange,
making them ideal systems to identify and quantify trophic reverberations. The
study will be conducted in streams and adjacent riparian zones and will
encompass (1) streamside ungulate browsing and riparian plant communities, (2)
community composition and abundance of in-stream biota, quantification of
terrestrial fluxes (organic matter and invertebrate) fluxes to streams, and
diets of stream biota, and (3) emergent adult aquatic insects in the riparian
zone and the response of spiders and bats. These riparian insectivores serve as
a bellwether for changes in stream insect emergence and stream-riparian
linkages. In each park, replicate study sites will be established along streams
with and without controls on ungulate browsing of riparian woody vegetation. By
comparing within and across three national parks, this study will yield a
greater understanding of how community and landscape context may mediate the
strength, or even sign, of reverberating responses to terrestrial top-down
control of ungulate browsing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.