* 1754097
* The Role of Meiotic-Stage Non-Coding RNA in the Modulation of Anther &amp; Pollen Development in Grasses
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Virginia Walbot, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2024
* USD 3,886,862.00

This project will investigate the lifecycle and functions of a class of small
RNAs that support pollen development in grass flowers, specifically in anthers.
The experiments focus on the biogenesis, precise localization, and
quantification of these 24-nucleotide RNAs, the proteins that utilize them for
anther functions, and their role in plant fertility. Prior work demonstrated
that these small RNAs are required for robust male fertility under even slight
temperature stress: without them anther development fails. The project will
focus on maize anthers because it is easy to determine accurately what
developmental stage they are in, they are easy to dissect, there are numerous
developmental mutants that affect anthers for which the gene has been isolated,
and because understanding male fertility is important to the production of
hybrid corn seed. A more detailed understanding of the molecular basis of pollen
development enables improvements in seed production, including hybrid seeds; in
the grasses, hybrid corn and rice have significantly boosted world food
production. Outcomes of this project could include discovering new genetic
pathways for more precise control of male fertility in plants, and plants with
fertility that is more resilient to environmental change. The project will
utilize plant genomics and targeted mutagenesis, cutting-edge imaging
techniques, bioinformatics, with a focus on developmental biology. Broader
impacts of the project include training of students in plant and computational
biology via continued integration with long-running and successful undergraduate
and high school internship programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
focus specifically on the class of 24-nt phased, secondary siRNAs, known as
"24-nt phasiRNAs" that are highly enriched in meiotic-stage anthers. The work
will be done in maize as the primary species for analysis because there are
significant, existing genetic and molecular resources. The project will address
several important questions. Do meiotic cells differ from somatic cells in the
accumulation of small RNAs and their functions? Which transcription factors
guide the transitions required for setting cell fate and differentiation of cell
type-specific properties that include phasiRNAs? How are meiotic-stage small
RNAs deployed to guide anther cell fate and differentiation? Where and when do
the microRNA triggers, precursor mRNAs, and biogenesis or effector proteins
accumulate? The project will characterize phenotypes and molecular genetic
analysis of loss-of-function knock-out mutations that impact phasiRNAs,
including mutations of the Dicer-like5 (Dcl5) gene, for which preliminary data
demonstrate male sterility. Project members will be trained broadly in plant
small RNA biology and genomics, cell biology and microscopy, and computational
methods through their individual and group projects in the analysis of the
localization, biogenesis, and biochemistry of small
RNAs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.