* 1754810
* Community processes structuring assembly and disassembly of bat gut-microbial communities across a gradient of habitat degradation
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Tigga Kingston, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 05/31/2024
* USD 829,959.00

Mammal guts are home to communities of microbes that play an important role in
the nutrition and health of individual animals. These microbial communities, or
microbiomes, are made up of hundreds of species of bacteria, but which species
are present, and how common they are, varies from individual to individual
animal. This variability is important because abnormal communities can lead to
conditions that range from obesity to depression. However, the rules by which
microbial communities come together or breakdown are poorly understood. Using
wild bats as models, the researchers will investigate how host sociality, diet,
genetics, and microbe functions and interactions shape the make-up of digestive
microbiomes. The results of this research to understand the rules governing
microbiome composition can help advance human and wildlife health. To improve
students' understanding of how scientific research is conducted, the team will
engage elementary school students from around the country in the project,
sharing data live from the field in real time. Students will learn how to
analyze and interpret the project data through the researchers' STEM K-12
initiative: The Malaysian Bat Education Adventure. Using an existing
Biodiversity module (grades 5-6) and a new module "Microbial Diversity: What's
in your bat?" (grades 6-7), students will be introduced to topics of microbial
ecology and diversity. The program's success in changing student STEM knowledge,
skills and attitude will be evaluated with quantitative methods in a pre- and
post- intervention design with control group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will determine the relative role of community processes in structuring gut-
microbial composition and function in insectivorous bat species co-distributed
across a gradient of habitat degradation. The researchers hypothesize that
microbiome community assembly and disassembly involve deterministic processes of
niche filtering, species interactions, and dispersal. This research will test
the hypothesis that changes in host ecology wrought by habitat degradation will
alter the relative influence of these processes with consequences for community
composition and function. Bats will be studied across a forest modification
gradient in Malaysia, and individually-matched samples of gut-microbial
composition, metagenome function, dietary composition, host genotype and
measures of social interaction obtained for each bat. These data, in conjunction
with analyses of co-occurrence, phylogenetic and functional trait patterns, will
be used to test structural equation models specified to untangle the processes
structuring communities in a causal modeling framework. Evidence of the role of
dispersal in structuring microbiomes will derive from comparisons of co-
distributed host species that differ in sociality. Interspecific associations
will be assessed using co-occurrence network approaches. Functional trait space
is developed from genomic inference for each bacterial phylotype within an
individual bat's microbiome. Phylogenies are estimated using maximum likelihood
and 16S gene alignment among community members. To test the role of diet and
host genetics (the host environment) in community processes, the researchers
describe diet from feces with the COI DNA barcodes, and quantify host diversity
and relatedness through genome fingerprinting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.