* 1754244
* Laboratory Studies of the Effect of Turbulence on Aerosol-Cloud Interactions
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Raymond Shaw, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 02/28/2023
* USD 742,986.00

The optical properties of warm clouds depend on the droplet size distribution
and its moments. In turn, these are influenced by the aerosol particles that act
as nuclei for the formation of cloud droplets. This project will investigate on
how the aerosols and cloud droplets interact within a turbulent environment, in
the context of both the aerosol first and second indirect effects (albedo and
lifetime effects).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The studies will be performed in the Pi
Chamber, in which clouds are generated through isobaric mixing within a
turbulent environment. The laboratory environment allows for aerosol-cloud
interaction in the presence of constant thermodynamic forcing and turbulence
properties. The laboratory system does not attempt to reconstruct the full
complexity of the atmosphere, but rather aims to isolate specific aspects of the
aerosol-cloud system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objectives of the project are to
investigate the transient response of clouds as they interact with and cleanse
the surrounding aerosol population; To investigate supersaturation variability
in a turbulent environment; To investigate the growth of cloud droplets in a
steady-state, turbulent environment, specifically to understand the relative
roles of the phase relaxation time and the turbulence correlation times; To
continue development of a Large Eddy Simulation (LES)/bin-microphysics model for
comparison with and interpretation of laboratory observations, with the eventual
purpose of serving as a bridge to the full atmospheric context; And to perform
initial exploratory work on the ability to form and measure mixed-phase
clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Results from the Pi
Chamber have already led to the verification that cloud droplet growth by
condensation is fundamentally different when the phase relaxation time is small
or large compared to the turbulence correlation time; and to the illustration
that this provides a mechanism for accelerating aerosol activation and cloud
collapse. Both of these processes are fundamentally linked to aerosol-cloud
interactions and their influence on indirect effects. This research builds
directly on those results and will lead to a deeper understanding of cloud
cleansing of aerosols, supersaturation variability in turbulent flows, and how
that supersaturation variability influences the broadening of cloud droplet size
distributions, key aspects of the precipitation formation problem. The results
also will be compared with a LES/bin microphysics cloud model that can serve as
a link to studying the phenomena identified in the laboratory in the context of
the more complex atmosphere. Finally, the study will provide further insight
into the conditions necessary to generate steady-state mixed-phase
clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Precipitation formation
and radiative properties of clouds are critical aspects of the climate and
weather forecasting problems. They are therefore issues of immediate societal
relevance and have potential to translate to tangible economic benefits and
improvements in the human condition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Pi Chamber uses
Rayleigh-Benard convection as the mechanism for producing supersaturation for
cloud formation. The research will contribute to the diverse community of
researchers studying Rayleigh-Benard convection. It will have relevance to the
vast range of applied problems studied by that community, from stellar
atmospheres to the earth's mantle to applications of myriad engineering problems
involving turbulent heat transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the Pi Chamber
provides valuable opportunities for education: from outreach at the K-12 levels,
to undergraduate internships and senior projects, and finally to graduate
student and postdoctoral research. The current project includes support for two
full-time graduate students who will become well versed in the operation of the
cloud chamber as well as with the wide range of associated instrumentation.
Outreach events in the cloud chamber lab will be continued on a regular
basis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.