* 1754075
* Collaborative Research:  SG:  RUI:  Exploring the genetic basis of phenotypic novelty in experimental hybrids of monkeyflowers (Mimulus)
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Arielle Cooley, Whitman College
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 08/31/2022
* USD 72,640.00

Life on earth exhibits a dazzling array of patterns. These range from internal
patterns, like the repetition of vertebrae in the spinal cord, to external
patterns like the stripes of black pigment on a zebra. Pigmentation has become a
powerful model for exploring the origins and genetic mechanisms behind these
types of patterns. For example, new information about insect development has
been learned by studying the colorful eyespots in butterflies. In plants, the
mechanisms of pigment production have been well-studied, but surprisingly little
is known about the mechanisms of complex patterns of pigmentation. Filling this
knowledge gap is the goal of this research. This project will study two species
of monkeyflower; each has flowers with strikingly different color patterns.
What's more, when the two species are mated together, new intricate and complex
color patterns emerge. Since these new pigmentation patterns are seen only when
different species are mated together, it suggests that interactions between
their genomes give rise to the new patterns. Exploring how such interactions
between different genomes can produce unexpected new traits is a primary focus
of this research. One master's student, six undergraduates, and six high school
students will be recruited to carry out this work. These students will be
exposed to high-impact learning opportunities as they are immersed in hands-on
scientific research. At least two of the high school students will be selected
from a high school that specifically serves disadvantaged
youth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pigmentation patterns in the hybrids of Mimulus
cupreus x M. luteus var. variegatus are too intricate to quantify using standard
approaches. Instead, a new digital image analysis pipeline is being developed.
This approach will be useful for analyzing spatial patterning in monkeyflowers
and in other taxa. The researchers will use this new method to identify and
quantify elements of floral color pattern in a phenotypically diverse F2 hybrid
population. Next-generation sequencing will be used to map the genomic regions
responsible for the observed variation in flower patterns. Because M. cupreus
and M. l. variegatus also differ in yellow carotenoid pigmentation, the same
phenotypic and genetic datasets will be used to identify the genetic basis of
divergent carotenoid production, which is an important but under-studied
component of plant physiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.