* 1754845
* Collaborative Research:  New World Justicia s.l.:   A microcosm for understanding covariation of floral traits and pollinators in a phylogenetic context.
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Carrie Kiel, Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 09/30/2024
* USD 603,452.00

This project will investigate how flowering plants interact with animal
pollinators over evolutionary time. Flowering plants dominate the majority of
terrestrial ecosystems and most depend on animal pollinators to complete their
lifecycle. Biologists hypothesize that the interaction with pollinators
ultimately increases the number of flowering plants over time. However,
important details are lacking about how this might be happening. Flower color,
shape, and size are widely understood to reflect adaptation to pollinators. Yet,
emerging evidence indicates that microscopic changes in floral features may also
have large effects in driving new species to evolve. This project will
investigate how biochemical, microscopic and macroscopic traits of flowers vary
with different animal pollinators in the water-willow genus, Justicia.
Researchers will determine the evolutionary relationships among Justicia species
native to North, Central and South America to analyze trait data, including
field-based observations of pollinator behavior. The project will train high
school, undergraduate and graduate students, including members of under-
represented groups and community college students, as well as a post-doctoral
research associate. Researchers will provide outreach to the public about the
ecological and economic importance of pollination biology through educational
exhibits at the University of Colorado Boulder Museum of Natural History and
Rancho Santa Ana Botanical Garden.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test
the hypothesis that variation in morphological traits intimately involved with
the reproductive success of flowering plants are inter-correlated and are
associated with functional groups of animal visitors. Researchers will
investigate the evolutionary history of New World Justicia (Acanthaceae; the
Acanthus family), whose ca. 400 species show remarkable diversity in micro-
morphological floral traits essential to reproduction, including anthers, pollen
and stigmas, and support a range of vertebrate and invertebrate pollinators.
Outcomes of the research will include a comprehensive phylogenetic hypothesis
for New World Justicia species based on nuclear genomic data, a quantitative
analysis of macro- and micro-morphological variation in relationship to
pollinator type, and improved taxonomic circumscriptions for this widespread yet
poorly characterized lineage. Research will facilitate the discovery and
description of species new to science, build herbarium research collections, and
expand ethological information about pollinating animals. Targeted fieldwork in
five Neotropical countries will strengthen international collaborations among US
and Latin American scientists and facilitate investigation of this species-rich
lineage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.