* 1754994
* Acid/base sensing and regulation of multiple physiological processes in fish
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Martin Tresguerres, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 07/31/2023
* USD 667,800.00

All organisms must be able to sense and regulate the pH level in their fluids to
avoid cell malfunction that can lead to sickness and, in extreme cases, death.
Prior work identified the a soluble enzyme in gills from sharks and rays as a
novel molecular sensor and regulator of high blood pH. The current project will
explore the putative role of this soluble enzyme in sensing and regulating low
blood pH in shark gills, and will expand those studies to gills of other aquatic
vertebrates, bony fishes. In addition, it will explore novel functions in red
blood cells and heart muscle cells from both shark and bony fishes. Because
those two cell types are greatly affected by pH, this soluble enzyme may play
important roles in essential physiological processes such as oxygen uptake and
delivery by red blood cells, and in contraction and heart beat rate by heart
muscle cells. This project will develop biochemical, cellular, and physiological
tools, many of which could be subsequently adapted to test similar hypotheses in
other organisms. This information will help understand and predict how organisms
respond to environmental and metabolic stress, as well as informing the
management of wild and farmed populations in changing ocean conditions. This
project will provide research training opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers and develop onsite and online
educational outreach activities for K-12 students in collaboration with SeaCamp
San Diego, a local marine science camp for kids and
teenagers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The enzyme soluble adenylyl cyclase (sAC)
produces the ubiquitous messenger molecule cyclic AMP in response to changes in
CO2, pH and HCO3- levels. Since its discovery in 1999, sAC has been found to
regulate diverse physiological processes in multiple animal phyla ranging from
coral to mammals, and is therefore deemed an evolutionarily conserved acid/base
sensor. The proposed research will: (1) continue research on elasmobranch gill
cells to elucidate if sAC regulates acid secretion; (2) perform the initial
molecular and biochemical characterization of sAC in a teleost fish (the rainbow
trout); (3) explore the presence of multiple sAC splice variants in trout, and
their putative differential subcellular localization; (4) characterize the
putative role of sAC in trout gill cells in sensing and regulating blood
acid/base status; (5) study a potential role of sAC in regulating oxygen binding
in erythrocytes from shark and trout; (6) explore the role of sAC in
cardiomyocytes, where it is hypothesized to regulate contractibility. To achieve
those aims, a variety of experimental methods will be used including primary
cell cultures, expression of GFP-tagged proteins in cultured trout fibroblasts,
intracellular pH and Ca2+ measurements, erythrocyte oxygen-binding curves,
sarcomere shortening, and immunocytochemistry. Given the established importance
of acid/base status and cAMP on the physiology of gill cells, erythrocytes and
cardiomyocytes, this research has the potential to find novel sAC-dependent
mechanisms that regulate physiological functions essential to fish, and which
potentially extend to other animals. The simultaneous study of elasmobranch and
teleost adds a comparative and evolutionary component.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.