* 1754705
* Collaborative proposal:  The foundation of terrestrial life: Inferring a total-evidence timeline of vascular plant evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Cynthia Looy, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 04/30/2024
* USD 453,195.00

This project will determine when vascular plants evolved and how they are
related. Vascular plants include lycopods, ferns and their allies, as well as
conifers and flowering plants. They form the foundation of nearly all
terrestrial ecosystems and our food supply, yet scientists disagree about when
and how they evolved. Current methods for estimating evolutionary timelines for
these species have led to conflicting answers, as they rely on the ability of
researchers to assign extinct fossil species correctly to particular branch
points in the tree of life. This assignment is challenging to do because extinct
species may have morphology that can be interpreted differently. Researchers
will refine a new data analysis method to address this limitation. They will
compare the DNA sequences of living vascular plants and incorporate
morphological data from both living and extinct species to reconstruct their
evolutionary relationships. During this process, researchers will apply new
computer algorithms to estimate the evolutionary timeline for the species.
Researchers will train undergraduate and graduate students, including members of
under-represented groups, and support the professional development of an early-
career researcher. They will educate the public about plant evolution by
creating an interpretive exhibit at the University of California Berkeley and by
producing a series of online video lessons for high school students and
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a new total-evidence
dating method to reconstruct the next generation of time-calibrated phylogenetic
hypotheses that incorporate both extinct and extant species. Researchers will
leverage DNA sequence data collected by an existing NSF award to reconstruct a
backbone phylogeny of ca. 300 extant vascular plants using nuclear genomic data.
They will also collect morphological data for ca. 300 traits from these species
as well as ca. 200 extinct fossil species. These data will be simultaneously
integrated by the software program RevBayes to infer a time-calibrated
phylogeny. This program combines sophisticated tree-shape priors, powerful
models of morphological evolution, and recently developed methods for relaxing
the molecular clock. Project outcomes will include a robust estimate of vascular
plant divergence times and patterns of morphological evolution with an explicit
measure of the full associated uncertainty of that estimate. The project will
support research by sharing new and legacy morphological datasets in the online,
open-access PROTEUS database and by hosting a training workshop focused on
refining the theory and practice of divergence-time dating. Research will
strengthen collaborations among US and international
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.