* 1754350
* Collaborative research: Species delimitation, hybridization and the origin of parthenogenesis in Whiptail lizards (Aspidoscelis).
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Robert Thomson, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 513,113.00

Species are the basic unit of biological diversity. Scientists must be able to
accurately recognize the boundaries between species, and the relationships among
them, to understand fundamental biological processes and global patterns of
biological diversity. The biology of some organisms makes recognizing species
challenging. In particular, when species hybridize in nature it obscures the
patterns of morphological and genetic variation that scientists usually use to
recognize them. In some cases, hybridization is also associated with unique and
interesting biological phenomena, such as changes in reproductive modes,
chromosome number, or evolutionary adaptation. In this project, the research
team will develop ways to accurately recognize species in a group of lizards
where hybridization is common and species identification has been challenging:
The North and Central American Whiptail lizards of the genus Aspidoscelis. In
addition to improving methods for recognizing species, this research will
increase the understanding of the effects of hybridization in the wild, as well
as the evolution of reproductive modes in this group of lizards. The research
activities will also provide training for a diverse team of scientists and
students, many from groups typically underrepresented in science, in Hawaii and
California.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Whiptails have diversified rapidly and
experienced a large amount of introgressive hybridization, which makes them
ideal for evaluating phylogenetic and population genetic methods for
disentangling hybridization, lineage sorting, and systematic error.
Hybridization between gonochoristic species has also repeatedly led to the
formation of parthenogenetic lineages at a frequency that is essentially unique
to this group. The research team will use genomic and morphological data to
disentangle the effects of introgressive hybridization and lineage sorting on
the patterns of divergence between all lineages of the Whiptail lizards, and use
these results to infer the origins of parthenogenesis across the genus. By
examining the geographic, temporal, and genomic dynamics of hybridization and
introgression in Whiptails, the project will provide a better understanding of
how gene flow impacts the speciation process in nature, and across evolutionary
time. Comprehensively resolving patterns of speciation among Whiptails will also
shed light on the processes associated with the frequent changes in reproductive
mode that make them unique among vertebrates, and contribute to their ability to
serve as a model system for other areas of inquiry across the life and
biomedical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.