* 1754662
* Evolution and function of an unusual photosynthetic metabolism: Portulaca, the C4-CAM plant
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Erika Edwards, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 06/30/2023
* USD 722,848.00

Plants perform photosynthesis to transform carbon dioxide and sunlight into
stored chemical energy - carbohydrates - that the rest of life relies upon.
Photosynthesis works well when plants are not exposed to environmental stress,
but when plants are too hot, or drought stressed, this process becomes
inefficient. Plants have evolved two main alternative photosynthetic pathways in
response to environmental stresses, CAM and C4 photosynthesis. C4 and CAM have
each evolved many times, and it has been thought that C4 evolved in response to
hot temperatures and CAM in response to drought. Similarly, these two pathways
were assumed to be incompatible at cellular and genetic levels. However, a
C4-CAM plant has been discovered: Portulaca, which performs C4 photosynthesis
normally, but performs CAM under drought. This project aims to understand the
function and ecological significance of a C4-CAM photosynthetic system. The
research team will discover how many times C4-CAM evolved in Portulaca, and will
identify the spatial configuration of both pathways within the leaf. They will
identify the genes that regulate both pathways, and will compare the ecological
ranges of C4-CAM species with relatives that do not have this trait. Finally,
they will survey other plants to identify additional origins of this novel
photosynthesis type. This research may contribute to crop improvement- for
example, efforts to engineer C4 into rice, and CAM into poplar. A C4-CAM crop
could be highly productive when water is prevalent, but drought-resistant when
water is scarce. In addition, this award will support a broad range of
educational activities, including post-doctoral and graduate student training,
undergraduate research, and high school teacher training and curriculum
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;C4 and CAM photosynthesis are two metabolic
pathways that have evolved multiple times. Though biochemically similar, each
pathway requires a unique suite of anatomical characters in order to work
efficiently, and conventional wisdom holds that these characters are
antagonistic, such that anatomy that facilitates efficient C4 will
simultaneously disadvantage a CAM metabolism. This widely accepted view cannot,
however, accommodate Portulaca, the only plants currently known to operate both
C4 and CAM cycles within a single leaf. Recent work suggests that ancestral
Portulaca was a facultative CAM plant, and evolved a C4 system while maintaining
CAM capability at least three times. The proposed research will test this
hypothesis and develop Portulaca as a model lineage for investigating the
evolutionary connectivity of C4 and CAM pathways. This project aims to: 1)
confirm the existence of facultative CAM in all major Portulaca lineages, and
characterize CAM and C4 biochemical cycles and differential gene expression in 7
species representing all C4 origins; 2) identify the spatial configuration of C4
and CAM cycles within the leaf, using in situ hybridization and protein
immunolocalization; 3) utilize recently designed targeted gene enrichment baits
(HybSeq) to sequence key photosynthetic (and other) genes from across Portulaca
to improve phylogenetic resolution and analyze convergent molecular adaptation
across the group; 4) characterize and contrast the climatic envelopes occupied
by C4-CAM Portulaca and C3-CAM related lineages; and 5) initiate
phylogenetically-informed physiological surveys to discover additional C4-CAM
plants in other clades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded in the
Biology Directorate of NSF by Integrative Ecological Physiology in the
Integrative Organismal Systems Division, Systematics and Biodiversity Science in
the Division of Environmental Biology, and Emerging
Frontiers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.