* 1754092
* Renewal:  Scholarship for Service @ Carnegie Mellon
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Dena Haritos Tsamitis, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2024
* USD 4,999,796.00

Carnegie Mellon University (CMU), a designated National Center of Academic
Excellence in Cyber Defense Education, Research and Cyber Operations, proposes
to continue and expand its participation in the CyberCorps(R): Scholarship for
Service (SFS) program to prepare highly-qualified cybersecurity professionals
for entry into the government workforce. This project will prepare the nation's
cybersecurity workforce through a rigorous educational experience shaped by an
interdisciplinary master's programs in Information Security; participation in
learning and research communities with peer institutions, enriching meta-
curricular initiatives; and community outreach opportunities. The SFS program
funds projects that address cybersecurity education and workforce development,
including funding to award scholarships to students in cybersecurity. In return
for their scholarships, recipients will work after graduation for a Federal,
State, Local, or Tribal Government organization in a position related to
Cybersecurity for a period equal to the length of the
scholarship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, the U.S. federal government has hired
198 Carnegie Mellon SFS graduates who have gone on to serve and protect the
nation's information infrastructure at the Department of Defense, National
Security Agency, Federally Funded Research and Development Centers (FFRDC) and
many other federal organizations. Academic programs in cybersecurity feature
technical, interdisciplinary coursework that incorporates business and policy
perspectives from top-ranked colleges in engineering, computer science,
business, and policy. CMU's CyLab, a security and privacy research institute,
serves as a focal point for the wealth of security and privacy activity across
the SFS program. CyLab is committed to interdisciplinary and cross-disciplinary
research and education, with 109 faculty from many departments, including
Computer Science, Institute for Software Research, Heinz College of Public
Policy, Information Networking Institute, Electrical and Computer Engineering
and many more. CyLab is a hub for research that touches technical and societal
problems, economic issues, and policy questions. Leading cybersecurity
researchers, investigators and teaching faculty work side by side with SFS
students to explore and advance critical areas such as software security,
cryptography, reverse engineering, privacy, biometrics and cyber
forensics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.