* 1754658
* SG:  Synthetic analysis of the importance of species richness to ecosystem services in natural systems
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2018,05/31/2019
* Rachael Winfree, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2019
* USD 149,998.00

Nature provides ecosystem services that benefit humans: crops rely on
pollinators, marshes protect coasts from storm surges, and forests remove carbon
dioxide from the atmosphere. The world is rapidly losing biodiversity, and
understanding how biodiversity loss will affect ecosystem services is important
for human well-being. Most attempts to do this have used experiments in the
field and laboratory. Natural communities, in which ecosystem services are
provided, rarely look like experiments. Scientists acknowledge this, but it has
been hard to study the effect of biodiversity loss on ecosystem services in the
real world, in large part because of limitations in the analysis of complex
natural communities. In this project, the researchers will use a new method that
overcomes previous limitations to analyze some of the world's largest data sets,
with the goal of understanding what aspects of natural communities are needed
for ecosystem services. For example, is it enough to have many individuals of a
few species, or do we need many different species to provide ecosystem services?
This research will provide society benefits through a better understanding of
how biodiversity influences ecosystem function, which could have relevance for
science policy. Additionally, data and coding from the project will be made
available to the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge of what drives
ecosystem services at large scales is rudimentary, and the widespread belief
that species richness is necessary for ecosystem services in natural systems is
more of an assumption than an established fact. This project will use a novel
and powerful analytical approach, based on the Price equation from evolutionary
biology, to determine the importance of biodiversity to multiple ecosystem
services. Specifically, the Price equation partitions differences in ecosystem
services into three additive terms: richness, composition, and context
dependence (which includes abundance variation as well as environmental
factors). The PIs will compile the largest and most complete publicly-available
data sets, and use them to conduct a synthetic analysis. The research will
determine: (1) the relative importance of richness, composition, and context
dependence in producing the mean levels and temporal variance of ecosystem
services, (2) the role of spatial and temporal scale in ecosystem functions, and
(3) the extent to which data from the worlds' largest biodiversity-function
experiments align with results from ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.