* 1754273
* Photosynthetic basis of temperate plant invasions: a pan-hemisphere comparison of leaf function
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Thomas KICHEY, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2022
* USD 686,467.00

Invasive plants cost millions of dollars annually in control and eradication
efforts and are among the most pervasive threats to biological conservation and
natural area management. However, only a small percentage of introduced plants
actually become problems, and one of the biggest challenges in invasive species
management is to identify whether some species are 'pre-adapted' to invade -
that is, have attributes in their home range that may identify them as potential
threats before they are introduced. This project compares the performance of
over 40 species of invasive plants in their home and invaded ranges across
fields and forests in the Northeast U.S. and in similar climates of Europe and
Asia. Combined with laboratory tests of leaf chemistry and structure, the
investigators will determine whether invasive plants change in their invaded
range in ways that make them better able to compete with native vegetation, or
whether they already possessed these competitive attributes in their home range.
The combination of field and laboratory measurements across a large range of
species in multiple habitats will provide a unique set of data to identify the
main constraints on leaf function. The project fosters international knowledge
transfer and research partnerships through exchanges of senior personnel,
graduate students, and postdoctoral associates between research labs. Results
will contribute to land management practices through a better understanding of
mechanisms behind successful invasions of non-native plants. The project
enhances STEM education by increasing resource development and outreach
activities for the "Syracuse Global Change Garden", an education-based arboretum
on the Syracuse campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the
mechanism of ecological advantage of invasive plant species from two
complementary angles. First, researchers will determine how plants of different
photosynthetic capacity allocate a key limiting resource (nitrogen) to different
leaf functions (light harvesting, carbon fixation, cell wall structure,
defensive compounds) to test whether nitrogen allocation drives assimilation
rate, and whether invaders have higher allocation to assimilation than co-
occurring native species. Second, researchers will determine whether invasive
species have altered their allocation to assimilation rate in their invaded
range in response to reduced natural enemies, or whether photosynthetic
advantages were already present in their native range due to different regional
evolutionary histories. Finally, the investigators will test experimentally
whether photosynthetic performance is the principal driver of competitive
dominance in invaders. This project will be among the first to test invasion and
leaf allocation theory empirically across a large number of species and habitats
(forest and field environments), and to test the 'pre-adaptation' theory of
species invasions at a physiological level. The project will also advance our
understanding of invasion processes by determining whether shifts in leaf
function commonly occur in the invaded range, and whether such processes are
sufficient to alter interactions with native species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.