* 1754863
* Communication Technologies, Social Tolerance, and Relationship Persistence
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2018,09/30/2019
* Keith Hampton, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 09/30/2019
* USD 117,999.00

Contrary to much current opinion, new communication technologies may facilitate
the persistence of social contact and the maintenance of social ties. In so
doing, they may increase exposure to a variety of opinions and backgrounds and
thereby increase social cohesion and social tolerance. Through the everyday use
of new technologies, relationships may be less transitory than in the recent
past and people may be increasingly aware of diversity within their personal
network of relationships. These trends may aid in the diffusion of information
and attitudes between individuals and groups that may otherwise be sparsely or
infrequently connected. This project focuses on inter-generational relationships
in the context of children departing rural communities for post-secondary
education

The goal of this research is to pre-test the design and measures for a
longitudinal study into how the use of new communication technologies is related
to the stability and durability of people?s relationships, and how awareness of
acquaintances? activities might influence social tolerance. Rural communities
and the life course transition of a child leaving the community for post-
secondary education provides a unique context in which to study these effects.
Children who leave for post-secondary education gain experience and diversity,
but often do not return to their rural communities. Individuals experience a
loss of intergenerational contact, and the rural community does not benefit from
the children?s experience. This research uses a mixed methods approach, a survey
administered over the internet and by telephone of a sample of first-generation
students from rural communities and at least one of their parents or guardians,
and a series of interviews with rural households. The survey and interviews will
collect information on a variety of processes related to persistence and
awareness, including variation in technology use, relational maintenance, social
support, and cross-generational contact.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.