* 1754491
* What are the environmental causes of population variability of highly mobile animals
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* W. Alice Boyle, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 07/31/2023
* USD 654,356.00

The abundances of animals vary from year to year, sometimes quite dramatically,
and these changes are often attributed to differences in weather patterns.
However, it is often difficult to understand the many ways that seasonal changes
in rainfall and temperature influence the reproduction, survival and movement
patterns of organisms. This study uses grassland birds to understand the effect
of weather patterns on populations directly and indirectly, through their
effects on vegetation, food availability and predators. By focusing on migratory
birds, this work explores the effects of weather pattern on populations at both
the local and continental scale. Through the development of novel statistical
tools to process multiple types of data, the project will generate insights
critical to forecasting population declines and will provide a template that can
be used in other systems. Because &gt;96% of North America's tallgrass prairies
have been converted, the project's findings and implications will be used to
promote the long-term health of Great Plains ecosystems. This project will
cross-train students in statistical and biological methods, engage local stake-
holders and promote the appreciation of grassland ecosystems though public
outreach opportunities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This study will identify the key
climatic drivers of population fluctuations in highly mobile animals by
combining detailed, population studies with long-term community data in an
integrative population modeling framework. This study will test predictions of
multiple alternative drivers of local breeding-season abundance by identifying
the direct physiological responses to weather by several bird species, including
the Grasshopper Sparrows, Dickcissels, and Eastern Meadowlarks, and by examining
the interactions between rainfall, fire, and grazing on plant, prey, and
predator communities on these populations. This project explores the issue of
scale, by using stable isotopes in feathers and geolocator data to examine the
links between climate in non-breeding areas and breeding abundance in subsequent
years. Finally, this study develops cutting-edge statistical methods that are
needed to integrate disparate datasets and reconcile climate-population linkages
at multiple scales. This work will be informed by and build upon four decades of
data collected through the Long-Term Ecological Research program at Konza
Prairie, Kansas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.