* 1754242
* RUI:  A Phylogenomic Approach to Understanding the Symbiosis Between Acropyga Ants and Xenococcine Mealybugs
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Sean Brady, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 06/30/2024
* USD 733,689.00

A major question in evolutionary biology is how different kinds of organisms can
form and maintain mutually beneficial relationships over long periods of time,
often with conflicting self-interests. This project will use state-of-the-art
techniques to study an insect agriculture system to understand the evolutionary
bonds between Acropyga ants and mealybugs. Acropyga ants are herder ants that
use mealybugs in a similar way humans use diary-cattle. The ants keep the
mealybugs in their nests, place them on underground plant roots to feed, and
then the ants feed on honeydew (fluid) the mealybugs excrete through specialized
pores. By reconstructing the evolutionary relationships of the ants and
mealybugs it will be investigated whether or not the two partners have
influenced each other's species diversity over time. The ant - mealybug system
is a powerful model system to contribute to a broader understanding of the
evolution of mutualisms among species. This project will also provide research
training in taxonomy and systematics to undergraduate and graduate students,
engage K-12 teachers with training to improve K-12 science education, and
contribute to scientific infrastructure through collections and publicly
accessible websites (e.g., AntWeb).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary research
goals of this study are twofold: 1) conduct phylogenomic studies of Acropyga
ants and xenococcine mealybugs using genomics level data (ultraconserved
elements) and 2) use the phylogenies to test for codiversification between
lineages. The production of robust phylogenies using a phylogenomic approach to
capture and sequence, using next-generation sequencing, ultraconserved elements
from the two insect partners in this system will provide data at multiple
evolutionary timescales. The vertical transmission of mealybugs across ant
generations via trophophoresy and the high specificity of xenococcine species
inhabiting ant nests both lead to the expectation of codiversification between
the partners. We will test three hypotheses: 1) weak partner fidelity (null); 2)
diffuse-sense codiversification; and 3) strict-sense codiversification. We will
utilize both permutation and event-based methods to test for significant levels
of cospeciation between ant and mealybug phylogenies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.