* 1754096
* Collaborative Research: Rates of lineage, phenotypic, and genomic diversification in replicated radiations of murine rodents
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2023
* Jeffrey Good, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 04/30/2023
* USD 420,707.00

Much of the diversity of life has arisen through the process of adaptive
radiation. Adaptive radiation occurs when a group rapidly diversifies into many
species to fill a variety of ecological roles. While adaptive radiation is a
common theme in the evolution of life, many of its features are poorly
understood. This project seeks to better understand how adaptive radiation
proceeds. The project will examine the rate of diversification in genes,
morphology and species diversity over the evolutionary history of a group of
rodents containing more than 600 species. The study will determine how changes
in genes, morphology and species are correlated as the species diversified.
Importantly, the group under study contains the common lab mouse and rat, two
species that serve as scientific models in medical and basic research. This
study will place these model organisms in an evolutionary context that will
allow scientists to better understand how their genes and other characteristics
have evolved. Such understanding provides new insight into genes and
characteristics of medical significance. Scientific meetings organized by the
researchers will bring together scientists who study mice and rats from
different perspectives, including molecular biology and medicine, to share
insight and generate new research questions. In addition to the broader impacts
on basic science and medicine, public outreach and education events at
participating natural history museums will use the results of this research to
teach principles of evolutionary biology to K-12 students and improve public
understanding of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates
comparative genomics with quantitative morphology in a rigorous phylogenetic
framework to illuminate the dynamics of diversification in lineages, phenotypes,
and genes across the most species-rich adaptive radiation in mammals. The
exceptional species and ecomorphological diversity in rats and mice (subfamily
Murinae, 634 living species) arose over the last 14 million years through
replicate adaptive radiations, primarily in the distinct biogeographic units of
Indo-Australia. This research will expand on the genomic resources from the
leading mammalian model organisms to encompass the diversity of murine rodents
by sequencing whole exomes from a large, phylogenetically dispersed set of
species. In addition, the project will generate high-resolution, 3D morphometric
models of cranial and post-cranial skeletons from the same species. The project
will combine these distinct data layers to: estimate a species-level phylogeny
of the Murinae; identify and date biogeographic and ecological transitions;
estimate diversification rate shifts across the phylogeny; estimate rates of
phenotypic and molecular evolution relative to transitions (biogeographic and
ecological) and shifts in lineage diversification rate; test for correlations
between the tempos of phenotypic and molecular evolution; and, quantify
morphological and molecular convergence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.