* 1754317
* Biogeochemical Processes along the Lower Amazon River Continuum
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2018,11/30/2023
* Jeffrey Richey, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine O'Reilly
* 11/30/2023
* USD 795,339.00

This research addresses the movement of CO2 from rivers to the atmosphere, a
phenomenon referred to as outgassing. Recently revised estimates of riverine
outgassing suggest that it is a significant component of the global carbon
cycle. But precisely how much outgassing occurs and what factors control the
rates of outgassing remain poorly understood, especially in the lower, tidal
reaches of large tropical rivers. Most measurements of outgassing are made far
upstream of the ocean, and oceanography studies are restricted to zones that are
offshore. This leaves a major knowledge gap, with little or no data available
for extensive river reaches between upstream gauging station and offshore sites
where oceanographic research vessels pick up the signal at sea. This project,
with a focus on the Amazon River, will provide greater insights into how
riverine carbon cycles function, and ultimately their influence on global
cycles. The coupled models developed for the project will be available to policy
makers for use in evaluating broader water resource issues of the changing
Amazon basin. The project will support the training of one graduate student and
an undergraduate student recruited from an underrepresented minority.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research will use a combination of river boat
expeditions, remote sensing, and modeling to test the hypothesis that dissolved
CO2 levels remain above atmospheric saturation along the entire lower river and
in the inner reaches of the plume. Under those conditions the Amazon River plume
would act as a net source of CO2 to the atmosphere when freshwaters and low
salinity waters are fully considered. The hypothesis that gaseous, dissolved,
and particulate concentrations of carbon vary consistently with the tide will be
evaluated through detailed measurements over tidal cycles. To obtain insights
into the biological mechanisms regulating organic matter decomposition and
energy production a combination of proteomic signatures of microbial metabolism
and dissolved organic matter characterization by ultra-high-resolution mass
spectrometry will be employed. Finally, a detailed hydrodynamic model, that
includes biological processes and inputs from a basin hydrology model, will be
used to provide synthesis across the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.