* 1754201
* Unraveling the genetic basis of amino acid composition in dry Arabidopsis seeds
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Alexander Lipka, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Aruna Kilaru
* 05/31/2023
* USD 917,690.00

Essential amino acids are necessary for human health but must come from dietary
sources, as the human body cannot produce them. A lack of these essential amino
acids in a diet leads to malnutrition. Much of the world's human and livestock
populations rely on seeds for protein, but most staple crops seeds are deficient
in several essential amino acids. Efforts to fortify the amino acid composition
of staple crop seeds have had limited success since plants respond to induced
protein composition alterations by activating a regulatory mechanism that
"resets" it back to an original state. While beneficial to the plant growth and
development, this mechanism has been a major hurdle to biofortification efforts.
Fortunately, it is also known that different cultivars/varieties display natural
variation in their seed amino acid composition, which means that the regulation
of these compounds is genetically driven and thus should be amenable to
manipulation. Therefore, this project aims to identify the key genes involved in
this regulatory mechanism by analyzing hundreds of Arabidopsis strains, which
display natural genetic and seed amino acid composition variation. Subsequently
the potential role of the identified candidate genes will be tested using
classical physiological and genetic approaches. Identifying new genetics targets
will help facilitate the breeding of new crop varieties that can support our
nation's and world's growing population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is important to
identify the genes that underlie the amino acid composition of dry seeds. Doing
so will shed new light on a complex regulatory mechanism in plants as well as
facilitate efforts to fortify staple seed crops. While much is known about amino
acid metabolic pathways, little is known about their regulation, especially in
seeds. So far, it is known that alterations to the composition of seed storage
proteins (i.e., the major amino acid sink) lead to proteomic reprogramming and
activation of a rebalancing mechanism, a response that suggests tight regulation
of this trait. Seed amino acid composition varies substantially across genotypes
within the same genus. This observation implies that the genetic architecture
responsible for this natural variation includes, at least in part, the genes
involved in responding to amino acid sink alteration and activation of the
rebalancing mechanism. This project aims to elucidate key components of this
genetic architecture in Arabidopsis thaliana using two approaches: (1) a GWAS on
amino acid composition measured from dry seeds of an 800-accession association
panel and (2) an amino acid/gene expression correlation-based network analysis
of wildtype and two storage protein mutants with active rebalancing phenotypes.
The candidate genes identified from each approach will be compared, and the top
candidate genes will be tested for involvement in amino acid regulation via
knockdown and overexpression experiments. The identified genetic regulators will
provide new targets for breeding programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.