* 1754157
* Collaborative Research - LTREB RUI Renewal: Evolutionary demography - the contribution of adaptation and environment to population dynamics, range size, and niche width
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Vincent Eckhart, Grinnell College
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 07/31/2024
* USD 47,482.00

A fundamental objective of ecology and evolutionary biology is to explain the
geographic distributions of species. But species are dynamic entities, and their
geographic distributions respond to changing environments. If the environment of
their suitable habitat changes, populations of a species can sustain themselves
in their current habitat by adaption through natural selection, or they need to
shift to new locations. Understanding the mechanisms that account for species
distributions is especially timely because of the accelerating pace of
environmental change. The contribution of adaptation to population dynamics,
local persistence, and to the geographic range inhabited by a species, has
rarely been quantified. Although comparative ecological studies and species
distribution models typically assume genetic uniformity across a species
geographic range, genetic studies have repeatedly demonstrated local adaptation.
This project explicitly examines the contribution of adaptation to population
growth and the extent of a species geographic range, through the continuation of
a long-term field population demographic study and the use of a species
distribution model. The project will also involve outreach to a rural middle
school, engaging students in research activities, and it will connect citizens
to research scientists through an innovative outreach program, Market Science,
where researchers engage the public at farmer's markets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will focus on a well-studied California
native plant species, Clarkia xantiana, which has been the focus of intensive
field research for over 12 years. This research will provide new, exceptionally
detailed information about how species' ranges evolve and the factors that are
likely to influence species responses to climate variation. The specific
objectives of this project are to examine: (1) whether population dynamics vary
from the center to margins of the species' range and what environmental factors
drive this variation; (2) the spatial scale of local adaptation and how it
relates to demographic similarity among populations; and (3) the interplay of
population dynamics and adaptation in shaping environmental tolerances (niche
width) and geographic range size. Only long-term studies can provide robust
predictions about what controls population persistence, evolutionary adaptation,
and their consequences for species ranges. Long-term demographic datasets of
vital rates (e.g. survival, reproduction), population growth, and abiotic and
biotic (herbivory) factors, have been collected in 35 natural populations
spanning the major portion of the species' range. All monitoring of field
populations will be continued an additional ten years. Past work has examined
local adaptation using a large reciprocal transplant experiment among
demographically-divergent populations. This experiment will be repeated in the
project's second five-year phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.