* 1754665
* Analysis of novel components promoting asymmetric division in maize
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2023
* Michelle Facette, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 01/31/2023
* USD 707,580.00

Plants and animals are composed of many cell types, and each of these cell types
have specialized roles so that together they make a functional and efficient
organism. Each cell within a multi-cellular organism must be patterned
correctly; that is, each cell must be placed in the correct place with respect
to its neighboring cells. The process that determines cell placement is
asymmetric cell division. This proposal addresses the mechanism of asymmetric
cell division in plants, using maize (corn) as a plant model system. The roles
of specific proteins during asymmetric division will be investigated, including
a motor protein (myosin) and a family of unknown proteins. Additionally, new
mutants that fail to correctly carry out asymmetric division have been
identified. These new mutants will be used to identify novel proteins important
for this process, as well as an undergraduate genetics training program. Broader
impacts for the project include a microscopy workshop aimed at training
researchers in image analysis. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Asymmetric cell
division is tied to cell fate determination and tissue patterning, and is
critical for proper plant development and function. Asymmetric division occurs
in three steps: cell polarization, division plane establishment and maintenance,
and cytokinesis. Maize stomatal development provides an excellent model system
for investigating plant cell asymmetric division. The functional roles of new
molecules promoting division asymmetry will be investigated. Candidates that are
known or predicted to interact with the actin cytoskeleton will be a primary
focus. This focus will help determine how proteins in the pathway communicate
with the cytoskeleton to orchestrate the complex process of asymmetric division.
Objective 1 will determine the role of a class XI myosin in asymmetric division.
Mutants in this myosin show abnormal asymmetric division in the stomata.
Objective 2 will determine the role of a family of unknown proteins in
asymmetric division. These proteins interact with a receptor-like protein (PAN2)
previously shown to be required for asymmetric division in stomata, and Crispr-
Cas9 generated knockouts of these mutants show aberrant divisions. Objective 3
entails the retesting and mapping via of novel mutants isolated via an enhancer
screen. Retesting, segregation analyses and mapping via next generation
sequencing will be used for training of undergraduate researchers. Broader
impacts for the project include a microscopy workshop aimed at training
researchers in image analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is jointly
supported by IOS, MCB and the ROL venture fund.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.