* 1754207
* OPUS:  Synthesizing Ecology with Ecological Networks
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Neo Martinez, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2019
* USD 169,083.00

To better understand how earth?s ecosystems such as oceans, lakes, forests and
farms sustain the needs of species, including humans, the science of ecology
needs to increase its rigor, precision, and predictive power. Such advances will
enable a better understanding of human interactions with nature and improve our
ability to forecast how environmental change will affect services provided by
natural and agricultural ecosystems in the future. To reach these goals, this
project will synthesize three decades of the principle investigator's and his
close colleagues' research into a predictive theory of the way ecosystems with
many species are organized and how they change over time. The core of this
theory is based on organisms' abilities to consume resources, grow, and be
consumed by other organisms as well as the network architecture of these
consumer-resource interactions among tens, hundreds and thousands of species.
Elements of this general theory have been published in over one hundred papers,
most of which are sole or co-authored by this project's principle investigator.
How the ideas in all these papers fit together, including the theory, its
foundations, and future directions have yet to be adequately synthesized and
articulated. This project will describe that synthetic framework in the form of
a book, a review article, visualizations and video animations that define the
concepts, equations and computer simulations underlying the theory. This
research will also increase the accessibility of ecological network theory to
broader audiences, and advance the careers of researchers who are members of
groups underrepresented in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
synthesize theory focused on the structure, dynamics, and evolution of food webs
and their bipartite subsets including mutualistic and host-parasite/pathogen
networks based on integrating consumer-resource theory with network theory and
the metabolic theory of ecology. This involves describing the conceptual and
computational theory of allometric trophic networks and its application to
ecological, evolutionary and sustainability sciences including predictions of
the quantitative consequences of species loss, fishing, and climate change.
Further development aims to advance a systems biology of ecology that
synthesizes ecology by integrating its subdisciplines, especially organismal,
population, community and ecosystem ecology, as well as the interface between
ecology and evolutionary, social, sustainability, and network sciences. Benefits
to society include increasing our understanding of ecosystem management and eco-
evolutionary and coupled natural-human dynamics. Two years of research and
writing will be conducted involving collaborative visits to international and
domestic centers of network and ecological network
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.