* 1754117
* Biodiversity Survey of Hawaiian Mesophotic Algae
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Alison Sherwood, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 06/30/2024
* USD 792,021.00

This project will document seaweeds (algae) living on deep coral reefs around
the Hawaiian Islands. Visible light reaches a depth of 100 to 500 feet in the
clear ocean waters of the tropics and subtropics. As a result, coral reefs of
this deep region, called the mesophotic zone, include seaweed species that
provide food and habitat for many marine animals, including game fish. However,
this region is challenging to explore because it is beyond the limits of
traditional SCUBA diving. As a result, seaweed species that live on deep coral
reefs are not well-documented. Researchers will identify hundreds of seaweed
specimens collected over the past 10 years and will share these data widely. New
species will receive scientific names that recognize the long-standing
significance of seaweeds in Native Hawaiian culture. Results of the project will
also uncover how deep coral reefs may help shallow coral reefs recover after
damage. Shallow coral reefs are important sources of tourist and fisheries
revenue but are prone to disturbance. The project will train undergraduate and
graduate students, including members of under-represented groups, and support
the professional development of an early-career researcher. Researchers will
share with the public the cultural, ecological and economic importance of
seaweeds through an educational, traveling museum exhibit and a television
program that will be accessible online to K-12
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will bring together the taxonomic
and phylogenetic expertise of several researchers who specialize in algae of the
tropical Pacific Ocean. Researchers will discover and analyze the mesophotic
seaweed flora of this region as well as test hypotheses regarding patterns of
biodiversity in deep-reef ecosystems. A DNA barcoding approach will be used to
initially characterize the almost 1,800 mesophotic algal specimens already in
hand. Morphological data will complement this approach to flag a subset of
species or groups of species for more in-depth study. Comparison of chloroplast
genomes of select species will allow an additional level of analysis of the
differences between shallow and mesophotic seaweeds, which experience different
light environments. Outcomes of this project will include improved understanding
of the biology and biogeography of the Hawaiian mesophotic seaweeds, the
description of 60-80 new species, and long-term archiving of
specimens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.