* 1754874
* CAREER: Experimental Modeling of Tidal Current Turbine Foundations: An Integrated Research and Education Plan
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2021
* Cassandra Rutherford, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 01/31/2021
* USD 301,852.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant will advance the
understanding of the unique behavior of tidal current foundations and improve
science and engineering education at the elementary and high school levels,
while promoting increased diversity in the field of geotechnical engineering.
The research will investigate efficient and reliable foundation systems for
undersea tidal current turbines. The foundations must be designed to resist high
lateral loads as well as vertical and horizontal cyclic loading from the
oscillating turbine blades, allowing the turbines to effectively absorb and
harness the tidal energy while attached to the seafloor. Decreasing the cost of
the foundation system can be an important part of making tidal power a viable
and economical source of electricity. The research tasks will be used to produce
educational products such as learning modules, demonstrations, animations and
videos that will be implemented in the courses taught by the researcher and in
K-12 outreach programs. A renewable energy lesson will be created for the 4th
grade students at Booker T. Washington STEM Academy and the Girls Adventures in
Mathematics, Engineering, and Science (G.A.M.E.S) camp for high school
girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this project is to
evaluate suction caisson foundation systems for tidal current turbines by
examining the foundation performance using both 1g bench-scale (in transparent
soil and Kaolin) and centrifuge testing under combined cyclic loading. This
research focuses on the cyclic nature of the vertical, horizontal and moment
loading due to waves, the rotation of the tidal current turbine blades and the
change in direction of the horizontal loading due to ebb and flow tides.
Although there have been many studies on the use of suction caissons as anchors
with diameters less than 10m (Length/Diameter = 3-5), few researchers have
investigated using suction caissons as foundation elements in soft clays with
intermediate aspect ratios of L/D = 1-3. In addition, the unique vertical
cycling and semidiurnal or diurnal (12 or 24 hr) tidal cycling of the horizontal
load has not been accounted for in previous designs of suction caisson
foundations. The focus of the experimental testing is to investigate the
foundation performance, failure modes, load-displacement response, yielding
behavior, and cumulative displacements under cyclic loading. The research effort
will result in: (i) high quality laboratory data; (ii) load-displacement curves,
and (iii) failure envelopes/interactions diagrams, that will allow for the
continued study of the utilization of tidal current turbines as a renewable
energy source.