* 1754181
* SG: RUI: Resilience of mountain lakes across a gradient of glacial retreat and vegetation advance
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2024
* Mark Olson, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 03/31/2024
* USD 212,317.00

Mountain landscapes worldwide, long considered sentinels of environmental
change, are changing rapidly as glaciers retreat and vegetation advances
upslope. Pristine lakes within those landscapes, especially lakes whose iconic
beauty has led to their designation as World Heritage sites, have strong tourist
appeal. Yet that beauty is threatened by changes to the clarity of the lake
waters. Conservation efforts for these potentially fragile ecosystems would
benefit from a predictive understanding of lake responses to global climate
change. This research explores the consequences of these landscape-level changes
for lake ecosystems. Rather than study a single system over a long time, these
researchers will substitute a comparison of lake ecosystems that currently
differ in the extent of glacial and vegetation coverage in the catchment. The
primary aim of the research is to compare lake responses to rain and snowmelt-
driven inputs of materials such as glacial flour, the finely ground rock from
glaciers, and dissolved products of organic matter decomposition. Both of these
materials have strong effects on the clarity of the water or water transparency,
which in turn influences many aspects of lake ecosystem function. Lake responses
will be examined using two complementary measurements of ecological resilience:
resistance, the magnitude of change in the system following rain or snowmelt
events; and recovery, the rate of return to previous conditions. Project
findings will deepen the basic scientific understanding of the effects of
changing landscapes on lake ecosystems in the Rocky Mountains. Undergraduate
students will be engaged in all stages of the research, including planning, data
collection, analysis, and publication. Targeted efforts will be made to attract
students from diverse backgrounds and experiences. Because water transparency of
mountain lakes is a powerful case study through which to communicate ecosystem-
level effects of environmental change to a broader audience, a short film
describing the research will be produced and
distributed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will test the
overarching hypothesis that changes in the resilience of water transparency
occur systematically as lake catchments shift from glaciated to rocky to
vegetated states. Specifically, resistance of water transparency is predicted to
increase with glacial loss and decrease with vegetation advance. Additionally,
recovery rates of water transparency are predicted to increase as the regulator
of transparency shifts from suspended rock flour in glacial catchment lakes to
dissolved organic matter (DOM) in vegetated catchment lakes. To test these
hypotheses, high frequency monitoring buoys equipped with sensors that measure
turbidity and the fluorescent component of DOM will be deployed in five lakes
that vary across a gradient of glacial and vegetation coverage. Concurrent
hydrological data will be used to better understand dynamics of material inputs
and their relationships to meteorological data recorded at nearby weather
stations. More generally, the research probes the relationship between the two
components of resilience by testing whether resistance and recovery change
independently as glaciers retreat and vegetation advances. The potential for
uncoupled changes in the two components of resilience is a unique and
transformative aspect of the research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.