* 1754992
* RR Standard Grant: Remote Sensing and the Rise of Conflict Archaeology
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Fiona Greenland, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 245,966.00

This project will investigate the robustness and reliability of data generated
through the collaboration between archaeological science and counterterrorism
studies. The research will focus on two teams of scientists that have developed
new techniques to study archaeological site looting in Syria and Iraq?an
endeavor given particular urgency because of evidence linking insurgent groups
with illicit artifact trafficking. Data generated by satellites have been
central to this work. Satellite remote sensing works by capturing thousands of
digital images and processing them on a computer through a series of
mathematical functions. Despite the heavy reliance on machines and algorithms,
the process of hybridizing and interpreting data relies on a series of judgment
calls and individual interpretations, all of which is shaped by participants?
training, disciplinary traditions, and institutional settings. Intellectual
merit: Studying the judgment calls and negotiations inherent to this work
presents an important opportunity to understand how technicians and analysts
grapple with problems of data reliability and replication. We know little about
how internal pressures of interdisciplinary collaboration and external pressures
for actionable information shape researchers? judgment calls on standards of
evidence and methods. As a broader impact, the research will inform public
conversations among citizens, policymakers, and ethicists concerned with how new
forms of sensitive data are being used to make strategic decisions about armed
conflict abroad. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three research questions structure the
study, each of them concerned with the robustness and reliability of remote
sensing data. Primary fieldwork will take place in two sites: one research team
that reports directly to a federal agency and draws research support from that
agency, and one research team that operates in a private university and does not
rely on federal funding to do its research. At each site, the investigator will
observe three sets of actors: Detectors (technicians, satellite engineers,
machines); Analysts (archaeologists, NGO and think-tank personnel, and other
interpreters of the satellite images); and Decision makers (agency officials and
policymakers). Interviews and observations will focus on collaborative ties,
gaps and overlaps in the image-generation process, and the production of policy
recommendations. Comparing these two study sites will support analysis of site
location impact on research outcomes. The project will contribute to our
understanding of how big data decision-making informs counterterrorism efforts
at the federal level. It has potential to transform the application of satellite
remote sensing data to macrosocial issues by isolating the factors that lead to
error or breakthrough in data processing and interpretation. Finally, the work
will contribute to ongoing debates in the social sciences regarding the co-
constitution of credible science and research endeavors that involve opaque,
proprietary data collection and analysis. Findings about satellite remote
sensing data management and processing, and its integration with archaeological
data, will extend to supporting future collaborative work on counterterrorism
studies, cultural resources management, and remote sensing hybridization in
satellite teams and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.