* 1754550
* The serotonin transporter (SERT) and the control of circulating serotonin in teleost fish
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* M. Danielle McDonald, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 813,570.00

Serotonin is a neurotransmitter most commonly known for its role in depression.
In mammals, serotonin can also cause the constriction of blood vessels, altering
blood flow to organs throughout the body. Mammalian serotonin transporters in
blood platelets remove serotonin from the blood plasma, thereby controlling
serotonin's effect on blood vessels. In fishes as in mammals, serotonin levels
within the blood plasma are low and elevation of circulating serotonin results
in the constriction of blood vessels. However, in contrast to mammals,
significant levels of serotonin have not been found within fish blood cells and
it is not known how circulating serotonin levels are regulated in fish. This
project will fill that gap by characterizing the serotonin transporter's role in
controlling circulating levels of serotonin, and thus blood pressure and flow,
in fish. Fish will be tested in water with normal oxygen levels, and in low-
oxygen conditions when controlling blood flow to active tissues and organs such
as the gills is most important. It is expected that this project will reveal the
role of serotonin and the serotonin transporter in the control of blood pressure
and flow in fish, contributing significantly to the field of cardiovascular
physiology. Results may also help to answer existing questions about serotonin's
role in blood flow control in mammals. The project will educate and expose
underrepresented youth to science, enhance the participation of women and
minorities in science, and strengthen collaborative partnerships.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role of the serotonin transporter (SERT) in
controlling circulating levels of serotonin (or hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) and,
consequently, vascular resistance, in the Gulf toadfish (Opsanus beta) will be
determined under normoxic and hypoxic conditions. Three questions will be
addressed: (1) What are the tissue distribution, transport kinetics, and
pharmacological sensitivity of a teleost SERT compared to SERT of other
vertebrates? (2) What is the role of systemic SERT in the control of circulating
5-HT? (3) What is the role of branchial SERT in the control of circulating 5-HT?
The answers to these questions will support the central hypothesis that SERT
plays an integral role in controlling circulating 5-HT and, as a result,
vascular resistance, blood pressure, and blood flow in teleost fish. Advanced
techniques, including fluorescent neurotransmitter imaging probes, will be
applied to investigate SERT function at the cellular level. The research will
reveal organs, such as the heart, and cell types, such as gill neuroepithelial
cells, that are active contributors to 5-HT homeostasis. The potential role of
SERT in controlling circulating 5-HT is important because uncontrolled
circulating 5-HT levels would lead to an undesirable vasoconstriction of the
gill and detrimental reductions in oxygen uptake, an effect that could reduce
hypoxia tolerance and limit survival. Project outcomes will also contribute to
understanding the possible implications of SERT activation or desensitization
with environmental perturbations such as hypoxia and pharmaceutical exposure.
The project's educational and outreach impacts include engaging underrepresented
youth in marine science and enhancing the participation of women and minorities
in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.