* 1754764
* Collaborative Research: Can disturbance history predict plant species responses to environmental change?
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Ellen Damschen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 07/31/2024
* USD 607,573.00

One of the greatest challenges of our time is anticipating how environmental
change will alter the types of plants and animals we find within an ecosystem.
At northern latitudes, winters have become shorter, snow depth has decreased,
and temperatures have become more variable. This research project uses and
continues long-term field surveys (65+ years) to determine whether these
changing winters have affected the types of plants found within grassland
communities. This work examines which characteristics of species may make them
most vulnerable to being lost and how land management activities, such as
prescribed fires, may prevent their loss. Project investigators will develop
courses to train students about ecological complexity, and will develop
workshops and webinars with local and national groups to inform the public about
grassland ecology and conservation. Overall, this research examines how plant
characteristics may influence their loss and persistence and determines how to
best manage grasslands and savannas, two globally threatened and economically
important ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research examines the role that
the functional traits of plants play in the responses and persistence of
grassland species to changing winter conditions and environmental disturbances.
Using data from historic and current surveys, this project examines how
grassland plant communities in the North Eastern United States have changed over
the past 65+ years and the degree to which these changes are explained by the
frequency of fire disturbances and changing climatic conditions. Using a
functional traits approach, manipulative field experiments will be used to
determine species responses to disturbances (burning, mowing), winter conditions
(snow depth), and their interactions, on species persistence, establishment, and
community stability. This work examines the importance of freeze tolerance as a
persistence related trait and tests the hypothesis that fire regimes are
beneficial to preserving grassland diversity through their selection of stress-
tolerant plants and influence on plant establishment and colonization rates.
This work adds to our understanding of the ecology and management of grassland
and savanna ecosystems and would make functional trait data available through
several on-line resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.