* 1754974
* Modeling Neural Processes as Analog Computations
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Corey Maley, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 05/31/2019
* USD 155,121.00

This award supports theoretical research into the brain as a computational
system. It is motivated by developments in computational neuroscience where it
has become increasingly clear that the sense in which the brain is computational
is completely different from digital computation, the kind that predominates
computer science. The researcher will develop an empirically-informed
philosophical account of neural computation by drawing on current research in
neuroscience and in historical research on analog computation. The results of
this interdisciplinary project will contribute to the theoretical understanding
of intriguing claims by psychologists and neuroscientists about the
computational nature of the mind and brain. Findings are to be presented at
conferences and workshops in computational neuroscience and in philosophy of
science. The results of this research are to be published in an
interdisciplinary monograph suitable for researchers in the cognitive science
community. More broadly, the findings will be incorporated in courses to help
students in both the sciences and humanities to make better sense of these kinds
of claims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the early intellectual exchanges between
neuroscience and the study of theoretical computation, it is no longer clear
precisely what is meant by claims that the brain computes. Because the brain
cannot be a digital computer of the kind whose theoretical underpinnings are
found with the Turing Machine, claims that the brain is computational are either
vacuous or metaphorical, or in need of a principled account of computation. This
research project will provide such an account. It will serve to advance
philosophy of neuroscience, and it will provide much-needed theoretical support
to computational neuroscientists' claims that the brain is a computer, an
intriguing idea that has yet to be carefully articulated. Current ideas about
computation have largely ignored analog computation, which was once a thriving
paradigm for computational practice. The rehabilitation of analog computation
would add to our intellectual repertoire for thinking about other systems as
computational.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.