* 1754513
* Social Status-dependent regulation of an identified brain circuit
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Fadi Issa, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Lynch
* 06/30/2024
* USD 470,000.00

Social hierarchies are organizing agents for all social animals. They allow the
peaceful yet unequal division of natural resources based on the dominance rank
of group members. As social hierarchies mature, animals begin to alter their
behavior according to their social rank. This project advances understanding of
the neural mechanisms that underlie social aggression and how social experience
shapes animal behavior based on social rank. Using zebrafish as a model organism
and an integrative approach of behavioral, cellular, including
electrophysiological, and molecular analysis, the investigators study how social
experience regulates identified brain centers involved in modulation of
behavioral output according to their social rank. Specifically, investigators
study how social status is encoded in brain and the mechanisms through which it
regulates the startle escape response. Zebrafish are an ideal model organism to
address these key questions because they are highly social animals and form
stable dominant-subordinate relationships that can readily be investigated.
Moreover, zebrafish can be modified genetically to pinpoint specific pathways
that control specific motor responses. Results from this project will provide a
better understanding of the neural mechanisms underlying social aggression and
how social information is encoded within the brain to alter motor activity. In
addition, the project provides extensive research experiences for undergraduate
students from diverse backgrounds, as well as includes science educational
activities for middle and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project investigates the interplay between hypothalamic dopaminergic nuclei and
their modulation of the Mauthner neural circuit that underlies escape responses
in zebrafish. The Mauthner neurons are a single pair of reticulospinal neurons
activated by auditory stimuli and innervate contralateral spinal motor neurons.
Supra-threshold stimuli activate the Mauthner neurons and leads to the startle
response. The startle response is also prone to descending dopaminergic (DA)
modulatory input from the hypothalamus. Building on evidence that DA plays an
important role in social aggression, motivation, and stress, this project
investigates the mechanisms by which DA controls escape behavior in animals of
different social status. To this end, a combination of molecular,
electrophysiological and calcium imaging, histological, genetic,
pharmacological, and behavioral approaches are utilized. Additionally, the
project examines the role of nuclear progestin receptor in regulating
dopaminergic activity. Hypothalamic DA neurons express the nuclear progestin
receptor (Pgr), a transcriptional factor that regulates expression of target
genes involved in hormonal regulation. Prompted by preliminary data indicating a
regulatory role of Pgr on DA pathways, experiments are undertaken to elucidate
the underlying neural and hormonal signals that determine social regulation of
the descending dopaminergic input to the Mauthner escape circuit. Collectively,
the studies will advance understanding of the mechanisms that underlie
modulation of behavior by social information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.