* 1754725
* Epigenetic regulation of seasonal behavior in insects
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Christine Merlin, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Renn
* 05/31/2023
* USD 600,000.00

Many animals change their behavior in response to seasonal changes in the
environment. The molecular nature of the changes that occur in the brain to
alter behavior in a seasonal manner remains poorly understood. This project will
examine epigenetic changes, i.e. changes in external modifications to DNA, that
turn behavior-regulating genes on or off in a season-dependent manner. The work
will be carried out using behavioral approaches and DNA sequencing of the genome
of the long-distance migratory monarch butterfly, Danaus plexippus. The monarch
exhibits extreme seasonal behavioral changes at the individual level in response
to changing daylength and temperature. Migratory monarch butterflies accomplish
an extraordinary journey of 2,000 miles from the United States to their
overwintering sites in Mexico by flying southward in the fall. In the spring,
migratory butterflies flip their flight orientation northward and return to the
United States. This project will reveal seasonal epigenetic changes to the
genome in the brains of these seasonal forms. These findings will provide
insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying seasonal migration and the
production of distinct seasonal flight orientations, and may be applicable to
other migratory species. They could also have implications for conservation
strategies to help preserve the iconic monarch migration, a spectacular yet
threatened biological phenomenon. The project will provide valuable research
training for students interested in animal behavior, neuroscience, and
bioinformatics, including students from groups underrepresented in STEM fields.
The researchers will also develop outreach activities devoted to increase public
awareness for the need of monarch habitat conservation
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seasonal behavioral adaptations are key to the
ecological success of many animals. The behavioral plasticity observed in
individuals in response to seasonal changes in the environment strongly suggests
that epigenetics play a crucial role in shaping seasonal behavior. However, the
epigenetic changes that link brain function to seasonal regulation of behavior
remain largely unknown. This project will leverage the remarkable seasonal
plasticity of monarch butterfly migratory behavior in response to seasonal
changes in the environment (daylength, temperature) to delineate the genome-wide
epigenetic architecture in the brain that underlies seasonal migratory behavior
and flight orientation. The goal of the project is to identify active cis-
regulatory elements (CREs) and putative transcription factors (TFs) that mediate
differential gene expression in the brains of non-migrants, fall migrants and
spring remigrants. The researchers will use fall migrants and fall migrants
reprogrammed into spring remigrants in controlled conditions and a combination
of next-generation sequencing technologies. Genes differentially expressed in
the brains of these seasonal forms will be identified by RNA-seq, and open
genomic regulatory regions and CREs that mediate this differential expression
will be identified by ATAC-seq and ChIP-seq of histone marks. Candidate
transcription factors (TFs) responsible for the seasonal behavioral
reprogramming will ultimately be identified through DNA genomic footprinting
within CREs. The project will have broad societal impacts through outreach
activities devoted to increase public awareness for the need of monarch habitat
conservation efforts, and research training of students interested in animal
behavior, neuroscience, and bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.