* 1754831
* Functional dissection of cerebellar circuits for emotional learning and memory
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Diasynou Fioravante, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2022
* USD 600,000.00

When conditions around organisms change in a way that violates their
expectations, this change drives learning and the formation of new memories. How
the brain detects the violation of expectations and processes it to support
learning and memory is unclear but is thought to involve several brain regions,
prominent among which is the cerebellum. The cerebellum is known to regulate
learning of fine movements and motor coordination, and its role in non-motor
functions is only now beginning to be appreciated. The investigators in this
project will determine the contribution of the cerebellum to emotional learning
and memory. Specifically, the investigators are examining whether communication
between the cerebellum and emotion-regulating brain circuits is necessary during
learning and/or recollection of threat-related emotional memories. By using
novel technologies, the investigators selectively and reversibly interfere with
this communication in a spatially and temporally precise manner and can thus
determine its functional significance. The knowledge gained from this
investigation will inform understanding of cerebellar function and of the
neurobiology of emotion, with implications for neurodevelopmental and post-
traumatic stress disorders. The investigators also capitalize on the fact that
formation of emotional memories is a fascinating topic to which people with
diverse backgrounds can readily relate and are i) mentoring undergraduate
students from groups underrepresented in STEM in laboratory research; ii)
continuing and expanding a public outreach initiative, which brings the latest
brain science achievements to the general public and engages UC Davis trainees
in public speaking to non-specialists; iii) disseminating information about
brain science and research career choices to Hispanic communities locally and
world-wide; and iv) are developing workshops for K-12 educators, to help further
their science background and recommend ways to incorporate brain science in
educational curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is growing appreciation for
the modulatory role of the cerebellum in social and affective behaviors, in
addition to its established role in motor control. However, the mechanistic link
between the cerebellum and emotional learning and memory is lacking. Functional
connections exist between the cerebellum and the amygdala, raising the exciting
possibility that a cerebello-amygdala circuit processes information important
for emotional learning and memory. The overarching objective of this proposal is
to understand the role of the functional connectivity between the cerebellum and
amygdala-based emotional circuits in learned emotion. The investigators
hypothesize that the cerebellum causally contributes to threat-related emotional
learning and memory through projections to emotional circuits. They are testing
this hypothesis at the microcircuit and synaptic levels through a multifaceted
approach, which leverages the spatiotemporal resolution of optogenetic and
pharmacogenetic tools to dissociate motor from non-motor effects. The
expectation is that if communication between the cerebellum and specific
emotional centers is necessary for learned emotion, then inhibition of
cerebellar projections should impair aspects of learned emotion. The project is
conceptually innovative because it assigns for the first time emotional
functionality to cerebellar projections that are well-conserved across mammals
but have received little attention to-date. It is also technically innovative
because it employs for the first time an approach to the study of the cerebellum
and learned emotion that minimizes compensatory effects and enables the
separation of motor from non-motor contributions. The potential exists to break
new ground in the understanding of cerebellar function and of the neurobiology
of emotion. Finally, the project is of broad interest as it offers deep insights
into principles of motivated behavior and sheds light into the role of
traditionally-considered motor areas in non-motor
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.