* 1754451
* Collaborative Research:  Inferring admixture history in non-model organisms using local ancestry detection
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Beth Shapiro, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2023
* USD 600,391.00

What happens when geological, climatic, or other events cause recently diverged
species to be reintroduced to one another? If their evolved genetic differences
are not great, the two species may mate and produce hybrid offspring. Between-
species crossbreeding, once considered a rare and mostly inconsequential
phenomenon, has now been documented in a wide variety of species pairs including
brown/polar bears, dog/wolf, cow/bison, and even human/Neanderthal. Importantly,
in each of these cases, at least some of the hybrid offspring were viable and
fertile as evidenced by tracking genetic exchanges between these species pairs.
Each of these past crossbreeding events can be considered a natural experiment
across what were thought to be species barriers. This project will develop tools
for detecting and analyzing genes that have moved across species. Application of
the tool will focus on two species pairs for which past hybridization has been
particularly important. Cows and bison were intentionally crossbred by ranchers
in the early 1900s, such that most bison carry cow genes. Brown bears and polar
bears had several episodes of past crossbreeding,and this continues to occur.
Analysis of these species pairs will reveal which genes are refractory to
movement across species and which are not. This information will be key to
understanding the extent and consequences of future hybridization of any species
pair of interest. Outreach to the public, students, and pre-service teachers
will occur through a focus on the California Golden Bear and associated
educational programs at the California Academy of Sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new flexible ancestry inference tool will be capable
of localizing introgressed genomic regions even when only low-coverage DNA
sequence data are available. The tool will incorporate complex demographic
scenarios, such as multiple pulses of admixture, and will pinpoint regions of
the genome that are of potential evolutionary significance by virtue of being
high frequency or devoid of admixed ancestry. The application of this tool to
two species pairs with known admixture histories will provide new insights into
the processes of speciation and local adaptation, with the potential to inform
management practices that seek to limit admixed ancestry in populations that are
targeted for conservation. In addition, the tool will satisfy the growing need
for improved methods of signal detection to infer evolutionary processes,
providing the research community with a valuable tool for transforming genomic
data into scientific inference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.