* 1754838
* Collaborative Research:  Linking ion transport, energetics and species distributions in freshwater ecosystems
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Charles Hawkins, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 03/31/2024
* USD 383,573.00

The Nation's streams and lakes are growing increasingly salty, as measured by
salinity. Some of these changes are associated with local human activities, and
some are associated with broader climate changes. Increases in salinity are
expected to have important impacts because many aquatic organisms evolved in and
require low-salinity environments. Ecologists report that increases in salinity
adversely affect some groups of aquatic organisms (e.g., aquatic insects such as
mayflies, a focus of this project) that are ecologically important and serve as
a primary food source for fishes and birds. Thus, modest increases in salinity
could greatly affect both the biodiversity and functioning of freshwater
ecosystems. This project is designed to better understand how and why different
aquatic insect species vary in their ability to thrive in waters of different
salinity. The research will advance understanding of the physiological
mechanisms by which salinity affects the metabolism, growth, and survival of
aquatic insects, and, ultimately, their distributions and abundance. Project
results will help local, tribal, state, and federal water resource agencies and
their constituents and stakeholders better interpret monitoring data on aquatic
insects, which are widely used as indicators of water quality and ecological
conditions. At least three graduate students and several undergraduate
researchers will be supported and trained in the project, and the investigators
will contribute to K-12 curriculum development related to water quality and
ecological physiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will expose a new mayfly
model species to short-term and long-term salinity gradients to establish how
gene expression patterns, oxygen consumption, hemolymph chemistry, and gill
physiology link to measures of fitness. Using comparative methods, the
researchers will test the hypothesis that the efficiency of ion uptake in dilute
environments and the ability to curtail excessive ion uptake in ion-rich
environments are key osmoregulatory characteristics that can shape salinity
niches. The investigators further hypothesize that the energetic costs of ion
transport interact with temperature to influence growth, fecundity, and
mortality to define species-specific salinity niches, the expression of which in
nature can be observed from niche analyses of field survey data. The study will
significantly advance understanding of how both natural variation in salinity
and human-induced changes in salinity contribute to organismal performance and
species distributions in an increasingly salty world. By integrating different
levels of biological organization (genes to biodiversity patterns) and
laboratory and field work, the project should significantly advance the
synthesis of physiology and macroecology. The project will also help establish
and evaluate a promising and needed model aquatic insect species, and will
provide foundational understanding of osmoregulation differences across taxa
that will inform the use of aquatic insects as ecological indicators of
environmental change. Graduate and undergraduate student trainees will be
supported, high-school teachers will conduct summer research and develop
relevant curricula, K-12 science curricula that integrate science, management,
and policy aspects of water quality will be developed and tested, and public
outreach workshops will be held for federal and state
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.