* 1754271
* Collaborative LTREB Proposal:   Will increases in dissolved organic matter accelerate a shift in trophic status through anoxia-driven positive feedbacks in an oligotrophic lake?
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Robyn Smyth, Bard College
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 15,000.00

Lakes provide many services to society, such as clean drinking water and
productive fisheries. Many lakes, however, are now experiencing increased input
of carbon and nutrients, warming temperatures, and declining ice cover, which
may reduce water quality or cause blooms of potentially harmful algae.
Specifically, many lakes across the United States are experiencing increased
browning due to high loading of organic matter leached from land plants.
Browning reduces water clarity and interferes with drinking water management
practices. In addition, it can cause other changes that may lead to rapid long-
term declines in water quality. This research will test the hypothesis that
browning may reduce oxygen concentrations in lakes. Low oxygen can cause
nutrient release from lake sediments that may increase algae blooms, leading to
lake eutrophication. Understanding the effects of browning will increase
knowledge of lake ecosystems, and improve forecasts of how lakes will change as
their surrounding environments change. This research will also train graduate
and undergraduate students, and will lead to better public understanding of
threats to lake water quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ecological tipping points
are of vital interest as anthropogenic activities rapidly transform natural
ecosystems. Changes in dissolved organic matter (DOM) represent one important
potential driver of tipping points in aquatic ecosystems. This project will
investigate whether increases in terrestrial DOM loading can push clear-water
oligotrophic lakes beyond a critical tipping point by stimulating hypolimnetic
anoxia and sediment DOM and phosphorus release, which may initiate a positive
feedback loop of decreasing water clarity, stronger thermal stratification, and
enhanced hypolimnetic anoxia. This feedback loop accelerates ecological change
and ultimately may shift lake trophic status toward greener, mesotrophic to
eutrophic as well as browner, dystrophic conditions. This project will extend a
long-term data set of water quality variables sampled since the late 1980s in
two lakes in or near the Lacawac Sanctuary and Biological Field Station, located
in northeastern Pennsylvania. Complementing these long-term observations,
experiments and modeling will be carried out to understand feedbacks associated
with browning and enhancing understanding of broader patterns of change in
inland water bodies. The project will support a regional lake monitoring network
in Pennsylvania and closely interface with GLEON, the Global Lake Ecological
Observatory Network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.