* 1754072
* Collaborative Research:  RUI:  Understanding the effects of ploidal level on responses to global change in plants
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Clayton Visger, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2024
* USD 177,862.00

Polyploidy, or whole genome duplication, occurs when an organism has one or more
extra copies of all its chromosomes. This phenomenon is particularly common in
plants, and recent estimates suggest that 15-30% of plants are polyploid.
Polyploid species include a vast number of crop and other plants with economic
and agricultural uses (e.g., cotton, wheat, potato, soybean). Polyploidy is
known to influence a wide range of genetic and physiological features of plants,
including physiological traits related to water use and photosynthesis.
Polyploid plants can be more vigorous than diploids, have broader ecological
niches, wider geographic distributions, and increased ability to invade new
habitats, all driven by novel genetic combinations or gene expression patterns
that can produce extensive changes in many traits. This project will investigate
how polyploidy affects plants' ability to respond to increases in temperature
and decreases in available water (i.e., drought). Gene expression and
physiological responses to drought and temperature will be measured for a set of
fern species at different ploidal levels (amounts of polyploidy). Knowing
whether and how ploidal level impacts these important components of the eastern
forests of the United States will allow better prediction of how changes in
temperature and water availability will influence community structure in natural
ecosystems and will inform conservation efforts. Information on gene expression
changes involved in tolerance of drought and increased temperatures has
potential to assist crop breeding programs. An integral part of the project is
to train postdoctoral associates, graduate students, and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on a set of fern species
found in forests throughout the eastern United States. This is a naturally
occurring plant system where polyploidy is prevalent, and whose members are
ecologically important in the ecosystems where they occur. Gametophytes of six
Dryopteris species, including two pairs of a polyploid and its parent taxa, will
be grown in a multifactorial experiment with drought and temperature treatments.
Data will be collected on reproductive and physiological ecology to determine
how changes in temperature and water availability influence demographics and
sporophyte recruitment from gametophytes as well as ability to recover from
environmental stress. RNASeq will be used to generate gene expression profiles
to evaluate differences between unstressed, dehydrated, and rehydrated
gametophytes in different temperature treatments. Data will be analyzed using
new methods for performing differential gene expression analyses on per-cell,
per-biomass, and per-transcriptome bases. Results will be informative in
quantifying the effects of experimental treatment on gene expression in
organisms at different ploidy levels, including in crop plants and non-plant
systems. The results of this work will improve the understanding of how ploidal
level may influence species' responses to environmental change. A workshop on
how to effectively and engagingly teach plant life cycles will be held at the
Botanical Society of America's annual Botany conference, and will use a data-
driven approach that incorporates results from the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.