* 1754980
* The Impact of Toxicological Standards on Governance
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2023
* Naomi Oreskes, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2023
* USD 15,750.00

This historical study examines how toxicologists and regulators developed Good
Laboratory&lt;br/&gt;Practice (GLP) regulations to ensure the reliability of
toxicology data supporting drug and&lt;br/&gt;chemical regulation and trade. The
study?s central goal is to understand how toxicological data have traveled out
of the laboratory and across political jurisdictions. The study traces how GLP
rules that initially crafted to resolve a crisis in toxicology were used to
regulate domestic and international chemical testing and trade. This study will
contribute to our understanding of the interaction of trade and public health
regulations. This study will help to evaluate impacts on public health and
develop more effective policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
seeks to understand how and why GLP was developed in the U.S., and why GLP
appeared to OECD states to be a good solution to the problem of regulatory
harmonization and facilitation of international trade. It asks how a particular
way of doing laboratory&lt;br/&gt;work was rendered authoritative, and what
consequences this has had in governmental efforts to&lt;br/&gt;control
chemicals. The investigators will analyze archival records and published
documents from regulatory agencies, toxicologists, and international standard-
setting bodies, and conduct oral histories with participants. Findings from the
study will inform the literature in the field of STS on the history of
toxicology and risk analysis, the development of regulatory policies, and values
in science.