* 1754014
* Norwich Scholarship for Service program FY2018 - FY2023
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Matthew Bovee, Norwich University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2023
* USD 3,586,393.00

Norwich University, a designated National Center of Academic Excellence in Cyber
Defense Education and Digital Forensics, proposes to continue and expand its
participation in the CyberCorps(R): Scholarship for Service (SFS) program to
prepare highly-qualified cybersecurity professionals for entry into the
government workforce. Norwich SFS students develop a thorough commitment to a
multi-disciplinary perspective on computer security, with awareness on
integrating technology with human factors. This is done within a program that
emphasizes internships and activities in the academic year. The program's strong
mentoring component promotes a cooperative culture that scholars can leverage as
they transition into the workplace. The SFS program funds projects that address
cybersecurity education and workforce development, including funding to award
scholarships to students in cybersecurity. In return for their scholarships,
recipients will work after graduation for a Federal, State, Local, or Tribal
Government organization in a position related to Cybersecurity for a period
equal to the length of the scholarship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the Nation's
oldest private military college, Norwich graduates have served to address
threats for nearly 200 years. Many threats facing American society today, come
in the form of cybercrime and cyberterrorism. The project addresses these new
threats of the cyber-realm through the following strategies: providing pathways
for students wishing to serve the nation in cybersecurity; fostering a culture
of exploration and examination of the cyber-realm, with a focus on misuse and
mitigation strategies; improving academic research and experiential learning
opportunities and promoting publication; and fostering relationships with
government to increase internship and employment opportunities. The project
plans improving the participation of women, underrepresented minorities, and
veterans; furthering undergraduate research opportunities to establish a science
of cybersecurity; and coordinating outreach activities led by SFS students to
increase interest in cybersecurity and promote public
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.