* 1754844
* The Influence of Plant Functional Traits on Multi-trophic Interactions: An Experimental Community Restoration Approach in a Hawaiian Lowland Wet Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Rebecca Ostertag, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 07/31/2024
* USD 798,158.00

An understanding of the direct and indirect links between biodiversity and
ecosystem functioning is still a large unknown in ecology. This lack of
knowledge impedes restoration of degraded lands, because the establishment of a
complex food web is rarely planned for in restoration. It is often assumed that
"if you build it, they will come"; in other words, if a certain plant community
structure is achieved, the assumption is that animal colonization will follow.
Yet, there is a limited understanding of cause and effect; if certain plant
species are chosen for restoration, how is animal presence and abundance
affected? The proposed field experiment will address if functional trait-based
restoration influences the species and functional diversity of animal
communities. Plant species differ in many tangible ways relating to resource
use, growth, and reproduction. Intentionally choosing species with specific
traits may help direct and engineer the species of animals attracted to restored
sites, which provides land managers with tools to guide degraded sites towards
healthier ecosystem states. This research will offer student and technician
research training opportunities, public outreach, and expand development of a
module for middle school students at a local Hawaiian language immersion charter
school. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The restoration experiment will be conducted in a
Hawaiian lowland wet forest, which consists of a reference (invaded forest) and
experimental treatments in which native plants were left in situ, all non-native
plant species were cleared, and four different mixtures of ten species were
planted. The four different mixtures of ten species vary by functional traits,
as well as their overlap in the restored community. This research will test the
hypothesis that animal diversity of the litter arthropod community will be
higher and interactions among species will be more complex in terms of
connectance, interaction diversity, and interaction specialization in the
treatments where the plant species have a greater diversity in their functional
trait values. These invaded forests are living experiments in how novel
ecosystems assemble new community members, with environmental conditions ideal
for examining multi-trophic interactions. Stable isotope analyses, network
analyses, and statistical modeling will provide indices of different aspects of
animal assemblage and interaction complexity in a relatively low diversity
tropical environment. In turn, ecosystem services value estimation will provide
additional context for treatment comparisons and sustainable ecosystem
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.