* 1754254
* Collaborative Research:   Rapid and Pervasive Mitochondrial Heteroplasmy with Recombination in a Remerging Ectoparasite
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2022
* Bruce Rannala, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 04/30/2022
* USD 150,334.00

Mitochondria are parts of cells that have their own DNA, as well as a
fundamental role in metabolism. They are essential for animal life. With
advances in DNA sequencing it has recently been shown that some individuals may
possess multiple, distinct lineages of mitochondria in their cells. This
suggests that the presence of multiple types of mitochondria, a condition known
as heteroplasmy, may be an integral part of the evolution of many species. This
finding is very surprising, because mitochondria, almost always are inherited
from the mother only, and in humans, heteroplasmy has been linked to severe
genetic disease. From an evolutionary perspective, the presence of more than one
type of mitochondria in an individual may have an important function in
generating genetic diversity. It is likely that the presence of multiple types
of mitochondria presents opportunities to exchange genes between different
mitochondrial lineages. Despite growing recognition of the potential
significance of heteroplasmy, this aspect of animal evolution remains poorly
understood. This project aims to address key questions relating to how
heteroplasmy is generated, how long it can be maintained, and whether genes are
exchanged between mitochondrial lineages. The bed bug will be used as a model
species for these studies because it exhibits unusually high levels of
heteroplasmy. Experiments to resolve these questions have the potential to
fundamentally change how we look at genetic inheritance of mitochondrial DNA in
animals. The project will include training of undergraduate and post-doctoral
scholars, the establishment of a collaborative network of researchers and pest
control operators, and public outreach in both Oklahoma and North Carolina.
Furthermore, given that the bed bug is a significant public health concern,
establishing it as a model system will continue to bring them to public
attention, reinforcing awareness of the species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
uniparental inheritance appears to predominate in the animal kingdom, the
growing evidence of heteroplasmy through paternal leakage and compelling recent
evidence of mtDNA recombination, underscores that while we have developed a
great understanding of mitochondrial function and evolution, our understanding
of mitochondrial inheritance is far from complete. The bed bug, Cimex
lectularius, is an ectoparasite that has seen an unprecedented resurgence in
recent years. Studies have revealed that it exhibits high levels of mtDNA
heteroplasmy, which is both pervasive and rapidly generated. Furthermore, mtDNA
recombination appears common. Given the suitability and tractability of this
species as a model system, this study will: (1) Address how intra- and inter-
population genetic characteristics correlate with rates of heteroplasmy; (2)
Investigate the degree to which mitogenomic divergence and mitonuclear
interactions affect the rate of paternal leakage; (3) Empirically and
theoretically examine heteroplasmy decay in a species where it is common and
pervasive and for which genetic drift vs. selection may be evaluated; and (4)
Take a complete mitogenomic approach to investigate recombination and the
presence of recombination hotspots. Due to the high rate of leakage and
recombination seen in the bed bug in concert with recent advances in DNA
sequencing technology and analytical methods, this system offers a unique
opportunity to address this hotly debated and evolutionarily consequential
question.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.