* 1754597
* Collaborative Research: Competition and cooperation in the defensive symbiont communities of aphids
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Jacob Russell, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 06/30/2023
* USD 487,591.00

Insects comprise the bulk of animal diversity on the planet and are often
infected with microbes called 'symbionts'. Microbial symbionts can have large
effects on their host insects, shaping their interactions with other species or
their responses to the non-living environment. This is especially well-studied
for plant sap-feeding insects, known as aphids, which can carry various
combinations of over ten maternally transferred symbiont species. These
symbionts influence aphids' interactions with food plants, protect aphids from
attack by parasites and pathogens, or alleviate the effects of temperature
changes. Since insects are important vectors of human disease and major
agricultural pests, understanding the roles of these 'hidden players', and the
mechanisms underlying symbiont function is important to further human interests
in crop protection and preventing disease spread. Most studies to date have
investigated the effects of single symbiont species infections, even though most
insects carry multi-species symbiont 'communities'. This award will use a
highly-tractable aphid model system, with well-characterized bacterial
symbionts, to identify the effects of competition and cooperation amongst
multiple symbionts on symbiont transmission, localization and aphid biology.
Researchers will use newly developed culturing methods combined with genomic and
gene expression studies, to investigate how these effects are generated. Since
maternally transferred symbionts are widespread in insects, findings from the
aphid model are relevant to crop and medical pests. In addition, this award
supports the training and professional development of high school,
undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral researchers, and includes outreach
events into the communities of the investigators.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The pea
aphid, Acyrthosiphon pisum, harbors a diverse cohort of facultative, maternally
transferred symbionts and is an important model for defensive symbiosis. Recent
field-based research shows that most individual pea aphids, with a facultative
symbiont, harbor two or more species. Interestingly, symbiont distributions are
non-random, with enriched co-infection among some symbiont pairs and rare co-
infection among others, leading to the prediction that natural selection favors
co-infections between symbionts with distinct defensive roles, establishing
'generalist' aphids protected against multiple threats. However, just a subset
of such partnerships is likely favored as pairings between rare symbiont
partners could heighten costs or emergent pathogenicity. Alternatively, rarity
of some co-infections may stem from within-host symbiont interactions, including
competition and resulting decreases in transmission rates. Conversely, common
co-infections may stem from non-competing, cooperative symbionts that
reciprocally enhance transmission. This award will test these different
scenarios through manipulative experiments on engineered aphid lines that
measure the impacts of co-infection context on symbiont-mediated protective
phenotypes and rates of symbiont transfer. Symbiont densities and localization
will be linked to aphid fitness, defensive phenotypes, symbiont interactions,
and rates of transmission. In addition, genomic and gene-expression analyses of
symbionts will be used to identify mechanisms underlying competitive and
cooperative dynamics that are predicted to structure pea aphids' symbiont
'communities'. This research will enhance the understanding of multipartite
symbioses in insect pests, with implications for mitigating their damage to
human health, livestock, agriculture, and infrastructure. It will provide
training to high school, undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students and
enhance outreach to the local community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.