* 1754261
* Collaborative Research: Refining Geothermobarometry in Pyroxenes using In Situ Measurements of Fe3+
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Melinda Dyar, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2023
* USD 172,000.00

This project promotes the progress of science by providing calibrations for use
at a national facility, the Advanced Photon Source at Argonne National
Laboratory; these results will also be useful for users of other synchrotron
facilities worldwide. The calibrations address the scientific question of how
much oxygen was present when a mineral crystallized by analyzing a proxy, which
is the oxidation state of the multivalent element iron. This understanding has
vital importance for understanding how oxygen controls the crystallization path
and composition of cooling magmas, also providing insight into processes that
may have operated on and in the magma as it moved to the surface. Graduate and
undergraduate students at Mount Holyoke College, the University of Tennessee at
Knoxville, and the University of Idaho will be supported by this project,
including at least three women.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The ability to measure
redox states at sub-nm and pm scales is a formidable analytical challenges due
to the inherent anisotropy of most rock-forming minerals, which causes their
crystal structures to interact with photons differently according to crystal
orientation. This project studies oriented single crystals to explore the
effects of crystallographic orientation on x-ray absorption spectroscopy
measurements, focusing on the pyroxene mineral group, one of the most common
phases in igneous rocks. The team will use these data to build a universal
calibration appropriate for quantifying the partial pressure of oxygen (oxygen
fugacity) in pyroxene-bearing samples. This work has the potential to advance
knowledge in multiple geological disciplines. It will also enable synchrotrons
around the world that use the Athena software package to quickly and easily
determine Fe3+ contents of pyroxene minerals with known precision and accuracy.
Finally, this project applies machine learning techniques to the study of
spectroscopic data. Development of this methodology is exportable to other
fields, such as medical, biological, and forensic uses of spectroscopy, where it
has the potential for societal impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.