* 1754311
* Collaborative Research:   Comparative Genomics of Host-specific Adaptation and Life History Evolution in Brood Parasitic Birds
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2024
* Michael Sorenson, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 04/30/2024
* USD 254,164.00

Examples of convergent evolution, in which similar morphological, behavioral or
functional traits arise independently in different species, provide a powerful
framework for examining the extent to which the genetic changes underlying
adaptive evolution are predictable versus idiosyncratic, a fundamental question
in comparative genomics. Avian brood parasites, birds that provide no parental
care to their offspring but instead lay their eggs in the nests of other
species, represent an ideal model system for comparative analysis because brood
parasitism (and the loss of parental care behavior) evolved independently seven
times in five different avian families. This project will characterize patterns
of genomic change in both parasitic and non-parasitic birds to test whether
changes in the same specific genes and/or parallel patterns of genomic change
have occurred in independent brood parasitic lineages. The results will also
provide insight into other fundamental questions about genome evolution,
including whether genetic changes underlying differences in behavior are most
often in regulatory portions of the genome or represent structural changes to
the genes themselves. In a second, related line of inquiry, the project will
examine the unique evolutionary dynamics of the sex-determination chromosomes,
leveraging recent research showing that specialized adaptations for exploiting
particular host species are maternally inherited (passed from mother to
daughter) and therefore encoded on the avian W-chromosome (analogous to the
human Y-chromosome) in three different brood parasitic species. The project will
also contribute to the training of scientists at various career stages including
undergraduates, graduate students, and a postdoctoral fellow. A research
experience for undergraduates (REU) component will provide an opportunity for
two students from East Carolina University to receive training in bioinformatics
at Harvard University. The project will produce high quality genome assemblies
for additional bird species, supporting additional comparative analyses of
genome evolution across vertebrates, and data from the project will be
integrated into educational materials supporting courses in the emerging fields
of molecular and population genomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Avian brood parasites
and their hosts, which exhibit a spectacular diversity of behavioral,
morphological and physiological adaptations and counter-adaptations, have served
as important models for the study of coevolution. Recent discoveries of
genetically divergent, host-specific matrilines within each of three different
parasitic species, examples of "adaptation without recombination", present a
unique opportunity to examine the effects of selection on the non-recombining,
sex-limited chromosome. Likewise, with seven independent origins of obligate
parasitism and associated loss of parental care, brood parasites offer an
unparalleled opportunity to explore the genome-wide consequences of a major life
history transition, providing greater power for tests of genomic convergence
than in other recent analyses of the genomic basis of phenotypic convergence.
Results of the study will lend insight into basic questions about genome
evolution, including the relative importance of determinism versus historical
contingency, and the manner in which integration versus modularity of genetic
networks constrains the outcomes of natural selection. In addition to increasing
the number of high quality genome assemblies for birds (currently available for
only zebra finch and chicken) and assembling W-chromosome sequences, the
proposed study will test two major hypotheses: 1) that evolutionary processes
influencing the non-recombining, sex-limited W-chromosome (e.g., Hill-Robertson
interference, selective sweeps, genetic hitchhiking) are amplified in parasitic
lineages that have maternally inherited host-specific adaptations; and 2)
examining all seven parasitic clades, that the evolution of brood parasitism
(and loss of parental care behavior) results in genome-wide signatures of
molecular convergence and/or convergent changes in coding and/or regulatory
regions associated with particular genetic pathways or
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.