* 1754358
* NNA:  Collaborative Research: Interactions of the Microbial Iron and Methane Cycles in the Tundra Ecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* David Emerson, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 09/30/2023
* USD 797,389.00

There is great concern about changing conditions in the Arctic due to
environmental transformations that are impacting tundra and its underlying
permafrost. At the same time there are major gaps in our understanding of
tundra/permafrost microbiology and elemental cycling. Filling these knowledge
gaps will enable a better overall understanding of the tundra, and can provide
crucial information about how this globally important, but fragile ecosystem
will respond to change. The particular knowledge gap this research will fill
centers around iron and the bacteria that control its availability. Iron is an
essential micro-nutrient for animals, plants, and microbes. It also serves as a
growth substrate for certain groups of bacteria, many of which fix carbon
dioxide to grow. Some of these bacteria directly compete with other groups of
microbes that produce or consume methane, the atmospheric concentration of which
is continuing to increase. It is particularly important to understand the
dynamics of carbon dioxide and methane in the Arctic because there is a large
amount of organic carbon stored in permafrost that could be converted into these
two gases. The research team consists of a microbial ecologist with considerable
experience in iron cycling bacteria; a mathematical modeler who will quantify
the relative impacts of different microbial processes, and a tundra ecologist
with extensive experience in elemental cycling in permafrost environments. This
project will, for the first time, systematically characterize and quantify
microbial communities responsible for iron cycling in the tundra/permafrost of
Alaska?s North Slope, and increase our understanding of how these microbes
interact with the carbon cycle by suppressing methane production.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The basic supposition of this research is that conditions
in the Arctic are beneficial to an active iron cycle because the shallow depth
permafrost prevents ferrous iron-laden waters from percolating into deep
aquifers (a common route for iron removal from temperate ecosystems).
Furthermore, cool water temperatures slow the chemical oxidation of iron, and a
short, but intense growing season provides a source of labile carbon that helps
fuel iron reduction. These ideas will be tested by conducting field and
laboratory studies at the Toolik Field Station on the North Slope of Alaska.
Previous work has revealed there are extensive populations of iron-oxidizing and
iron-reducing bacteria associated with microbial iron mats in this region, but
in general, little is known about their diversity or function. This work will
utilize cultivation-independent, amplicon-based community analysis and
metagenomics to further characterize community diversity and function among
these chemosynthetic communities. The team will measure methane production at
tundra sites with high rates of iron cycling and compare these to sites that are
similar in terms of hydrology and landform, but have lower rates of iron-cycling
to assess the direct impact of the iron cycle on methane production and
consumption. The microbiomes of these sites will also be compared using
molecular analysis. In addition to these field measurements, the researchers
will construct a laboratory microcosm that can be seeded with soils and
microbial iron mats collected from Toolik. This will allow controlled conditions
to simulate interactions of the iron and methane cycles under conditions where
key parameters such as iron and oxygen concentrations can be controlled. From
both field and laboratory data a reaction-based model will be developed using a
series of kinetic equations. These will form the basis for a predictive model
that can estimate the suppressive effects of iron cycling on methane production.
In terms of broader impacts, the work will provide unique opportunities for
training undergraduate, and graduate students, as well as a postdoctoral
researcher, in combining field, laboratory, and modelling based science to fill
an important gap in our knowledge of the tundra ecosystem. To broaden public
outreach two artists will be engaged to create a unique art-science dialog that
will broaden the interpretation of the project results, and provide museum
quality creative work that can be displayed in either science or art
exhibits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.