* 1754468
* LTREB:  Collaborative Research:  Host-microbe symbiosis through the lens of stochastic demography
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Thomas Miller, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 06/30/2024
* USD 354,060.00

Nearly all plants and animals harbor microbes such as bacteria that live on or
in them. Understanding the influence of these microscopic organisms on their
host species may advance our ability to solve problems in agriculture, wildlife
disease, and human health. Before these applications can be fully realized,
biologists first require a better understanding of when and how microbes
influence the fitness of their host. This project will test the hypothesis that
the effects of microbes on their hosts fluctuate from year to year, being
beneficial in stressful years (when hosts need assistance) but neutral or costly
in favorable years. As a consequence, hosts with microbes may experience reduced
year-to-year fluctuation in fitness compared to hosts without microbes, which
may be an important benefit of harboring microbes. This hypothesis will be
tested by extending data collection of a long-term field experiment with grass
species that harbor fungal microbes, collecting new data on the genetics of the
grasses in that experiment, an applying a statistical modeling approach. Fungal
microbes that live inside plants are a widespread in grasses, including forage
grasses that are important to livestock, and this research could have important
agricultural applications. Additionally, this project will provide research
training for students at the high school, undergraduate, and graduate
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis of reduced demographic variance in
symbiotic hosts leads to two novel predictions that this project is designed to
test. First, by buffering hosts against harsh conditions, symbionts may limit
genetic drift and promote higher genetic diversity in host populations. Second,
hosts with and without symbionts may exhibit different patterns of temporal
fluctuation in their demographic rates, thus promoting the storage effect, a
mechanism that can stabilize competitive coexistence of symbiotic and symbiont-
free hosts, and potentially explain the mixtures of host types that are widely
observed in a diversity of plant and animal symbioses. The scientific team will
test these predictions using a long-term field experiment with sites in Texas
and Indiana, in which grass populations were established with or without fungal
endophytes. Building on nine years of demographic data and leveraging a
hierarchical Bayesian analytical framework, the team will quantify and compare
the effects of symbiosis on host fitness via reductions in variance versus
effects on mean performance, and test the contributions of the storage effect to
the coexistence of hosts with and without symbionts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.