* 1754984
* Doctoral Dissertation: Socio-Political Causes and Effects on Emerging Contaminants
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2020
* Laura Rabinow, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2020
* USD 15,989.00

This project will study how public officials, regulatory scientists, and
concerned publics understand the safety of drinking water supplies over time.
This case study will identify insights within knowledge conflicts involving
experts, regulators, citizens and scientists about emerging contaminants. It
will provide useful lessons for more effective governance of emerging
contaminants. The findings of this study will be of interest to policy makers,
local and regional governments, community members and scientists.

The research will examine the case of perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA)
contamination of drinking water. The research will involve interviews,
participant observation, and analysis of policy documents. These sources will be
used document a history of New York State drinking water policy, to examine how
regulators and elected officials have addressed the unknowns about PFOA, and to
analyze how affected residents have worked to engage and critique the production
of knowledge (and ignorance) by regulatory authorities. This study contributes
to a body of social research that illuminates variation in national and regional
approaches to chemical regulation. This case study makes a novel contribution by
showing how state level policies interact with federal regulatory systems, on
one hand, and local-level crises, on the other. Furthermore, the research will
attend to theoretical questions about the maintenance of authority in the
context of social crisis and scientific unknowns.