* 1754246
* The Role of Mating System Divergence in Plant Speciation
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* David Moeller, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,135,200.00

Understanding the formation of new species, the process of speciation, is among
the most challenging problems in evolutionary biology. Rates of speciation vary
widely among flowering plants and are strongly associated with the degree of
reproduction via self-fertilization versus mating with other individuals (known
as the plant 'mating system'). This project integrates new evolutionary theory,
field and laboratory experiments, and genomic analyses to test key hypotheses
about the role of mating system changes in plant speciation. The project
investigates the processes that determine where and when strong barriers to
mating occur. It will clarify whether evolutionary changes in rates of self-
fertilization directly promote reproductive isolation between diverging species.
The experimental work focuses on two subspecies of the California annual plant,
Clarkia xantiana, which differ in mating system. One subspecies is primarily
self-fertilizing the other is primarily outcrossing. These plants are ideal for
study because they exhibit features of newly formed species. However, they have
only recently diverged and can still interbreed. Moreover, their flowers are
substantially different where they co-occur, a signature of the speciation
process. The proposed work will also involve extensive outreach to the public
via an innovative program called, 'Market Science', where researchers present
topics to and engage directly with the public at local farmers' markets. This
highly successful program will be expanded to include new topics on evolutionary
biology. The proposed project will also directly involve undergraduates in
authentic research in the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
address three primary objectives. Aim 1 examines the role of natural selection
in the evolution of reproductive character displacement between sister
outcrossing and selfing lineages. This work involves the development of novel
theoretical models of character displacement that incorporate divergence in
mating system. It also involves large-scale field experiments that quantify the
role of individual traits in conferring reproductive isolation and determine
their genetic basis. Aim 2 examines the ecological and genetic costs of hybrid
formation between sister outcrossing and selfing lineages. This work involves
field experiments and genomic analyses that quantify the reproductive fitness of
hybrids. Aim 3 synthesizes Aims 1 and 2 by asking about how reproductive
isolating mechanisms collectively influence genome-wide patterns of variation
and introgression between the two taxa. This integrative work will advance
evolutionary research by calling attention to the potential for mating system to
influence speciation broadly in nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.