* 1754913
* I-Corps: Smart Materials for Next Generation Wastewater Infrastructure Resilience
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2018
* Mark Hernandez, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 06/30/2018
* USD 8,605.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project stems from a new
generation of cement formulations that will enable more cost effective
maintenance, operation and (re)design of critical wastewater transport systems
than are currently available. This I-Corps project leverages successful reuse of
industrial byproducts for rehabilitating corroding utility conduits in place, as
well as creating a new generation of corrosion resistant wastewater
infrastructure. Industrial by-products that are otherwise discarded as low
value, or hazardous wastes, are recycled in a way that concurrently strengthens
concrete while substantially increasing its corrosion resistance. This I-Corps
project investigates a competitive commercial approach to reduce resource
consumption and pollution associated with replacing large masses of concrete,
including, but not limited to subterranean utility networks. This enables a
corrosion control strategy that is sustainable and synergistic with the
protections that critical wastewater infrastructure provides for environmental
health.

This I-Corps project exploits the ability of common charcoals and steel slags to
confer antimicrobial properties into cementitious materials. Forwarding a new
generation of inexpensive antimicrobial building materials is the heart of this
I-Corps project. By incorporating small amounts of granulated industrial wastes,
intellectual merit is realized by exploring engineering applications for new
concrete admixtures that are effective against corrosion while conferring
increased strength. While most concrete pipe rehabilitation efforts employ acid
resistant resins to protect (damaged) concrete pipe, this I-Corps project
leverages a preventative materials approach that inhibits the microbes
responsible for the concrete corrosion process.