* 1754115
* Community Assembly Across Scales of Ecological Organization
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Carla Caceres, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 06/30/2024
* USD 800,000.00

Despite substantial efforts to eradicate mosquitoes, mosquito-borne diseases
continue to pose a major threat to human health. Before an adult female mosquito
can transmit a disease to a human, however, juvenile mosquitoes must
successfully survive development in an aquatic habitat. In urban areas, female
mosquitoes often lay their eggs in small, temporary aquatic habitats created by
infrastructure for the management of storm water run-off, such as roadside catch
basins and drainage ditches. Therefore, a better understanding of the food web
ecology of storm water habitats is needed to help explain the distribution and
abundance of mosquitoes. Recent scientific advances have the potential to
transform the understanding of which factors are most important in determining
species distributions and abundances, including the recognition that all animal
guts harbor complex communities of microbes, known as the gut microbiome, and
that this microbial community has the potential to influence the survival and
reproduction of that animal in unexpected ways. This research will examine how a
complex set of interactions between the free living microbes, the gut
microbiome, the host mosquito, and other members of the aquatic food web, can
result in variation in mosquito growth and survival to adulthood, which
ultimately affects human disease risk. This research will engage K-5 students in
summer research experiences, and provide training to undergraduates in
quantitative skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ecological communities often occur as
embedded subsets, but an understanding of the feedbacks that occur among these
different subsets (e.g., the microbial gut community, the community of hosts)
levels is lacking. The ever-increasing power of next generation sequencing
technology, and the associated developing theory to interpret it, provides
ecologists with the tools needed to gain a better understanding of the
relationships between hosts and their microbes in natural systems. Therefore, a
major ecological frontier and the objective of this research is to advance the
understanding of the drivers of community assembly within embedded ecological
systems. The goal is to quantify the feedbacks that govern how communities
assemble simultaneously across hierarchical scales from the repeated assembly of
food webs in temporary aquatic habitats to the simultaneous assembly of the gut
microbiome of individual mosquitoes colonizing those food webs. Two interrelated
questions will be addressed using field and laboratory experiments: Is the
assembly of the gut microbiota of two important mosquito vectors of West Nile
Virus driven by the corresponding assembly of the invertebrate food web? Do
microbiome-driven differences in the growth rate of community members influence
invertebrate community assembly? The focus on food webs and microbial
communities that assemble in larval mosquito habitats also provides a link
between community ecology, microbial ecology and disease
ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.