* 1754834
* SG: Evolutionary history and contemporary function of alternative supergene haplotypes
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Jessica Purcell, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2024
* USD 199,819.00

Even before the structure of DNA was described, biologist Theodosius Dobzhansky
predicted that complex traits of organisms should be controlled by groups of
closely related genes. He called these 'coadapted gene complexes' and
hypothesized they should be passed on to offspring as a unit. These units would
keep certain beneficial combinations of genetic variation intact in the next
generation. Today, genome sequencing technology allows research into whether
coadapted gene complexes, also called 'supergenes', indeed control complex
traits. One such trait that has inspired curiosity in humans is social
organization. How are cooperative behaviors encoded in the DNA of social
organisms? Previous research found a large supergene associated with variation
in a complex social trait in ants. This supergene contains units of more than
600 genes that are passed together as a unit to offspring. By contrast, most of
the genome is shuffled from one generation to the next to ensure that offspring
inherit different genetic variation from each parent. In multiple Formica ant
species, individuals from colonies that consist of a single queen and her
offspring have one variant of this supergene. Individuals from colonies that
contain multiple queens have a different variant. The goal of this project is to
learn how these supergenes appear and persist in groups of species, how they
work, and how genes shape social behavior. This project will be an important
step in understanding how and why supergenes form, and also in developing the
link between genes and social behaviors. This project will also provide
opportunities for undergraduate research training and introduce K-12 students to
the study of social insects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and co-PI have recently
identified two ant species that each carry three alternative variants of the
supergene. This project will take advantage of one population of each species
where three haplotypes co-occur. Using these populations, the researchers will
characterize the variation among alternative haplotypes at the supergene and
link that variation to functional differences. In particular, differences in
phenotype and fitness will be investigated with a series of mating and brood
rearing experiments. The experiments will include queens with each possible
genotype in each species. Additionally, the gene order, recombination rates, and
zones of suppressed recombination between alternative haplotypes will be
assessed through high density linkage mapping and whole genome sequencing, in
order to reconstruct their evolutionary history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.