* 1754979
* Collaborative Research:  Integrating Molecular and Material Evolution of Spider Aqueous Glues
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Richard Baker, American Museum Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 07/31/2023
* USD 359,384.00

The spectacular diversity of spiders and their role as key predators across the
globe can largely be attributed to their innovative uses of silk. For instance,
a golden orb-web spider or a black widow can spin six different types of dry
fibers and a wet adhesive silk. The wet adhesive silks made by these spiders and
their relatives (the megadiverse superfamily Araneoidea) afford them greater
prey retention for a lower material cost than the dry prey capture silk spun by
other spider groups. Furthermore, these silk glues achieve adhesiveness in a
wide variety of environments, including extreme humidity conditions that
challenge commercial glues. A multidisciplinary team from three institutions
will investigate how variation in adhesive protein components relates to
variation in the glue's material properties. The wet adhesive silks of the 18
target species have significant variation in adhesiveness, material efficiency,
and response to humidity. Thus, the discovery of constituent proteins will allow
design of environmentally friendly glues with tailored properties. Furthermore,
web-building spiders offer many opportunities for science educators to integrate
biology, chemistry, physics, and mathematics as they engage their students in
the natural world. The team of investigators will mentor undergraduate and
Master's students, as well as incorporate the research into undergraduate course
curricula. Additionally, team members will offer science enrichment activities
at rural Virginia public elementary schools, run workshops for middle and high
school science teachers, and mentor New York City high school students to
complete original research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
evolutionary diversity of spider aqueous glues offers a unique opportunity
compared to other bioadhesives to determine how molecular building blocks
contribute to different aspects of adhesion. By integrating transcriptomics,
proteomics, and biomechanics within a phylogenetic framework, the proposed
experiments will pinpoint protein characteristics that co-evolve with
interfacial adhesion, intra-glue cohesion, and humidity responsiveness.
Objective 1 identifies shifts in gene expression associated with the evolution
of wet adhesive silk by profiling transcriptional diversity in each of the silk
gland types of 5 divergent araneoid species and 3 outgroup taxa. It also
investigates evolution of expression levels in the adhesive-producing silk
glands of an additional 13 species that build different web types and forage
under divergent humidity levels. Objective 2 identifies and quantitates the
proteins that compose adhesive silks of all 18 species, as well as their post-
translational modifications. Objective 3 measures wet adhesive silk material
properties for the same 18 species at different humidities. These integrated
experiments will contribute to understanding the origin and molecular
underpinnings of a key innovation. Specifically, they will determine the degree
to which gene expression shifts and new genes were required to make a novel type
of silk. The proposed work will track evolutionary rates in glue protein
characteristics, including post-translational modifications, which is currently
poorly understood. Finally, glue material property measurements will test the
hypothesis that humidity responsiveness of spider glue droplets has evolved for
optimal performance at the humidity in which a spider species typically
forages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.