* 1754404
* Collaborative Research:  Linking environmental challenges to the likelihood and severity of epidemics: A view through the shifting window of susceptibility
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2024
* Tracy Rittenhouse, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 04/30/2024
* USD 354,318.00

This research will help biologists who manage wildlife populations better
understand the environmental conditions that make disease outbreaks more likely
to catch hold and spread. A fundamental goal in biology is understanding how the
environment affects human and wildlife health. Stressful environments, for
instance, can make animals more susceptible to infection. But it is difficult to
predict or manage the effects of stress on disease outbreaks because there are
many complex, interacting processes. In addition, individuals may not respond
the same way to stress. This research project will test whether chronic stress
weakens the immune system during key times in an animal's development termed
'critical windows' of susceptibility. It will test whether animals are more
easily infected, better at spreading the infection, and more likely to die.
These results will then be used to test whether environmental stressors make
disease outbreaks more likely and severe for whole populations. This work will
help prioritize actions to prevent or lessen disease outbreaks. It will also
provide a more sophisticated framework for studying animal diseases. In
addition, the researchers will develop new teaching modules and workshops to
help inform state, federal, and academic scientists, land managers, teachers,
and college students about the ways in which stress affects disease outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projects will use a ranavirus, an often-lethal
pathogen of amphibians, and their wood frog tadpole hosts as model system to
test three specific hypotheses: environmental stressors 1) increase the average
susceptibility of hosts, 2) change the timing and duration of critical windows
of susceptibility, and 3) magnify initially small differences in susceptibility
among hosts. A series of dose-response experiments will characterize the windows
and distribution of susceptibility (both resistance to and tolerance of
ranavirus infections) and determine how they are affected by high salinity and
elevated temperature - two relevant and increasingly important environmental
challenges. Second, laboratory experiments will characterize how these stressors
affect ranavirus transmission. It is hypothesized that the most susceptible
tadpoles will also be most infectious. Third, the specific physiological and
immunological responses will be measured in the most and least susceptible
individuals to better understand the mechanisms underlying these responses.
Fourth, a sophisticated mathematical model will be used to translate these
results to population-level outcomes. Lastly, experimental epidemics in semi-
natural populations will be used to test the model's predictions of how
stressors alter critical windows of susceptibility to affect the likelihood and
severity of ranavirus epidemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.