* 1754788
* The Emergence of Symbolic Notation and Data Visualization in Algebra and Chemistry
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Pamela Smith, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2020
* USD 15,747.00

This award supports doctoral dissertation research in history of science that
focuses on the use of mathematical and chemical symbolism. Such notation is
currently regarded as essential to scientific work. By contrast, for much of
Western European history, the use of symbols in science was not regarded as a
suitable approach. However, by the nineteenth century, symbolic notation had
become ubiquitous. This project's objective is to explain why European
scientists came to see symbolic notation as credible during the early modern
period. To identify when and how scientists used symbolic notations, the
researcher will study scientific manuscripts, where the exigencies of publishing
did not constrain the use of symbols. These include mathematicians' and
chemists' notebooks, apothecaries' inventories, doctors' records, and manuscript
textbooks, all of which are unique and un-digitized. The results of this project
will shape how symbolic notation and visual thinking are understood by
historians of science and more broadly. They will show the limits of historical
methodologies that invest too heavily in a distinction between language and
image; symbolic notations were powerful precisely because they blurred the line
between these two domains. More broadly, they will show how effective design can
be improved through consideration of visual objects that are not admitted under
a strict definition of data visualization. Finally, they will be disseminated to
secondary students through lesson plans and classroom tools created by the
researcher, a former high school instructor, to provide another means by which
teachers can provoke interest in STEM fields, and to show students that the
union of the sciences and humanities can lead to productive
thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By examining how symbolic notations came to be
seen as credible during the early modern period, this project presents a deeper
historical understanding of how "visual thinking" and data visualization
developed. Today, diagrams, drawings, charts, and pictures are indispensable
tools for displaying data and identifying patterns within that data. However,
the ancient and medieval methods of scientific reasoning that early modern
scientists inherited were fundamentally verbal, and some scientific traditions
distrusted images altogether. The epistemological validity of visual thinking
therefore had to be proved. This project posits that symbolic notations played a
crucial role in that process during the early modern period. Because symbolic
notations could be seen as either linguistic or pictorial, they gave scientists
a way of experimenting with visual thinking while still being able to
characterize it as verbal thinking. Symbolic notations, in other words, served
as a conduit through which the validity of visual proof could be established by
means of an appeal to verbal proof. Moreover, it is argued that, over time, as
scientists became accustomed to the advantages of visual thinking afforded by
symbolic notations, they became bolder in their experiments with other visual
tools like diagrams, charts, and graphs. This project thus demonstrates an
underappreciated legacy of the Scientific Revolution: namely, that the
legitimization of visual thinking in science was predicated upon the development
and application of symbolic notations.