* 1754966
* Long distance signaling of iron deficiency via phloem
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2024
* Elsbeth Walker, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Aruna Kilaru
* 03/31/2024
* USD 870,864.00

This project aims to discover novel mechanisms that control the uptake and
distribution&lt;br/&gt;of iron in plants. Part of the impetus for such discovery
research is that iron deficiency&lt;br/&gt;is one of the most significant
micronutrient malnutrition problems facing the world&lt;br/&gt;today. The World
Health Organization estimates that ~1.62 billion people--~25% of
the&lt;br/&gt;world's population-- are affected by iron deficiency. The
production of staple crops that&lt;br/&gt;have elevated iron in edible parts
(e.g., in the grains of cereals) is widely regarded as the&lt;br/&gt;primary
means by which this problem could be stably addressed. However, this goal
is&lt;br/&gt;thwarted because our knowledge of the molecular mechanisms
controlling iron&lt;br/&gt;accumulation in plants is far from complete. The
scientists conducting this project have&lt;br/&gt;discovered that three distinct
iron transporter proteins are required in the leaves of&lt;br/&gt;plants in
order for those leaves to send correct signals of iron deficiency to the
roots.&lt;br/&gt;Since the roots take up iron in response to signals from the
leaves, investigation of the&lt;br/&gt;leaf transporters will reveal new
mechanisms that plants use to control iron uptake. In&lt;br/&gt;addition to
these scientific goals, the researchers will work to enhance
educational&lt;br/&gt;opportunities for undergraduates and K-12 students through
the development of multimedia&lt;br/&gt;web modules for K-12 outreach, and the
development of course based&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate research experiences
(CURES).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior work on the regulation and localization of
Arabidopsis iron transporters, OPT3,&lt;br/&gt;YSL1 and YSL3 has indicated that
they have opposite but indispensable roles in&lt;br/&gt;controlling shoot-to-
root signaling of iron status. A working hypothesis that
explains&lt;br/&gt;current observations is that OPT3 and YSL1/YSL3 together
modulate phloem companion&lt;br/&gt;cell Fe status, and that low concentrations
of Fe in the companion cells results in the&lt;br/&gt;production of a phloem
mobile signal that initiates iron deficiency regulated gene&lt;br/&gt;expression
in roots. In this project, a combination of transporter activity studies,
protein&lt;br/&gt;localization, and highly accurate determination of the metal
distribution in veins will test&lt;br/&gt;this hypothesis. The project
scientists have established the presence of a phloem-mobile&lt;br/&gt;inductive
RNA signal that is capable of inducing iron deficiency associated
gene&lt;br/&gt;expression in excised roots. Because a simple assay system for
the phloem mobile&lt;br/&gt;signal has been developed, profiling experiments
coupled with downstream genetic&lt;br/&gt;analyses will be used to identify the
phloem mobile signal produced in iron deficient&lt;br/&gt;leaves that regulates
root gene expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.