* 1754476
* Is sociality driven by an increased capacity for gene regulation?
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Sarah Kocher, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,121,420.00

A defining feature of social insects is the fact that different individuals play
different roles with respect to work and reproductive behavior, i.e., they
belong to different, specialized castes. Because the different social insect
castes develop from a common genetic background, differences in the timing and
levels of gene activity in individuals must be key to this behavioral
specialization. This raises the question of how these gene regulatory
differences come about among individuals and how they shape behavioral
diversity. The answer will provide crucial insights into the emergence and break
down of cooperative social interactions. This study harnesses the extensive
natural variation in social behavior found within and among 19 closely-related
bee species. It will assess how gene regulation changes as social behavior is
gained and lost. The project will also train high school, undergraduate and
graduate students by involving them in research and by integrating research
results into formal courses. It will also help in bee conservation though the
creation of "bee hotels" with brochures explaining how the hotels help these
declining species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will test the hypothesis
that social bees exhibit greater transcriptional complexity than solitary bees
either through increased variation in gene expression and/or variation in
transcriptional network connectivity. It will also characterize gene regulatory
elements in social, solitary, and polymorphic bee species and examine patterns
of selection on these elements. These studies will assess how (1) the timing and
location of gene expression changes across social forms and castes, (2) how gene
co-expression network organization changes, and (3) how regulatory elements
change as social behavior is gained and lost. The results will provide
fundamental insights into our understanding of the role of gene regulation in
shaping natural variation in behavior and other complex
traits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.