* 1754439
* Collaborative Research:  Reversing evolution to understand the genetic basis of species divergence
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Mohamed Noor, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2022
* USD 231,893.00

One of the most fundamental quests of Evolutionary Biology is to understand how
biodiversity arises through adaptation and speciation. Genes involved in
adaptation or isolation between species are frequently located in regions of a
chromosome where the ancestral gene order has flipped. These inverted chromosome
regions block gene exchange between closely related species, which allows the
genes inside them to evolve independently. It is not known whether those key
genes are randomly spread inside the inversions or whether they are more likely
found close to the edges or the center of those inverted regions. Circumventing
the barriers to genetic analyses posed by inversions will allow researchers to
learn the genetic basis of species divergence and adaptation. This project will
use the Drosophila (fruit fly) genome editing toolkit to reverse the outcome of
the evolutionary process and flip back the large chromosomal inversions that
separate Drosophila pseudoobscura and D. persimilis. This will allow
unprecedented analyses of important species divergence traits linked to these
inversions. This research will also have educational impacts in K-12 education
and teacher training via collaboration with public school teachers from local
minority high schools. Moreover, chromosome inversions cause many important
human diseases. Understanding where the critical sequences lie is fundamental to
development of treatment of those diseases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important
mechanism that allows species to persist in the face of gene flow is the
presence of chromosomal inversions. Although considered impermeable barriers to
gene flux in heterozygotes, chromosomal inversions can exchange genetic material
via double-crossovers or non-crossover gene conversion. Those processes should
be more common in the central regions of inversions. Theoretical studies thus
predict that nucleotide divergence between species differing by inversions
should be higher at the breakpoint regions relative to the center, and that
adaptive or reproductive isolation genes should also be more likely located
towards the breakpoints. Tests of the first prediction have been conducted using
population genetic or comparative genomic data, resulting in a range of
inconsistent patterns suggesting that theoretical models may oversimplify the
expected effects of inversions on recombination. Test of the second prediction,
on the other hand, have been impossible to conduct because inversions reduce or
impede recombination in hybrids, precluding fine scale genetic analysis of
interspecific differences at those genomic regions. To overcome this limitation,
this project will leverage CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing technology to revert two
fixed inversions between the sibling fruit fly species Drosophila pseudoobscura
and D. persimilis. The strains that will be generated will be used for genetic
mapping of reproductive isolation factors (hybrid male sterility), and for an
experimental evolution study that will test whether and how much chromosomal
inversions facilitate the persistence of hybridizing
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.