* 1754475
* Topography and forest dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* David Ackerly, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 07/31/2023
* USD 549,673.00

The influences of climate, soil types and topography on the distributions of
plant species, communities and vegetation types are topics of long-standing
interest in ecology. These topics have taken on renewed urgency in the context
of changing environmental conditions and their impacts on conservation
priorities. The type of plants and forests found in an area is largely
determined by the amount of rainfall the area receives, its average temperature
and its associated soils. As the climate of an area changes, it is expected that
the plants that make up a forest will change as it becomes more hospitable for
some species and is no longer appropriate for the survival of others. This
project uses a well-studied mountain system in coastal Northern California to
examine how climate variability, extreme climate events, and changes in rainfall
and temperature may influence the current and future structure of forests. The
goal of this work is to determine which types of plant communities will undergo
a more rapid change in the species that make up its members and which forests
may be most resilient to change. This work will contribute to the conservation
of forests through its work with a local nature preserve, as well as with
resource management and conservation agencies. This project will train community
college students in a forestry program and will facilitate their transfer to
four-year Universities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using well surveyed
sites along a coastal mountain system, high resolution climate and vegetation
layers, and species modeling approaches across large geographic ranges, this
project examines the role that inter-annual climate variability, extreme events,
and changing temperature and rainfall patterns have on current and future plant
distribution patterns. The use of sites along north and south facing elevation
gradients provides an opportunity to examine the relative effect of these
changing environmental conditions on forests that vary in rainfall and
temperature. This work will test the following three hypotheses to explain
species turnover and changing distribution patterns: 1) the local refugia
hypothesis which posits that cool/moist locations will buffer communities from
changing climatic conditions, 2) the trailing/leading edge hypothesis which
predicts that impacts will be greater in cool/moist locations, as these will be
occupied by species that are approaching the edges of their climatic tolerances,
and 3) the asymmetric propagule availability hypothesis which predicts that
dispersal strategies associated with hot/dry and cool/moist areas will
facilitate or limit the rate of change found in an area. This work addresses the
critical linkages between individual species dynamics and community change in
forest communities and will the inform how researchers and land managers
understand the dynamic responses of ecosystems to rapid environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.