* 1754518
* Uniting demographic life history theory and pollination biology to understand the ecological consequences of pollinator declines
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Amy Iler, Chicago Horticultural Society
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2024
* USD 552,286.00

Around the world, pollinators are in decline. Given that almost 90% of flowering
plants rely on animal pollination, there is concern that many plants will
decline towards extinction alongside their pollinators. Pollination is important
because it ensures that plants can make seeds, grow into new plants and keep the
species going. Yet, there are many reasons to think that the link between
declining numbers of plants and declining numbers of pollinators is not so
simple. For example, although it makes sense that a plant would make fewer seeds
when there are fewer pollinators around, fewer seeds do not necessarily mean
fewer new plants if, for example, the new plants compete for places to live.
Fewer seeds could actually result in less competition among new plants, allowing
more of them to survive. Furthermore, plants may use other resources not devoted
to making seeds to grow larger and survive longer, thus having more chances to
reproduce within their lifetime. These examples illustrate how, despite making
fewer seeds, enough new plants could be made to keep the species going. A bigger
lesson is that ecology is complex; all sorts of hidden strategies are not
apparent until you take a closer look. This project will follow the fates of
thousands of plants that are exposed to different numbers of pollinators,
thereby helping scientists to identify plant species most at risk from
pollinator declines and to understand why others are or are not at risk. In
addition to data collection, the scientists on this project will help train the
next generation of ecologists and will engage the public through an educational
film, a blog, and a permanent interactive exhibit.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Individual-based population models (integral projection models) will
be parameterized with data from a field experiment in which five species of
perennial plants receive different pollination treatments: (i) increased
pollination, (ii) reduced pollination, (iii) interannually variable pollination,
and (iv) an unmanipulated control. All plants will be tagged with a unique
identification number and their demographic status assessed annually. Additional
germination experiments will be used to parameterize the effect of pollination
on recruitment through density-dependent germination and seedling survival.
Projections of the population models will show the consequences of pollination
for plant population dynamics. Finally, life table response experiments will
elucidate specific life history mechanisms by which pollination does or does not
affect plant population growth rates (e.g., via trade-offs between growth and
reproduction). This project will provide the empirical evidence necessary to
bridge conceptual gaps among pollination biology, life history theory, and
population dynamics, as well as providing a framework for understanding and
predicting the ecological consequences of pollinator
declines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.